Thursday 8th April, 1999

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m in the Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

RESUMPTION OF THE DEBATE ON THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE SWITZERLAND INTERNATIONAL PROCUREMENT COMPANY CONTRACT WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA.

THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr. A.Ruzindana):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last time I was here, I represented the main report of the Public Accounts Committee and then at the end of presentation of the report, the House decided that since the report was about 2 years old, it should take into account what has happened.  Since then, we have accordingly produced an addendum to the original SWIPCO report and, Mr. Speaker, I would like to present that report.  But before, I do so, Mr. Speaker, allow me to say a few things about the events that have surrounded the investigations into this contract and a number of allegations that have been made so that they are put on record, so that it does not seem as if we had nothing to say about them.  

A practise has emerged during Parliamentary investigations to make personal attacks against the Chairmen or vocal Members of such Parliamentary investigations. This is deplorable but it happens.  Let me first comment on some smear campaign against me and some other Members of the Committee that has been going on in the corridors of Parliament and elsewhere.  

It has been alleged that I have personal interest which is what sparked off the investigations into the Government contract with SWIPCO.  It has ben alleged that I have a company which sells tyres and that, therefore, the engagement of SWIPCO consultancy services was a threat to my interest.  It is said that because of this personal interest, I manipulated the Public Accounts Committee to investigate the SWIPCO contract.  This smear campaign has been going on for a long time since PAC started investigations into this contract in November 1996. Other Members of the Public Accounts Committee have also been said to have had a personal motive during the investigations.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, one time a journalist then working with the New Vision was commissioned by a Member of this Parliament to write a damaging article against me.  One day, this journalist accosted me after a Public Accounts Meeting and said  -(Interruption)

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, you will forgive me, but I believe that the SWIPCO issue is an issue of great national importance and I do not believe at the moment, Mr. Speaker, we have the quorum in the House to give it full, fair and clear hearing.  Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that we can continue without a quorum.

THE SPEAKER: And therefore?

MR. NYAI: Therefore, Mr. Speaker, is it in order for us to continue with this debate?

	(A head count of the Members present was conducted)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are only 46 Members in the House. Therefore, we suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended for 15 minutes)

(On resumption_)

THE SPEAKER: Order please. Hon. Members, we have at long last raised a quorum.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr. Ruzindana): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Maybe, I will start again and this time, let me start by congratulating our Colleagues who have been elevated to the position of Ministers and Ministers of State.  Mr. Speaker, I had started by making a small preliminary explanation and let me be very quick about it, but since some Members had not heard it, let me start again, Mr. Speaker.  

A practice has emerged during parliamentary investigations to make personal attacks against the chairmen or vocal Members of such parliamentary investigations.  This is deplorable, but it happens. Members may recall that they just concluded a debate on the Ministry of Agriculture, the Chairman had to make a person explanation about attacks that had been made against him and many other investigations have suffered the same fate.  So, let me first, therefore, comment on some smear campaign against me and other Members of the Public Accounts Committee that has been going on in the corridors of Parliament and elsewhere.  

It has been alleged that I have a personal interest which is what sparked off investigations into the Government contract into SWIPCO.  It has been alleged that I have a company which sells tyres and that, therefore, the engagement of SWIPCO consultancy services was a threat to my personal interest.  It is also said that because of this personal interest, I manipulated the Public Accounts Committee to investigate the SWIPCO contract.  This has been said in the corridors of Parliament, on Radio One on "spectrum" and so on and there is need to clear this one.  This smear campaign has been going on for a long time since PAC started investigations into this contract in November 1996. Other Members of the Public Accounts Committee have also been -(Interruption)

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I respect my hon. Friend, the Chairman of PAC, hon. Ruzindana.  I have sat for a long time with agony when he keeps on repeating the words "smear campaign".  Smear campaign, Mr. Speaker, is like rumour mongering. If hon. Ruzindana wants to accuse a particular Member of Parliament or Members thereof, is it in order for him to get away with this generality that we have been smear campaigning? Why does he not come down to particularities, Mr. Speaker?  Is he in order to accuse the whole House of a smear campaign?

THE SPEAKER: I think the Chairperson is desisting from specifics but that is not to say that he has not heard statements or maybe innuendos which he is referring to, he says in corridors of this House, on "spectrum" and so on and so forth.  I think there is no problem in generalising. The problem would come if he specifies an individual or named an individual and then he is not able to substantiate. I think that will be a problem.

MR. RUZINDANA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling.  I had not gone very far and I think when I explain further, some Members know what has been going on.  In fact, one time a journalist then working with The New Vision was commissioned to write a damaging article about me. One day, this journalist approached me after a PAC meeting and said that he had some documents about me but that before he used them to write about me, he wanted me to comment on them.  I asked him to give me these documents for my perusal but he has never given them to me up to now.  However, he has been to several institutions with documents and he found out that those documents did not in anyway bear any truth and that is why he did not publish the story.  In Parliament here, some documents have been circulated to some Members and the whispering  campaign has been going on.  Some Members have received telephone calls and others have been paid personal visits. 

I wish, therefore, to state the following that it is true that I and my wife own a company and that company trades in tyres.  The company started business in 1985, but its business has never caused a conflict of interest between my public and private roles.  For example, during all the time I was Inspector General of Government, my company never traded with my office and by the time I left, my office had 24 vehicles. I could have made some money by selling tyres to that particular office, I did not!   This would have given me quite a substantial amount of money but I did not take advantage of that.  If I had wanted to use influence, this was the best opportunity I had. Up to now, the company has not sold a single tyre to my former office. The  convention is to refrain for about two years from  dealing -(Interjection)- I will clarify as I go on - from dealing with such an office where one has some residual influence.  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: He said he is not taking any clarification.

MR. RUZINDANA: I have not had any such dealings up to now.  I never used my -(Interruption)

MR. AWORI: First of all, Mr. Speaker, small guidance.  Did he quit the Floor on order or clarification?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I think you know - (Laughter). He declined to give way, then you rose on a Point of Order and I am interested to hear the Point of Order if any.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Chairman of the Committee to turn this into a personal explanation as a Committee Member - is it in order for him to turn this occasion, as Chairman of the Committee, into making a personal explanation when he should be telling us what is happening to the Committee report?  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: hon. Members, you will recall that when the opportunity was given for the Chairman to update his report, this was on the understanding that there had been new developments over the two years which would now change the scenario regarding this particular problem.  I think what the Chairman is doing is to give you this information which has now come to his knowledge in the course of his update.  I do not see anything wrong with that provided, Mr. Chairman, you do not go into the details of the personal explanation but let it be a preamble to your presentation of the update.

MR. RUZINDANA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a record and my record has become an issue in this investigation and since it has become an issue, I think it is proper that I clear it.  Some Members have been told quite a few of things and I am giving information so that anyone who has a contrary information can lay the papers on the Table here and we have our Rules, Privileges and Disciplinary Committee step the matters up.  

So, Mr. Speaker, I have been involved in hundreds, if not thousands of investigations. I have never diverted from objectivity in all these.  Why would I do it now?  Mr. Speaker, I know some documents have been given around and so on and I would like to request any Members who have these documents to lay them on the Table for scrutiny by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.  I can assure all my Colleagues and the whole world that I have no business interests that would be hurt by the SWIPCO contract or any other similar contract for that matter.  Of course, those who have been involved in this campaign are free to prove me wrong.  

Since my income has become a part of this investigation, Mr. Speaker, may I also say that I own a mixed farm in my constituency and this farm sells milk regularly and once in a while, I sell some cattle or produce.  In addition, I own a planted eucalyptus forest of several acres in my constituency and once in a while, this one also sells timber and poles and currently, there are some poles of the size which could be required by UEB. 

However, Mr. Speaker, the choice of tyres for this campaign is an unfortunate one for those who have spearheaded this campaign.  Why?  Because tyres are the most neutral commodity in this SWIPCO case.  Why are they neutral?  Because the main agent of SWIPCO, the hon. Elly Karuhanga, who is a signatory to the SWIPCO contract has a company EUREKA Motor Spares which has been in the business of selling tyres to, among others, public institutions as well.  If the hiring of SWIPCO services is not against his tyre business, why would it be against mine?  Besides, it is clear that since my company handles small transactions, the SWIPCO consultancy would not affect it.  However, other people have been informed that I was interested in Crown Agents winning this contract.  How could this be when the investigations started several months after the contract was awarded and signed?  In any case, in the PAC report, we said that Crown Agents' bid  was not a responsive one since they submitted their bids several months after the expiry of the bid time.  Crown agents was time barred and we said so in our report.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I wish to remind Members that when this matter was first introduced on the Floor, up to that time, it had never heard of SWIPCO.  Then, an hon. Member of this House tendered the documents to the Public Accounts Committee during one of its regular meetings.  The Public Accounts Committee then decided to look into this matter.  At what time, at what stage were manipulative skills exercised?  It is contemptible and an insult to suggest that anyone can manipulate the members of PAC.  Anyone who thinks so or says so does not know the calibre of the members of PAC.  

These are people of the highest calibre, elected by the whole House and in no way can they be manipulated by me or anyone else for that matter.  It has been an honour and a privilege for me to have had an opportunity to work with these Members of PAC whose prime objective has been the protection of the public interest.  I thank the House for the confidence placed in us.  We shall not fail you, we shall not fail the country.  This is the end of the statement, Mr. Speaker, but shall I say, Mr. Speaker, by carrying out the investigation which we have carried out, we have prevented an expenditure of perhaps 30 million in three years, of the contract and I will illustrate this in the addendum of the report.

Let me now turn to the report, Mr. Speaker and I hope Members have got copies of this report. The heading is "Addendum to the Public Accounts Committee report on the SWIPCO contract."  I hope every member has got a copy, Mr. Speaker.  Since the Public Accounts Committee report was completed and issued, a number of developments have taken place.  This is what has necessitated an addendum to the report, covering the events that have taken place since then.  The important question to ask is whether the PAC report has been overtaken by events.  The answer is in the negative.  In fact, the findings, conclusions and the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee report have been largely proved valid by other institutions that have studied the report and its implementation. Let me now turn to the report of other institutions.  

As we have already reported, the Auditor General had pronounced himself on the process engaging the services of SWIPCO and on the contract itself.  Members have got the original letter which the Auditor General wrote to the Public Accounts Committee on 6th December 1996.  Subsequently, the Inspector General of Government also did so at the time the payment became an issue.  The Attorney General has also had something to say about the contract.  Eventually, the Central Tender Board as a board pronounced itself on the contract to  SWIPCO more than two years after the contract was signed.  The President has also made comments on the contract.  Let me now turn to what has been said by all these institutions mentioned above about the contract.  

Members may have noted the report of the Auditor General dated 6th December 1996 to the Public Accounts Committee.  He came to the conclusion that there was a violation of the Public Finance Act, Tender Board Regulations because the tender was not handled by the Central Tender Board.  In his report, the Public Accounts  Committee coopted, among others, the Minister of Finance. The Auditor General recommended that: "If Government is to spend public funds on the contract, it should meet the requirements of the law by leaving the matter to the Central Tender Board to handle in accordance with the law".  This was three months after the contract was signed.  The Auditor General was not only ignored, he was publicly attacked and ridiculed in newspapers and in the public.  At this stage, corrective action could have been taken if the Auditor General was taken seriously.  However, nothing was done.  

Members must have by now studied the report of the Inspector General of Government.  It generally agrees with the findings of the Public Accounts Committee.  The following are some of the findings and recommendations of the Inspector General of Government which are found in a report which has been circulated to Members:- 
1.  "The Central Tender Board was ignored in the procurement of SWIPCO services right from the time of invitation for bids to signing of the contract."  The Public Accounts Committee had come to the same conclusion.  

2.  "The letters of invitation for bids were signed by the hon. Minister of Finance in contravention of regulation 7(1)(c) of the Central Tender Board Regulations which stipulates that orders for goods or services must be made by an accounting officer personally and the Inspector General and Auditor General are informed."  The Public Accounts Committee had made this same finding.  "Furthermore, the Central Tender Board was not involved in the evaluation of the bids or appointment of the valuation panel within the terms of regulations 1(b)(i) and (2); then 3(ii) and 4(i) of the Central Tender Board Regulations.  In addition, the Central Tender Board did not give approval to the contract as required by Regulation 7(1)(c) of the Central Tender Board Regulations.  The involvement of the Central Tender Board Chairman in the tendering process does not amount to statutory Tender Board approval and endorsement.  The SWIPCO contract was therefore, illegal." 
 
3. "SWIPCO was not straightforward during the biding process but resorted to high level lobbying and canvassing to secure a contract with Government.  This conduct is unlawful; it is not only unlawful, but also deplorable, considering that SWIPCO was supposed to promote transparency and professionalism in the Government procurement cycle."  PAC had pointed out the same point.  "The President, the Vice President and the US Ambassador were invoked whenever it was deemed necessary."

4.  "The directive of the then Minister of Finance, hon. Basoga Nsadhu, requiring parastatal bodies to utilise SWIPCO's services for all procurement of above US $50,000 is legally unenforceable because parastatals are autonomous entities."  This is now our comment. Although perhaps the Minister of Finance may have this power, enforcing it has proved difficult as the Inspector General of Government pointed out. "SWIPCO failed to show any empirical evidence that their services resulted in generation of savings for the Government within the terms of their obligations under the contract." This is our comment, perhaps the Minister of Finance will be giving a report on actual savings made.  
The IGG went further and said: "In addition, the Ministry of Finance did not review all contracts handled by SWIPCO so as to establish whether any savings were made by the Government as advised by the Attorney General and the Government of Uganda was, and is not, obliged to utilise SWIPCO's services over procurement of at least US $200 million per year.  This was neither the letter nor the spirit of the contract.  SWIPCO itself objected to being evaluated for procurement exceeding US $23 million.  SWIPCO is therefore not entitled to payment of their invoice in the amount of US $3,600,000."  This calculation is based on a performance guarantee, however, the contract has clear clauses related to how payment should be calculated.  These are the relevant clauses.  

The IGG goes on and says: "The Ministry of Finance should, as advised by the Attorney General, review all procurement handled by SWIPCO and establish whether the savings guaranteed under the contract were realised and if it is established that savings were actually realised, the Government should pay SWIPCO for work done."  Surely, no one can argue that SWIPCO should be paid for work not done, that is what is commonly called "air supply".  "Ultimately, SWIPCO's invoice in its present form should not be paid."  And that is how the IGG concluded.  
The Attorney General in various correspondences advised the Minister of Finance to brief Cabinet on this contract but it was not done. I am told now there is an intention to do so.  The Attorney General also advised the Minister of Finance to review all the contracts handled by SWIPCO and establish whether any savings were made by Government on them. In that regard, bear in mind Clause 3(1)(iii); that is the guarantee by SWIPCO that its services would generate savings for the Government, at least twice the fees collected by the consultant.  The Attorney General has over and over again requested the Minister of Finance to be clear on the scope of work that SWIPCO was supposed to handle.  This has not been forthcoming so far.  

Under the obligations of the client, Clause 5 - I think Members have got a copy of the contract - Clause (5)(1) (a)  and 5(1)(b)  provide for the issuance of a directive by the Minister of Finance to all Accounting officers, instructing them to abide by the terms of the contract. The Minister probably has the power to issue such a directive.  However, Clause 5(1) (a) (b) (c) (d) designate the Secretary, Central Tender Board as the officer responsible for delivery, to the consultant, of the documents for carrying out procurement services.  This removed the responsibility of complying with the provisions of the contract from Accounting Officers to the Secretary, Central Tender Board. Since a number of Ministries and departments have their own Tender Boards, it is not surprising that Central Tender Board would not know what tenders went through their Tender Board.  There are many such contradictions in the contract. 

Members have also noted the letter of the Principal Private Secretary to the President addressed to the Attorney General.  It says that His Excellency the President has noted that: "There is a lot of irregularities in the SWIPCO contract.  SWIPCO did not get all the work relating  to the Government procurement equal to or above US $50,000 in value due to disputes.  Therefore, Government never made the  savings it would have made with the SWIPCO consultant."  The irregularities noted by the President are what caused problems to the SWIPCO contract.

Maybe I should remind Members that I have just made a statement about my person but I would want also Members to reflect whether all these other institutions that made comments did also have a personal interest and I think that is useful.

Central Tender Board Retrospective Authority:
The findings of the Public Accounts Committee have been confirmed by the Central Tender Board, by the Inspector General of Government and the Auditor General.  The PAC report pointed out that Central Tender Board never awarded the contract.  This has been confirmed correct by the Auditor General, the IGG and the Central Tender Board's retrospective award in February this year.  Central Tender Board has confirmed that SWIPCO was evaluated for a business volume of US $23 million, not US $200 million as it is claimed.  Therefore, since the issue of the award is a fait accompli as Central Tender Board said, then the relevant issues to be considered are the contract itself and its implementation, the fees which SWIPCO should be paid and whether the contract should be renewed on its expiry or not.  

Central Tender Board clarified that the scope of work envisaged to be handled by SWIPCO was US $23 million for which it was evaluated. The Ministry of Finance, I understand, also now agrees that the contract did not include donor funded procurement.  We wish, however, to point out that the Central Tender Board retrospective authority dated fourth February 1999 is for only two years.  The Board approved the negotiated contract for the first two years, that is 1996/97 and 1997/98, despite some shortcomings.  The Board further resolved that the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Finance invites SWIPCO to re-negotiate the contract and submit the re-negotiated contract to the Board for final approval.  If this has not been done, then it means that the authorised two years have already expired and there is, therefore, no valid contract any more.  

Further, the Board said that Clause 3(6) where the fees are based on procurement worth 200 million dollars per year should be re-negotiated so that the fees are based on actual value of procurement handled rather than on estimated figures.  Moreover, SWIPCO financial evaluation which enabled the firm to win was based on handling the procurement evaluated at 23 million dollars rather than 200 million dollars.  It is, therefore, now obvious that SWIPCO should only be paid for the services rendered and its fees relate to a volume of business of 23 million dollars for which it submitted a bid and for which it was evaluated.  

An attempt by the then Minister and the Evaluation Committee to include transactions beyond the 23 million dollars estimate was vehemently resisted by SWIPCO.  The 200 million minimum was only for a performance guarantee.  If SWIPCO handled less or more than 200 million dollars in value, the guarantee would remain the same; that is, 800,000 dollars.  A guarantee relates to savings and not to payment.  
There are other Clauses in the contract which relate to payment.  The Ministry of finance has compiled data on Government purchases or contract above 50,000 dollars for the period 5th September, 1996 to 4th September, 1998.  I think Members of the Public Accounts Committee have got a copy of the document, the document was voluminous and we could not photostat it  but, Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention a few of the things which are in this document.  A lot of them are externally funded projects, others are fuel from oil companies, others are bills for utilities like water, electricity, telephone and others are purchases for foreign exchange for travel; others are CAA - Air navigation charges.  Consultancy fees of other consultants are also included in that document,  projects with consultants of their own are also included.  Insurance premium, loan interest, share capital contribution of National Housing Corporation to Housing Finance Company of Uganda is also there. Outstanding Bills and so on.  

After compiling all these transactions some of which aborted, the SWIPCO fees that would have been due were calculated to be 18,877,730 dollars for just the two years which were sanctioned by the Central Tender Board.  The SWIPCO invoice of 3,600,000 was therefore considered modest by the Ministry of Finance and it was therefore recommended for payment.  However, now that the Ministry of Finance has expressed a wish to withdraw this Report, then the SWIPCO invoice of 3,600,000 may after all not look as reasonable as it looked in comparison to the withdrawn Report.  

The origin of the 200 million is clearly explained in SWIPCO's document entitled "Notice: Addendum to the SWIPCO statement"  and number four says the following: "No investor goes into a new country without determining a minimum work load against which to create the necessary infrastructure.  The contract that SWIPCO has with Government indicates a considerable amount of work since it covers all treasury funded procurement -  and mark that - all Treasury funded procurement in order to ensure that the company would not invest without a commensurate and reciprocal commitment from the Government."  And with this in mind, the agreement was that the minimum of work would be settled at a figure that ensures that the cost of the international processes of the company are covered.  

An important point to note is that SWIPCO here admits that its contract covers only Treasury funded procurement which excludes donor funds.  Whoever calculates SWIPCO fees should take this into account.  However, after writing this Report, it was made available to the Minister of Finance and I have since learnt that this statement  that there was an agreement with some officials of Ministry of Finance is not true.  The officials concerned have explained that this is actually not true.  So, the statement now on the 200 million dollars just hangs in the air.  Further, in its official response to the Report of the Inspector General of Government of September, 1998, SWIPCO says on page 5 that: "As clearly negotiated and discussed with Mr. Kitabire of Ministry of Finance, this low fees structure would have to be based on the Government desire to use the services based on a minimum of 200 million on which SWIPCO would place a performance bond to assure the savings."  Mr. Kitabire has since said that this is not true, that there was no understanding between him and his team - his officials of SWIPCO.

The purpose of the contract:
The prime purpose of the contract was to make savings for the Government in the procurement process.  In return, Government was supposed to collect SWIPCO's fees from suppliers.  The way forward, therefore, hinges on this issue of making savings on procurement by Government and then the fees due as a result of this saving.  In accordance with Clause 3(1)(iii) of the contract, Government should review all the contracts handled by SWIPCO and determine what fees are due to SWIPCO.  Once this has been done, then the Auditor General and the Inspector General of Government should confirm the calculations of these fees, and if found correct, then payments can be made accordingly.  This is necessary because Rule 7(1)(c) of the Central Tender Board regulations stipulates that when an accounting officer orders for goods or services, the Inspector General of Government and the Auditor General must be informed.  

Secondly, Government should also establish whether any savings were made by Government.  Clause 3(1)(iii) again guarantees that SWIPCO services would generate savings for the Government at least twice the fees collected by the consultant.  The operative phrase here is "at least twice the fees."  If no savings double the fees of the consultant were generated, then the Government should execute the performance guarantee in accordance with appendix EC which says that the consultant will forfeit the performance guarantee and the contract may be discontinued without any responsibility to the client.   

Appendix (a) is clear.  It says that the consultant shall provide direct procurement or auditing of procurement as specified in Clause 5(1) at the option of the Government in terms of the services provided.  That is, if Government did not give some transaction to SWIPCO, then it cannot demand fees for services rendered since Government exercised this optional Clause.  Appendix (a) also says that the consultant shall perform the services described for other Ministries and tender boards as indicated in Appendix (e), optional to the Government.  

Members should note that it seems as if it is only Government with an obligation but there are obligations by the consultant as well.  We would like to know which ones have been fulfilled and which remain to be done.  For example, within 60 days of the signing of the contract, the consultant, that is SWIPCO, was supposed to install computers and software at the client facilities to be used by the Government staff in tasks related to the performance of the contract.  Has this been done? I hope the Minister will be telling us about this.  

Besides savings, interaction with SWIPCO was supposed to strengthen the capacity of the different beneficiaries of the consultant.  This is clearly stated by the Chairman, Central Tender Board in his letter to the Minister of Finance dated 28th January, 1998 while commenting on the savings generated by SWIPCO.  He said that while SWIPCO services have benefitted those who have used them to varying degrees, the ultimate objective is that at the end of the contract, the client organisation should have greater capacity to handle the procurement more efficiently than before interaction with the consultant.  The Minister should tell us whether greater capacity has been created where SWIPCO services have been used.  

That greater capacity has not been created, however, in the procurement system, is clearly indicated by the fact that Government, during the currency of the SWIPCO contract, hired another consultant on 13th July, 1998 to study and recommend how the procurement system can be improved.  This consultant, the International Trade Centre of Geneva (Switzerland) is the same one that had produced another report in 1994.  Recommendations of the consultant which relate to improvements in law institutions, procedures and processes are similar to the recommendations of an earlier study.  This is the area which the earlier studies mentioned, and the main PAC Report had identified to be urgent.  The Minister will perhaps inform us of the improvements made in these areas as a result of the SWIPCO contract.  

The other consultants have issued another Report dated August 12th, 1998 on how to improve the procurement process of Government.  The PAC Report was excoriated by the Ministry of Finance and thus the alarm bells rang by the Report did not produce any corrective action.  Instead, the situation became worse, starting from a position where no public funds would be expended to meet SWIPCO fees to the current position where the Ministry has been intent on paying 3.6 million dollars to SWIPCO annually.  PAC had informed the Ministry through its report that the actions of the Ministry led logically to this eventually.  The issue is not who is right, for that is clear.  

The issue is what should be done to those who refused to accept advice, a refusal that could cost the country at least 11.8 million dollars over the three year period of the contract for no services rendered.  This amount exceeds the Budget allocation for three quarters of all Ministries of Government.  In addition, these fees are tax free.  Why do we tax Coca Cola, Pepsi, BAT and so on which are also foreign investors but not SWIPCO?  The Minister perhaps will explain why payments to SWIPCO are tax free.  It is clear that the country may pay for services not rendered.  When the Minister of Finance accepted an indeterminate fees formula, when self assessment by the consultant was accepted, when Government accepted to be a commission agent of the consultant and when the known tendering procedures were thrown over board, this contract was then sealed with the signatures of, among others, a Member of this House.  

The intentions of this consultancy were good but the process of procuring the services of SWIPCO subverted its good intentions.  Corrective measures could have been taken at the different stages when errors were pointed out but this was not done.  This Parliament has proved itself as the consent of the Government.  This Parliament is the consent even of the Movement itself. This Parliament is the retaining war against corruption.  We, therefore, support all measures taken by Government to fight corruption.  We shall not let the people down who put so much confidence in us.  We are the hope of this country.  We shall not allow the Movement Government to be characterised as corrupt; we shall not allow the Movement era to be characterised as corrupt.  However, when dealing with contractual relationship, we must be fair and consistent.  This is why, in making conclusions about this SWIPCO contract, we should be fair to the country and to SWIPCO.  

The contract has now been implemented for over two years even though shortcomings were not corrected.  This has created obligations on both sides. On the side of Government, the main obligation is the fees that should be paid to SWIPCO by Government.  Although SWIPCO was awarded the contract on the premise that the suppliers would pay for services, PAC pointed out more than two years ago that this was fiction and this now has been proved true.  We wish, therefore, to make the following recommendations on the way forward. 

1.  That the Central Tender Board awarded the contract to SWIPCO for two years only.  The contract has therefore now elapsed.  However, SWIPCO has been operating even in the third year. Government should therefore urgently re-negotiate the contract and submit the re-negotiated contract to Central Tender Board for approval.  If the Government does not do this, there is no valid contract for the third year of SWIPCO. 

2.  SWIPCO should be paid the fees for work done during the period approved by the Central Tender Board in accordance with the provisions of the contract.  This should exclude externally funded procurement transactions since, as Central Tender Board observed, externally funded tenders are outside the SWIPCO services.  Government should establish the fees collected from suppliers and deposited in an account that was supposed to be opened for this purpose.  Government should then pay the consultant for work done but where the fees were not collected from suppliers, then obviously the Minister of Finance would have to come to Parliament for authority to pay from the Treasury.

3.  If there are any tenders which have been handled by SWIPCO but the procurement of the goods or services did not materialise, then Clause 6(3) should apply. This Clause states the following:
"If, due to any circumstances beyond the control of the consultant, the acquisition of goods or contracting of services do not materialise, the consultant may, within 30 days of learning of the official decision, proceed to invoice the client for the expenses he has incurred, which may in no case be greater than 1.5 per cent."  This clause covers the reimbursement of expenses where a procurement aborts.  There is no clause in the contract covering procurement which are not given to SWIPCO. That is, there is no clause permitting payment for no services rendered.  Clause 5(1) also covers the situation where the client decides not to make use of the SWIPCO advice when it has been provided.  This should apply where appropriate.  

5. Government should take measures to advise for such consultancy services if Government has decided to continue with such services.  The process of engaging an enforcer of transparency in procurement must be engaged in a transparent manner.  

Finally, we would like to say that the Public Accounts Committee, and myself as a person, have no problem with the third party procurement agent for Government.  This has never been an issue with the Public Accounts Committee.  The issue has been the transparency of the process of engaging such an agent.  The process of engaging the services of SWIPCO was not proper and  to make matters worse, its contract is also a problematic one.

However, for the agent to be useful and effective, he should be engaged through a transparent process which conforms to established regulations and procedures.  This is not what was done in the case of SWIPCO.  This has undermined the effectiveness of the consultancy.

Our final recommendation is that the contract with SWIPCO flaunted with so many problems and irregularities should not be renewed in its present form.  

Mr. Speaker, as requested by the House, this is the addendum to the original Report and I would like to request the House to approve the Report and, Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr. Gerald Ssendaula): Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, first for the initial part of the Report and the addendum and also to thank him for the cooperation that we have had because since we were last year in the House and the recommendation was made that we get together and provide an addendum to the Report, meetings have been held which involved all parties.  They involved the former Minister for Finance, hon. Mayanja Nkangi and they involved the Attorney General; they involved officials from the Ministry of Finance.  In the conclusion of the Chairman, what we are all looking for is a solution to this outstanding issue.  

I am not intending to go page by page over the addendum or the original Report, but I wish to touch on some of the points and also to put on record the recommendation that we are making from the side of Government.  I must say from the offset that it has now been as an established system of Government that when issues of policy have to be handled, Cabinet has to give an endorsement but in this respect, we have been negotiating or talking to the Chairman of PAC and we have so far not obtained the endorsement of Cabinet.  

It was indeed agreed this afternoon with the Chairman of the Committee that in view of the fact that we are dealing with issues on straightforward terms that we are not going back over the contract except moving on recommendations, we come to the House so that we can remove from this House this outstanding issue.  However, Mr. Speaker, allow me to say that there are certain areas which, to me, appear to be relatively new when you consider the position which had been taken.  
For example, we are talking about taxes; that they are not paid but it is not my intention to be saying to the Chairman that this is not true because I am sure he has had opportunity to look at the contract.  On page 6 of the contract, you will see 19 - "Taxes and duties":  "Unless otherwise specified by the client, the consultant, sub-consultants and the personnel pay such taxes, duties fees and other impositions as may be levied under the applicable law exclusively for work performed in Uganda."  Mr. Speaker, also are issues regarding computers installed.  I think this is an issue which we administratively discussed with SWIPCO, and SWIPCO has already delivered in this country the computers and they are only requesting where to instal them. Regarding training of the personnel, this had been extensively done and we have records of a number of people who have benefitted from the training.  Even the consultancy which was undertaken recently in procurement, SWIPCO was party to that arrangement.  

Coming to the conclusions - because it will be better that we get to the conclusions and recommendations - I wish to say we agree with the recommendations of PAC as given in their addendum and it is our intention that they will be adopted. And to do this effectively, it will require an inter-ministerial Committee. This is an issue we discussed also in the preliminary stages. That is when we were trying to merge the report so that we have an inter-ministerial technical committee comprising officials from the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Justice, Central Tender Board, Integrity and Ethics, and then in an observance status, the IGG and Auditor General for implementing the points which have been raised.  

The points include among other, that payment should be based on work done.  Now, there is no way that you can achieve this unless there has been a record that has been extracted because the earlier record which was extracted, as stated, it has been withdrawn by the Ministry of Finance because it included items on which there was no need for procurement audit and, therefore, there is a need to draw out a fresh list. As I said, under the inter-ministerial technical committee, this will be possible under the observance of the IGG and the Auditor General so as to implement this.

Also I would like to point out that as stated in this recommendation, at the time when the report of all parties that have been involved in the past - that is bodies like the IGG - when they recommended that the contract should be reviewed and approved by the Central Tender Board, when the approval was provided, despite the fact that it was provided this year, it was provided for only two years.  As clearly stated, the work has gone on because the original contract which was signed was covering a total period of three years.  As pointed out by the Chairman, there is a need to renegotiate for the third year because there is barely about three or four months to get to the end of the third year as far as this contract is concerned  because part of the two years have already been approved by the Central Tender Board.

The Committee's various recommendations as stated, the issue of the amount which was put in a separate account, certainly there is a need for us to audit this separate account and the funds in that separate account will obviously be used for purposes of ensuring that the payment is made, provided we meet the requirement as stated in the recommendations of the Chairman in his report.

Mr. Speaker, allow me to conclude by informing this House that it is true there were errors in this contract or there were gaps as pointed out, and it is unfortunate that they were not corrected in the process. But Government is in a position to sit down in the arrangement that was provided and correct these errors together with the contractor so that we can create an atmosphere where when payment is made, it will all be fair to both parties. Again as pointed by the PAC Chairman, when we are judging, we should be fair to the contractor as well as to the Government because work has been done.

There was the issue of savings.  Certainly we have listed all of this and we feel there is more savings that we could have extracted but I could give you an example by way of percentage. We had pick-ups vehicle for the IGG under this arrangement.  The amount which was supposed to be paid for these pick-ups was a total of 78,000 dollars but after the contractor had entered into scrutiny of procurement, this figure was reduced to 66,000 dollars and that was the saving of 24 per cent to Government.  

Then there was the issue of galvanised sheets.  Again 96,000 was quoted but when the contractor intervened, the payment was reduced to 81,000.  Then there was the four-wheel-drive vehicles for the MPs in the House.  The total amount that should have been paid was supposed to be 605,000 dollars but finally, the payment was reduced to 413,000 dollars.  That is the saving of 31 per cent.  

MR. WAMBEDE: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I am rising on a point of clarification. With due respect, the Minister of Finance is giving a quotation of four-wheel-drive vehicles which were meant for MPs.  I do not know which MPs went for these vehicles. This is the clarification I want.

MR. SSENDAULA: Mr. Speaker, these were for these very Members of Parliament who are here. Certainly we had to procure vehicles for them under the hire purchase arrangement which was made (Interjections).   I think we need to be very clear about this. When we talk about procurement, it is at all stages because when you are asked and you made requisitions and you indicated which type of vehicles you needed, those among you who took the four-wheel vehicles, the quotation on these vehicles - the total number of all those that were procured was 600,000 dollars and this figure, after the procurement contractor entered into negotiations, was reduced to 413,000 dollars.  We can compute vehicle by vehicle to show you what initially was the quotation of the supplier and what turned out to be the quotation of the supplier when the contractor entered into the negotiation.  

MR. RWAKOOJO: Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I want to thank the hon. Minister for giving but I bought a 4WD - brand new - I looked at the price that I paid, I also asked the dealer what he sells the same vehicle at and the dealer told me it was the same.  Now, I would want to be clarified as which saving the Minister is talking about because definitely, it was not passed on to me.

MR. SSENDAULA: Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, can I ask for an excuse in this matter and as rightly put, when you say consult, I think it is proper that we consult - (The Minister consulted his officials) - I think I had made a mistake and I beg your pardon.  I have been told by the officials that while here they put MPs, they meant Ministry of Public Service.  Mr. Speaker, I sincerely apologise to the hon. Members over this point.  Thank you.

Going further, and I hope this time this is straightforward writing, we have nine million voters' cards for the Electoral Commission.  The cost was quoted as 900 million shillings but when the contractor intervened, the figure reduced from the 900 million to 645 million.  Then video cameras -(Interruptions)

MR. LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Minister for giving way. You are talking about voters' cards, hon. Minister, could you please clarify whether there was a public bid for these voters' cards or was is by soliciting because it is very very interesting to note that you moved from 900 million to 645 million?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think there is nothing wrong in consulting which the Minister is doing, especially considering that some of these things he is handling were handled by some other people.  

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank the Minister for giving way.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Okulo Epak, I have not yet - you did not even catch my eye.  Now you have caught my eye.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I am sorry for the assumption.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am finding it a bit difficult to appreciate what the hon. Minister is calling "savings".  I presume that all those books were ordered through competitive biding and the winners of the bids obviously must have been awarded the tender on the amount they quoted in competition.  At what time in the process were the contractors reviewing the amount of money they had demanded for the service? At what time?  Unless this was the sole source but if it was competitive bidding, I just do not see how you can independently now negotiate with a winner and lower his quotation.  Can he guide us on this, this seems to be a bit sinister?  I thank you. 

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Speaker, some of the items were through tendering and then negotiations took place with the winner of the bid.  Others were direct sourcing in some of the cases which I have quoted here.  So that is the position.

Mr. Speaker, having given you the examples, and in view of the recommendation in the report that there is a need to oversee procurement by a third party and that there is saving that can be made through overseeing procurement, I think the service of this contractor is necessary.  But as already recommended in the report, at the end of the contract or at the end of our debate, recommendations can be developed for purposes of ascertaining the future of this kind of arrangement.  But it has already been acknowledged by the Public Accounts Committee that there is some saving that can be made when there is this kind of arrangement.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OBIGA KANIA(Terego county, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Members will note that in the Minister's letter of 18th January, 1995, the rationale for soliciting for services of SWIPCO was essentially to build a capacity for a procurement system in Uganda because it had been observed that either we do not have that capacity or there were very strong weaknesses which needed to be corrected.  In that letter, in the fifth paragraph, the Minister stated:  "The selected company will be contracted for a period of about three years renewable at the option of the Government of the Republic of Uganda"  And at the bottom of that page, the last paragraph says:  "In carrying out the above functions, the contractor will ensure that the professional capacity of the Central Tender Board is strengthened and extended."  

In other words, it was envisaged that within three years, the Uganda Government will have built the capacity or some reasonable capacity to start a procurement system with a minimum involvement of the services of SWIPCO or a similar company.  But  on page 8 of the addendum report, in the last paragraph you will note that what SWIPCO actually did was to mention casually to our Ministry of Finance officials that "you know, there is need for you to contract somebody to study and advise on your procurement system".  

The effect of the sentence is that greater capacity has not been built in the procurement system and  Government had to contract ITTC from Geneva. What SWIPCO was actually doing was, casually passing over a responsibility  which was part of their contractual provision.  It was passing it over to another consultant body and saying  "You see, although I contracted to do this function, now I want to pass it over and in the process, I will come back and advise you in selecting this very same consultant at another fee."  That is the import of that paragraph of hiring another consultant.  Mr. Speaker, the position, therefore, remains that SWIPCO  deliberately does not want to build capacity in Uganda, it instead wants to build a capacity for doing perpetual business in Uganda because if it advises and capacity is built in Uganda, its business in Uganda will come to an end.  

I am really disappointed to note that Government had to get another contractor to do a service which was supposed to be done by SWIPCO.  Although I am a member of PAC, I would strongly recommend the last recommendation that was made by the chairman which says that the contract with SWIPCO which has so many  irregularities should not be renewed - but I heard my chairman saying "in its present form".  I would totally disagree with him on the last phrase of "in its present form."  I would say the contract should not be renewed because they have failed to perform their duties.  Thank you. 

MR. GERALD OBEDMOTH(Youth Representative, Northern):  Mr. Speaker, I am a little bit caught in the middle. I think there is a wrong precedence developing in this Parliament and I stand to be advised at an appropriate time.   

What happened today  at the very beginning when the chairman of PAC was presenting the addendum to the report set some very bad precedent for this House.  I did not know that the chairman of PAC at any one time has heard all these disturbing news about himself;  and if these disturbing news were there, to make our history correct, and to save the name of this Parliament, the chairman would have stepped aside and the deputy should have been the one to present so that we do not have time for all this explanation that leaves some of us with question marks as to whether certain things are true or false. 

I am also disturbed in that continually, the chairman of PAC kept referring to certain individuals whose names he could not mention and at the last minute, there was only the name of hon. Karuhanga that came out.  I think this Parliament should not be used to settle personal conflicts of people magnified in the name of corruption.  

I do agree that the manner in which SWIPCO came, according to the history that has been read, has been a little bit irregular.  It used high political profile, it inherited the enemies of those politicians it was using, now SWIPCO in the process of its work has started stepping on the toes of certain also high ranking politicians.  Now, the very way it came and the very method it used is now affecting its operation and is going to affect its future in this country. I think many companies that are going to come into this country to do business must learn from what SWIPCO is suffering from.  

Many of us today, both in this House and outside, who hold very high political portfolios in this country are involved in businesses and in the process of having a third party procurement agent, SWIPCO might have stepped on our toes.  And for this investigation to have started two years ago, it was also having some political connotations.  I think this Parliament must open its eyes.  I admire and at times appreciate the credibility of members of PAC but we should also take it that our interests are beginning to conflict. We do appreciate that every time we say, when somebody talks this, that person is not anti corruption. I hate corruption like anything but if where our interests conflict, it is also corruption -  Mr. Speaker, before the addendum came, the chairman of PAC presented in the report of PAC on SWIPCO one disturbing factor that came out -(Interruption)

MR. TIM LWANGA: Thank you very much for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member that although the report has been read by the chairman of PAC, it is not a one-man report, and it is wrong to assume that people are using this report to settle scores and things like that.  It is not a one-man's report.

MR. OBEDMOTH:  Thank you for giving me that information. I am still developing my point and I will give the little information I know that might not have been reflected in this report and eventually drive my point home that the picture that the general public has been given about SWIPCO and the picture that Parliament is beginning to pick about SWIPCO has been created by very high profile politicians in this country who have been doing business with government and when SWIPCO came, some of them have been denied that opportunity of doing business.  
In this report, it was indicated that the offices of SWIPCO International could be compared to a small shop on Kampala road.  That is when I started developing the feeling that there should be some bias and bad faith and, maybe some ill intentions somewhere which I can not now understand.  SWIPCO Uganda is a company located in IPS building just in front of Parliament here, and many Members of Parliament can have time to take a stroll there.  All of us know the cost of hiring an office and we know how much it costs for a company to hire a whole floor of a building like IPS; and then for this House to be informed by the Committee and by the government to the contrary that SWIPCO is doing this, then I wonder whether the value of the equipment and the value of that office can really tantamount to a small shop on Kampala road.  There is something hidden, and in an effort to remove SWIPCO, we are exposing this country to more loss of money because there are very many hidden people here who do not want to go through that scrutiny and they want to do business to make government lose money. It has also been indicated in the report and continuous blame is being laid on SWIPCO, SWIPCO.  

If you look at the irregularities in the contract, SWIPCO came for business. If you look at the irregularity in the contract which we are now talking about, it was as if the SWIPCO people designed the contract and took it and blindfolded all our legal people in government and said "now, sign this contract!"  Nowhere has it been referred to by the committee that here, government faulted.  We have a lot of legal officers in the Attorney General's chambers, where were they?  When all these things were happening, where were they?  I think at times we need to give a balanced picture.

MISS. BYANYIMA: I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, if the Member has read the report, and if he is not blinded by his zeal to defend SWIPCO, he will recall that, that report places blame also on government officials.  It does state clearly that, for example, the Minister for Finance should not have signed that contract, it was not his job to that.  It blames the Ministry for taking over the role of CTB, it put also of blame on various government departments.  I do not know whether the hon. Member was reading the report in a hurry, or he is very zealous in defending SWIPCO. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OBEDMOTH: I thank hon. Byanyima for giving me that information.  I do not represent SWIPCO in this Parliament, I represent the youth of Northern Uganda.  My concern is not about SWIPCO, my concern is about the services supposed to be rendered by a third party procurement agent in this country which  is SWIPCO is currently doing and that is why continuously, I am referring to SWIPCO.  I have not been blinded, and I think I am clearly seeing. I have not been blinded but I am thinking of the impact of the decision Parliament is going to take today about suspending the activities of SWIPCO and the impact it is going to have on corruption of these high level politicians who are trying now to fight SWIPCO to  go away. Mr. Speaker, a lot of questions have also been raised by the committee report on the issue of capacity building - (Interruption) 

DR. BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and the hon.Member for giving way.  Could the hon. Member clarify to me who - or substantiate who are these high profile politicians because this is so damaging that we would like to know who are these that are going to obstruct the anti corruption campaign? Otherwise, he should withdraw. Thank you very much.  

MR. OBEDMOTH:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Chairman of the Movement caucus must be aware of these people because these people we continue existing with them and today, it is not my task to come here to mention names.  
The report also raises a question on the capacity building that was supposed to be done by SWIPCO.  Mr. Speaker, I have information to support what the Minister for Finance clearly stated. Despite government not paying it money, between August 1997 and June 1998, SWIPCO managed to train at least 300 government officials. They came from the Ministry of Defence; Works and Communications; Internal Affairs; Local Government and then from parastatal organisations like the former Uganda Posts and Telecommunications; Uganda Electricity Board; National Water, even the IGG who today produces a report criticising SWIPCO.
It was on the 27th of May, 1998, while opening a training course for investigation officers from the IGG's office that the IGG put a lot of praise on SWIPCO.  I do not know what eventually happened to the mind of the IGG that at the last minute he cames with a damaging report and begins telling us SWIPCO was bad and yet SWIPCO managed to train his officers and on that day, the IGG praised it!  

The report also goes ahead to challenge the legality of the contract and overtaking the powers of the Attorney General.  In fact, before this debate is concluded I want the Attorney General to assure us who gives legal guidance to this country. Is it the IGG or its is the Attorney General?  And the Attorney General should tell us the implication. Is the contract legal and binding on Uganda or not?  And if the contract is binding, what do we do; should we pay SWIPCO?  All these questions, the Attorney General should be in a position of telling us, Mr. Speaker -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Can you come to your conclusion.

MR. OBEDMONTH: Mr. Speaker, as I conclude, at least in the report it is also indicated that SWIPCO never made any savings and there was no value added to the Government of the Republic of Uganda  but there are indications from Central Tender Board to the contrary because there is a document which I can lay on the Table which was written by the Chairman of the Central Tender Board on the 30th of January, 1998, to the hon. Minister of Finance. Mr. Speaker, if you could allow me, I will read it. The Chairman writes to the Minister of Finance - the reference is "savings and value added by SWIPCO":-  
"Having reviewed the calculations of savings and value added made by SWIPCO since implementation of their consultancy contract, we agree that the results are consequential. SWIPCO is making a valuable contribution to the procurement process with initial results of 2.904 in savings as well as 48.7 in value added. When applied to all procurement of Government the results being released by all Government institutions and parastatals will be in sums of great significant to our budget.  Additionally, the procurement training for Government officials along with better documentation is contributing to an improved tendering process.  The actual qualification of value added is most interesting, and in future tenders should be of significant value, particularly in the analysis of complex tenders.  The savings shown by SWIPCO exceeds those required to be generated for Government in comparison to the fees paid to SWIPCO.  The monetary and value added results confirm that SWIPCO's intervention is in accordance with its construction obligation with the Government of the Republic of Uganda" - and the Chairman of Central Tender Board signs it and copies it to -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima why do you not allow him to read - he is still reading a document.  He is quoting from a document he has not even said what he is going to do with that quotation. Now how do you interrupt him?  

MR. OBEDMONTH: It was copied to the Chief Economist and to the Permanent Secretary/Treasury and Secretary to Central Tender Board -(Interruption).

MISS. BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence. I am only interested in seeing that we conduct ourselves in a manner that we should.  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member holding the Floor has read to us a long document.  Mr. Speaker, as far as I know, the hon. Member, the Youth MP for Northern Region is not a Member of the Public Accounts Committee and I do not know what relationship he has with the office of the IGG but he seems to have researched and obtained a document that - (Interruption) 

MR. MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Winnie Byanyima is the Vice Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee which Committee gave us a report.  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Winnie Byanyima; one, to impute wrong motives to the Members of this House who are freely debating a report from their committee?  And two; is it in order for the hon. Winnie Byanyima to continue interrupting debate and impute that Members cannot access documents from the IGG's office?  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I think she is out of order because the hon. Member is referring to a document. How he got the document is not really an issue and should not be of concern to any Member here.  He has got the document. The only concern should be for him to lay the document on the Table so that you can access it and respond accordingly but let us allow him to proceed.

MISS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, if I can be allowed to finish my procedural point.  
THE SPEAKER: There was a point of order and I have ruled on it.

MISS. BYANYIMA:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, but I was in the middle of a point of procedure can I complete it?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Byanyima, you are ruled out of order and that is it. You can wait for another occasion.

MISS. BYANYIMA: I never finished the procedural point, Mr. Speaker!

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Winnie, if you want to challenge the Speaker's ruling on the point of order there is a rule in these regulations. You can bring a substantive Motion.  

MISS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I am not challenging your ruling, I accept your ruling Sir. I was merely asking to make my request of procedure.

MR. OBEDMONTH: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for that ruling, and I think it is very important that a Member of Parliament should always do research in order to come and make something which is substantiated and something which is acceptable to this country.

From this letter, I get a little bit dismayed and I want Members of Parliament to look at he value of the third party procurement services and not to look at the manner in which SWIPCO came because our opinion is going to make us throw away a very important service to this country.  It might not be SWIPCO, it can be any other company but this country needs a third party procurement agent to check on corrupt officials in this country who are trying to sabotage the work of SWIPCO in this country. Mr. Speaker, I thank you so much and I wish to lay these documents on the Table.

DR. GILBERT BUKENYA (Busiro North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to state clearly that for me, I am totally in agreement with having a third party procurement policy. I am totally in support of that however, Mr. Speaker, this report has raised a lot of issues that I think we cannot brush away merely because we support this policy.  I personally would like to have more clarification from the Minister, probably as to why there was a delay of 670 days in which computers which I think were supposed to be a major part of the procurement process - why was that delay to that extent?  

This Parliament has just received state of the art computers and I remember two months ago, this gift was granted to us and within two months, we can even access internet down here.  Why has such a company that was given the responsibility to procure these computers within 60 days of starting the contract taken almost two years to do so, and even up to now they are not functioning?  I think here is a delay and this delay continues to deter progress in this country. So, I would like to know really what was wrong in purchasing a computer and bringing it to this country.  

We hired SWIPCO on the understanding that it is a high profile, good and efficient company for procurement.  I am wondering why and who has paid the money for hiring yet another consultant in the process of all this to a third party to evaluate and access this procurement process.  It would be desirable to know who is footing the bills; is it the Government of Uganda or is it SWIPCO whom we have given a contract to help us improve our procurement system?

Thirdly, I would like to know from the Minister how is the training in procurement been planned because I can see random allocation of individuals from different Ministries and companies as the hon. Member representing the Northern Youth has mentioned.  How is it planned? Are we targeting certain individuals?  What has been the effect of this training?  When did it start and what has it achieved in that particular departments?  

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to know from the Minister - because there is a lot of good news that we have made a lot of savings, how do these savings equate with the costs?  Are we balancing or are we still in the negative or is our savings twice and, therefore, we are able to pay SWIPCO from the savings of these procurement because this is very, very, crucial.  I think it is not good to give only one side of percentages - 5 percent, 10 percent after two years of an effective procurement company.  One would have expected, Mr. Speaker, that we do have some savings of substantial amount which may lead us to continue.  
The last point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is the final recommendation as given by PAC. I think it is a bit mild.  Mr. Speaker, what I would suggest would be that Government, under a transparent system, re-advertises for the procurement process and SWIPCO be given a chance also to apply rather than saying let SWIPCO continue, we can ratify this small matters. Let us end this contract and let us have a transparent way of re-advertising for  these companies.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. DICK NYAI (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this Parliament is well known for fighting corruption and for fighting injustice.  Mr. Speaker, while we are debating today on the 8th of April 1999, the genesis of SWIPCO was at the World Earth Summit in Argentina in 1995.  A lot of water has gone below the bridge and, Mr. Speaker, I admire the character of our Minister of Finance in being able to say, "I am sorry, I have now consulted, I made an error."  Mr. Speaker, I would like all of us in Uganda to learn that lesson, the lesson of humility. 

In 1995 at the Earth Summit, His Excellency the President, among other world leaders, expressed great concern about corruption in the procurement process and he was advised by other leaders that there are procurement firms who can assist. I believe hon. Elly Karuhanga was in that conference and SWIPCO was introduced to Uganda through Argentina. The purpose of wanting SWIPCO here or any other procurement agency was to reduce "corruption in the procurement process." 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are certain things which we should do consciously and be honest about it.  Like, Mr. Speaker, today I came into this Parliament and I found a one-sheet document which carries the heading "The Report of the Public Accounts Committee on the SWIPCO Contract; A reply by the Minister Finance: 
(1)  Preliminary objections:  The report is incompetent. There is no mandate"  - and I was going to rely on this document, Mr. Speaker, until I consulted with the hon. Minister of Finance and he said he has no knowledge of such a document. I have it here.  

Now, Mr. Speaker, therefore, in relying on documents, we should  rely on its source and weigh the import of all the documents.  Mr. Speaker, I have already been persuaded by the Minister of Finance that this Government is about to do the correct thing because as far as I am concerned, in our tribe among the Ayivu -(Interjection) -  Yes! Even if it is not in the Constitution.  In our tribe among the Ayivu, when you do something wrong yourself you do not penalise a third party for it.  I hope I am making myself clear. If you yourself commit something wrong, then you do not punish a third party.  

It may be true, Mr. Speaker, that now to Members, the appearance of SWIPCO in Uganda may not be so apparent and so transparent but it is a fact that SWIPCO did come in Uganda and it did have negotiations with our Government. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the contract which every Member has a copy of is initialled on every page by Government officials.  Now, Mr. Speaker, allow me to say this.  In the extremity of fraudulent behaviour, if between you and me we have a deal and you ask Dick Nyai to write a contract and Dick Nyai writes a contract in Dick Nyai's favour and you sign that contract, is it Dick Nyai's fault? A contract which you have freely entered of your own accord! In the process, we are now here, who determines the legality of our contracts?  

The Public Accounts Committee from its report has relied very heavily on the advice of the Auditor  General.  Mr. Speaker, allow me to disagree with them slightly.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, the Public Accounts Committee should have sought and been guided very strictly by the Attorney General because, according to our Constitution, he is the final adviser to Government unless you resort to court.  On this matter of SWIPCO, there has been a lot of anxiety because once SWIPCO has not been paid and we know that the Public Accounts meeting is normally a post mortem of the Auditor General's report for years way behind - some people have been asking and I think they are genuine in asking why it is that Uganda Government has not even paid one cent to SWIPCO.  Why is this matter already with PAC?  What is the post mortem in non payment?   

I am going to read a letter which I will Table here, Mr. Speaker.  It is a letter which I believe is a very considered opinion of the Attorney General and it is a matter I researched. He addressed himself to His Excellency  the President as follows, Mr. Speaker:
 REF. MJ/AG/31 of 30th September, 1998,  addressed to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, State House, Kampala. It reads:
"Your Excellency, 
IGG'S REPORT ON SWIPCO CONTRACT
Background:
As your Excellency knows, MS SWIPCO has entered into a contract with Government for provision of pre-procurement and audit of procurement services.  The agreement which was signed on the 5th of September 1996 was to last for a period of three years and could be renewed if both parties so agreed.  The fundamental purpose of the contract was to make savings for the Government in its procurement process.  Indeed, SWIPCO represented in the contract itself that as a result of utilising their services, Government would realise savings of at least twice the amount of fees charged by SWIPCO.  Government on its part undertook to channel its bank of procurement through SWIPCO.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance, as required by the contract, directed all accounting officers and heads of parastatal bodies to channel all their procurement requirements equal to or above US $50,000 in value through SWIPCO.  

The fees to be charged by SWIPCO was to be based on savings made by Government at the rate of 2.1 per cent on direct procurement and 1.8 per cent on audit procurement. In fact, Government was to collect that fee from the suppliers and pass it on to SWIPCO.  SWIPCO was required to execute a performance bond which was calculated on the basis of US $200 million which was indicated as the amount of Government procurement in one year to pass through SWIPCO.  As it turned out, most Government departments and parastatal bodies did not comply with the Minister of Finance directive and ignored SWIPCO's services in the course of their procurement.  It appears this might well have been because of questions that arose in the present Parliament regarding the procedures followed leading to SWIPCO being selected for the contract.  
After the first year of the contract, SWIPCO submitted a claim to the Ministry of Finance for payment of their fees.  The calculation was based on the US $200 million which had been used to calculate the value of the performance bond" -  which performance bond, Mr. Speaker, I can add, SWIPCO has already deposited with Government for these three years.  " Both the Ministry of Finance and the Auditor General sought advice from these chambers as to the validity of the contract itself and also, as to whether the fee sum claimed by SWIPCO should be paid.  The advice we gave was that:
(1)  In spite of the number of irregularities leading to the award of the contract which could be discerned and which one wished should have been altogether avoided, such irregularities of a procedural nature within Government itself could not invalidate a contract completely executed and entered into on behalf of Government with a third party.  In my view, these irregularities did not go to the heart of the contract so as to vitiate it.

(2)  The Ministry of Finance should determine the sum to be paid  to SWIPCO after it carried out an audit to establish:- 
(i) whether any savings were made by Government and how much on all procurement contracts handled by SWIPCO.  
(ii)  Whether for procurement contracts not handled by SWIPCO there was any evidence to show that savings would have, in fact, been made by Government had it channelled them through SWIPCO.  
On the basis of (ii) above, the Minister of Finance would determine the fair amount due to SWIPCO and also, where appropriate, set in motion proceedings to discipline those public officials who disobey its lawful orders in this whole matter and, therefore, cause financial loss to Government.  There is no indication that Finance implemented that advice we gave in paragraph (2) above but nevertheless, did decide to settle the SWIPCO claim amounting to US $3.6 million.  

As already indicated above, the Auditor General was also advised by us when he sought advice as to the validity of the contract, that the said contract was validly executed and was binding on all parties.  The payment process was then later halted by the Inspector General of Government, pending his investigations of the contract, its performance and as to whether SWIPCO was entitled to payment.  The IGG is of the opinion, inter alia, that the contract was illegal and, therefore, void.  He accordingly recommended that SWIPCO's invoice should not be paid.  He addressed his report to the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and copied it to Her Excellency the Vice President, myself and several others.   

THE IGG REPORT
Her Excellency the Vice President has now directed me as the constitutional legal adviser to Government to study the IGG report and make recommendations to your Excellency.  I have studied the report and here below, are my observations and recommendations:-

(1)  I should from the outset correct a gross inaccuracy in the report.  According to the report, the IGG interviewed a list of persons he characterises as "principle players" including myself and the Solicitor General. He did not interview me.  The Solicitor General too confirmed to me that he was not interviewed as categorically asserted in the report.

(2)  The IGG goes on to quote at great length the constitutional provision as standing orders relating to the Attorney General.  The usefulness of those quotations are difficult to appreciate but most surprisingly, he neglects or refuses to quote the most important parts of the Standing Orders."

MR. ISAAC MUSUMBA:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, this is a point of order.  First of all, I apologise to interrupt my good friend but I want to rise on a point of order. I have here a document from Mutyaba, Egunyu, Mwesigye and Company Advocates.  It is addressed to the Attorney General and it is intimating that there is a matter between SWIPCO and Government which is for arbitration at the courts of law.  Now, Sir, my problem is and this is where I raise a point of order for you to rule on, the Attorney General's submissions, until they are brought to this House, are actually between the Executive i.e they are confidential in that respect.  Now, when we read them here and debate them here and do what, in my view, we prejudice the Attorney General's case.  Therefore, Sir, on a point of order, is it in order for us to go on and put on public record various positions between Government and its Counsel which could be used in a manner that is prejudicial?  And after you have approved, then Sir, I will make a small contribution on the way forward.  

THE SPEAKER:  The Member contributing is in order.  Can you proceed?

MR. KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was under great constraint whether to say anything on this matter on the Floor of this House precisely because somewhere, lawyers who are also members of this House have given me notice to go for arbitration proceedings and I would, therefore, not want to appear on record saying things that might be used against me when it comes to arbitration proceedings.  Let me also make a clarification that first of all, this correspondence - this is normal correspondence, advice that I give in the course of my duty.  It is my duty to give advice without fear or favour and express my opinion on any legal matter but it is also true that as Attorney General, I am perfectly entitled to review my opinion, reverse it, or proceed with it or improve it as the situation allows.  Therefore, quoting a letter here which I wrote to the President by itself - because I know that letter was followed by discussions, by meetings and indeed, even the letter to me from the President which was quoted by the chairman was as a result of that letter, so the usefulness of reading my correspondence to the President is really lost on me. 

THE SPEAKER:  Sorry, I did not get your conclusion.

MR. KATUREEBE:  The usefulness of reading this correspondence is lost on me.  It is lost to me, I do not understand what useful value it is. 

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  You see, he has a document which he is reading and at the end of it, he is going to say why he has actually read or quoted extensively from this document, then we can pass judgement on its usefulness or otherwise.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I had said earlier in my preamble that the Public Accounts Committee relied excessively and heavily on the Auditor General's opinion.  They did not take due cognisance of the Attorney General's opinion. That is why I am reading this letter and in this letter, indeed the Attorney General goes on to say that he, himself can review his position.  

"The IGG goes on to quote at great length the constitutional provisions and standing orders relating to the Attorney General.  The usefulness of those quotations are difficult to appreciate but most surprisingly, he neglects or refuses to quote the most important part of the Standing Orders in relation to the functions of the Attorney General.  He quotes para 3 of the section only, section YA only in part but leaves out the following sentences which fail the ones he quotes.  The Standing Orders states further: "He or she (Attorney General) is, therefore, unlikely to change their advice unless he or she is himself or herself convinced there are new grounds for altering his or her original opinion.  It follows that if a Permanent Secretary, or a head of department as the case may be, is, after very careful consideration, for any reason dissatisfied with the advice received, he or she should address it to the Solicitor General in writing, stating why.  The Attorney General's opinion expressed personally or through the Solicitor General is final.  
The above regulation of Government Standing Orders imposes a duty on Permanent Secretaries and heads of department to study legal advice tendered to them by the State Attorney and where they detect a problem, they must seek further advice from the Solicitor General himself or the Attorney General.  The business of the Government to run, there must be one final authority that gives legal advice to Government.  Constitutionally and as per Government Standing Orders, that authority is the Attorney General.  The legal opinion of the Attorney General may only be reversed by himself or by competent courts of law.  Although the IGG may give a legal opinion as a lawyer where is one, he cannot competently over rule the legal opinion of the Attorney General made in the exercise of his constitutional functions under Article 119 of the Constitution.  The Attorney General is free to accept the opinion of the IGG and review his own where it is sound in law.  

In this particular case, the other parties are pressing for arbitration proceedings.  A question that must arise in these proceedings is which of the two sets of legal advice is to be taken as representing the position of Government. Be that as it may, I am still of the firm opinion that in any case, this particular opinion of the IGG is unsound and legally untenable.  The IGG states that the contract is illegal and proceeds at page 18 to describe any illegal contract as one whose performance is inconsistent with any existing law.  It is void and the law will not give any remedy or firm actions on its basis.  Most amazingly, the IGG then goes on to advise Government in his recommendation C71 that the contract "should be thoroughly reviewed and modified to clearly spell out the rights and obligations of the parties."  He recommends further that the Ministry of Finance should establish whether savings were realised "under the contract and that SWIPCO should be paid for the work done."  

In law, a contract that is void is a nullity and, therefore, not capable of modification or review and nothing can be paid under it.  My legal opinion already given on this matter remains the position of the Attorney General.  I have not been persuaded by the IGG's "legal opinion" that I should change my opinion.  As I had earlier advised the Minister of Finance and the Auditor General, we should seek to amend the contract or seek to terminate it if Government is satisfied that the policy objectives behind it are not being achieved. The Ministry of Finance should calculate not only the savings that accrue to Government or would have accrued to Government, but also the fees that would have been paid to SWIPCO on the basis of those savings as per the contract.  

We can only proceed to amend or modify or terminate a contract that is valid, not one that is void.  My view is that this matter should be amicably settled instead of going for costly arbitral proceedings.  Should the calculations by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reveal that the fees being asked for by the other parties is unreasonable, I will have no hesitation to proceed to the arbitration to defend Government position."  Then he terminates his letter.  

The point here is that when we now come to the Public Accounts Committee recommendations, on one hand you are saying the contract is illegal, then you are saying let us re-negotiate it?  How can you re-negotiate that which is illegal?  I think it would be gentlemanly for this country and for this Government to say "look, we wanted to - and I am still persuaded that this Government wants to eliminate corruption in our procurement process, if that policy is still in place, then this Government goes ahead to review the contract with SWIPCO but you cannot penalise a third party because of your own inadequacies.  

SWIPCO did not make a contract with itself, it made a contract with our Government and it is only reasonable that our Government fulfils its part of the obligation so that we are recognised in this world that we are worth ourselves because tomorrow, if we tell SWIPCO, "you came here on your own and can go away", which other company are we going to invite here?  Whatever it is, Mr. Speaker, on a fundamental rule of law and purely good conduct of human behaviour in business, our Government did make a decision, let it pay for and correct its errors.  In fact, I am very surprised that in the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee, they are absolutely silent on the Government Officers who made us enter into this terrible contract.  Those are the people we should be going for.  I am quite sure this House will see to it that whether we are going for arbitration or not, that this Government gets out of this SWIPCO contract without unduly tarnishing the name of our good country.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  I will allow three contributors; hon. Wambede, hon. Nkuuhe, hon. Musumba and the Minister.  Now, whom do I remove in preference for gender?  Unfortunately only the males caught up with me.  Hon. Nkuuhe. Now I am giving you four minutes each.

DR. NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara):  I thank you for that generosity, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Report which I found very, very mild.  Mr. Speaker, I am also disturbed by the nature of this debate because it would seem that people have interests and I am really concerned about this because it can undermine the integrity of Parliament if we go on trying to defend sides as if either we are employed by so and so or so and so.  I do not think that is really fair for the integrity of Parliament.  

I would like also to commiserate with the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee and to tell him that, if you are defending integrity and you are trying to fight corruption, you must be prepared to be attacked.  That is the way the world operates.  And I can quote you from the book "Crime and Punishment" by Dostoyevsky  where he describes Stalin's Russia.  If you are sick, they took you to prison, if you commit a crime they take you to hospital, if you oppose Government,they take you to a mental institution.  In other words, if you are sick, you are sent to Luzira, you commit a crime, you are sent to Mulago, you oppose Government, they send you to Butabika.  That is the sort of attack you expect if you are fighting corruption.  Of course, if I am against a Report, I go for the head of that Report who is the Chairman.  It is like killing a snake; you go for the head!  That is the way they do it.  So, Mr. Chairman, you should stand steadfast, hold your Bible or your Koran and your rosary, and you will find that provided you are speaking the truth, it will make you free.  

Now, as far as conflict of interest is concerned, I think a contract of this nature has to have some sort of conflict of interest.  I would like to state that I have no interest at all on either side; either for or against SWIPCO but I can see that some people are lawyers acting for one side or the other and I think I will not say you excuse yourself from contributing or something like that.  At least in the cause of national justice, it is unfortunate but I think if somebody has an interest either for or against SWIPCO, it is important that he does not defend that position here because this House is supposed to be neutral.  
Now, Mr. Speaker, there was something on computers, that they were supposed to give computers 600 or so many days ago.  I cannot understand because if SWIPCO is a procurement company, it is supposed to evaluate suppliers. So, even these computers, actually somebody else should have supplied them and they evaluate all these potential suppliers.  And you see, if you delay with computers, it is one thing, if they come one year later, the price is almost half of those original computers.  So if you buy computers now and they are delivered two years, three years later, at what price are you paying?  Because by the time they are delivered, the price maybe about 30 percent.  Therefore, you will be cheated about three times.

Now, the other clarification I would like is, it seems this contract was entered into over many years and the Report talks of "Minister" or "the Minister" but I think we should clarify which Minister because obviously, hon. Ssendaula could not have been the Minister because he just became a Minister recently.  And I think that is why he is having problems defending things which happened before he was there.  So, we would like to know who was the Minister who entered into this contract, who were the bureaucrats and so on so that we can make our position very, very clear.  

The other point is modernisation.  We are talking about "modernisation", the slogan is "modernisation".  I would like to inform you, Mr. Speaker and the hon. Members that, even procurement has been modernised these days.  I can give you one example of how a private citizen saved the Republic of Uganda a lot of money.  This was in UEB. There was a case and through the internet, we learnt that UEB was trying to buy generators and Mr. Edward Baliddawa sent this word around to Ugandans and then they contacted so many suppliers and they started competing on line.  That is internet work, on line in computers and then the price dropped to about half and then this information was given to UEB and then they went through the normal procedures.  So, procurement has been modernised.  I do not see why we cannot take advantage of this modern technology.  We are talking of electronic Commerce, the Government has a slogan, "modernise", "modernise", why can we not modernise procurement?

THE SPEAKER:  Your time is up, I am sorry you cannot continue.

DR. NKUUHE:  The last point, Mr. Speaker, is this intermediation.

THE SPEAKER:  You time is up. Hon. Wambede.

DR. NKUUHE:  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, the matter before us is a very important subject  and when I look round, I feel that we do not have a quorum.  Is it in order for this House to continue transacting this very important matter when there is no quorum?  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  Following the attention of the Speaker being drawn to the matter of quorum, we have ascertained that there are only 60 Members in the House and we, therefore, do not have a quorum.  I will therefore adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 O'clock.

(The House rose and adjourned to Tuesday, 13th April, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)
