Wednesday, 02 April 2008
 
Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and I also want to welcome the students from Uganda Christian University, Mukono, in Mukono County North. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, I remember when there were problems in Kenya, we passed a resolution, which we communicated to a number of people, including Kenya, and we have received a response from Kenya; it reads as follows:

“A Resolution of Parliament of Uganda, concerning the post-election violence in Kenya:

We have received the contents of the resolution of Parliament of Uganda, concerning the post-election violence in Kenya. The Kenyan National Assembly wishes to convey its gratitude to the Members of Parliament and the people of the Republic of Uganda for their expression of solidarity with us in the true spirit of the East African Community. 

Signed: Clerk of the Kenya Parliament.” 

Thank you very much.

2.36
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for giving me this opportunity to raise matters of national concern, regarding the return of internally displaced persons in Northern Uganda.

All of us remember that when the Juba peace talks started, there had been some degree of stability in Northern Uganda, which has improved by the day, and as we speak now, the majority of our people are massively returning to their original homesteads to begin life afresh. They want to open up their land, they want to get settled and begin life afresh.

However, Mr Speaker, we think that the government needs to urgently come up, together with the partners in development, to facilitate this process especially this month because rain has returned; people are opening up land and people want to get back home as fast as possible. Therefore, I would like to raise a few issues that we would request Government to urgently respond to.  

One, I want to appeal to Government to urgently - this month if possible because of the season - to facilitate our IDPs with tools for agriculture and seeds because if they arrive late, it will be too late for the season. This is the planting season; this is a season when people are out cultivating.

Secondly, all the schools were displaced, but now all the schools are going back to their original sites. However, we have big problems. As the majority of the population returns with their children, the teachers are finding difficulties in finding accommodation and we, therefore, appeal to Government that as it was done in the internally displaced camps where temporary shelters were established for the schools, they should establish temporary accommodation for teachers. They should be able to be erected within a few weeks to allow these teachers settle back in the sites, to give the returning people education.  

Thirdly, there is another big problem especially when people lived in the camps, many people died in the camps and people buried their loved ones in the camps. But as they return, I would like to appeal to the government - because even when they leave these camps, the land belongs to some people and as people leave these camps, people want their land to be left without the graves - I would like to appeal to Government to make a provision either to get some place within these camps to be a cemetery and they rebury these people who were buried without any arrangement, or facilitate the relatives to take back their loved ones to their villages. 

On top of that, there are a number of places where heavy battles took place, mass killings took place, and as people return, they are encountering skeletons and people who were not buried. I would like to appeal to Government to facilitate the community in this process such that when these things are found in the fields, at least there is a proper arrangement for reburial of these people.

Fourthly, to allow the restoration of law and order, I would like to appeal to Government to speed up the process of facilitating the Police. The Police in Northern Uganda needs a lot of facilitation; their welfare needs to be improved, and the community Police in particular needs housing. We are told that there are some uniports which are being provided for this community Police, but as we speak now, they are not in place. I would like to appeal to Government to facilitate it because this would help in giving our people confidence and restoring the rule of law in the rural areas.

The number of the police officers also needs to be increased. At the moment as we speak, the community police officers are only 30 per sub-county, irrespective of the sizes of the sub-counties and we think that with increment in this number, our people should be able to resettle back home. Mr Speaker, not only the community police, but I think that also the entire Police in Northern Uganda needs facilitation and they need special facilitation because we think that they should not be treated the same way the Police elsewhere are treated because they are confronting a lot of problems as people return, and we think that they should be well facilitated. For example, the DPC of Gulu receives a monthly imprest of only Shs 400,000, compared to other areas and we think that he is confronted with a lot of problems that he needs support. 

The other area in which the returning IDPs need help is basically water points. Many people were surviving on wells and when they got displaced, these wells also disappeared. We need to support them and avail them water points in order for them to resettle as quickly as possible in their homesteads. 

There is of course the fear of unexploded bombs in those areas, especially in the fields where heavy battles took place, and where people go back to cultivate. I know that the Army in Northern Uganda is trying their level best - especially when these matters are reported, they always respond to pick up these bombs, but these remain extremely a big threat to the population because many of them may not know what to do. On our part as leaders, we continue to sensitise them that wherever they find such things, they should be able to report. 
In eastern Acholi, Mr Speaker, as IDPs return, there is the threat of the Karimojong and this is undermining the return of our people in eastern Acholi. Our people have a lot of confidence in the Juba peace process and this is why they have managed to pick up the courage and return home, despite the fact that the peace agreement has not been signed. People have confidence and when this matter came out yesterday in the media that the LRA have delayed the signing of the peace process, it was a very big concern and our people are concerned that Government should do its part. 

Lastly, as people return, they are retuning to bushes; bushes because the roads are not open. We would like to appeal to Government to open up community roads, put up bridges in places where there were bridges, to allow these children who are returning to their homesteads move to school safely. Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity, and we will be grateful if Government responds to some of these issues because they are of fundamental concern for the survival of our people returning back home. Thank you. 

2.45
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Reagan Okumu for raising these fundamental matters. 

First of all, I want to assure him that for all the points he has raised, Government has been aware of them. In fact, I was even due to chair an inter-ministerial meeting because different ministries have a role to play - the ministries of water, health, works, education, internal affairs. So, these are very critical matters. 

In addition, as many of you may be aware, we have a recovery programme. You were all given a chance to make comments on the recovery programme and at one stage when I had gone to the North, hon. Okello-Okello said “You have not given us enough time to make our input,” and I agreed to extend the deadline. So, you have had an input, NGOs have had inputs, development partners have had their input and the government has eventually had a recovery programme. It is roughly budgeted at US $606 million, although since his Excellency the President added some other items, it will be more than US $606 million.

However, I would like to make it clear that we have not yet received this money and so when I read a report that the Prime Minister’s Office was already “eating” this money, I was very disappointed. And I call upon all honourable Members of Parliament from these areas to explain that we have not yet received the money and that it would be so wicked as to eat even a cent of the money of the people who have suffered so much for 20 years. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Prime Minister for giving way. The recovery programme has been finalised and launched. So whether some people did not give opinion or views is not material now. What is left is the implementation. 

The sum of the money budgeted for that programme has to come from the donors but a bigger component is from here. I get disturbed when the Leader of Government Business tells the House that the money has not been found yet. Our local money here, found from where? The money is budgeted for; it is in the Bank of Uganda, you just go and pull it out and take it there. You do not have to find your own money here; it is budgeted for, you just make it available. That is what we are waiting for. Thank you. 

MR AKBAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, for the response he has given. But I want to add my voice to seek clarification on one issue; that in the 18 years or so in the IDP camps, many Ugandans were born and have spent most of their life there. There are those who are returning home at the ages of 18 to 20 who were born in IDP camps. We also want to know, what is the government position to cater for those people who have been in the IDP camps and are going home, because at that age, nobody can start primary education even if there is UPE? Thank you. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, when I was at the University of Chicago, we had a professor called Morgan; he was about 70 years old. But if you disturbed him while he was speaking, he would get out of the classroom. (Laughter) The point I would like to make is that if honourable colleagues listened - [Mr Kawanga: “You will get out?”] - I cannot get out -(Laughter)- if they had listened, then a number of their questions would not arise. 

The point I am making is that there are also ministries, which have to be working straightaway, like health and education. So, after chairing that meeting, hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere will make a comprehensive statement and then we shall be in position to address those points. I thank you. 

2.52
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise on a point of national importance. Just like my honourable brother, Reagan Okumu, has said that a good number of the population of Pader has already gone back to their homes, they were putting in much effort to help put up grass thatched houses for teachers and in schools where there were no classrooms, they also helped to put up some grass thatched houses for the children to study in.  

However, I come from Pader District and Pader borders, on one side, Karamoja and Lango. Some of our brothers from Karamoja want to tell us that they are more citizen than we are. Why I say this is because last month alone, we lost five of our members who were killed by Karimojong warriors. On Wednesday 12th of March, they attacked a sub-county called Palmoni and killed a man called Bosco Okello aged about 21 years. Four hours later, and I wonder whether it was the same armed warriors or another group, they killed another man by the names of Otieng Omario from another sub-county, which is quite far from Palmoni and that is Lapono sub-county. Two days later, they killed another man from Palmoni sub-county, Mudo parish and two days after that another man was also killed. In total, within a week, we lost five members of Pader District.  

In January, we also experienced the same. We lost a man called Oboke in Lapono sub-county and three others were wounded, among them a medical worker who happens to come from another part of that sub-county. As I speak now, workers and especially medical workers and some teachers who come from other sub-counties and other parts are afraid to work in this sub-county. I have raised this to challenge the responsible ministries and ask whether the minister in charge of security and the Ministers of Defence and Internal Affairs are aware about this. And what are they doing as far as this is concerned?

Mr Speaker, I want to request these ministries, including the Minister for Karamoja Affairs to do some work and make sure we have a permanent end to this problem. I am a Member of Parliament but I am also a victim of the Karimojong; I was denied the opportunity of seeing my father because he was killed by the Karimojong. An honourable member called Odonga Otto who comes from Aruu also had his mother killed by the Karimojong. How long shall we go on like this? Government has to find a permanent solution to this problem. 

I have some tips for the ministries that I have mentioned. We have some security roads, which if opened would help us control these Karimojong and make them afraid of coming to the district. These security roads include one that connects Kokini sub-county to Lango and Abim. There is another security road that connects from Kitgum, crosses Pader and goes to Abim. This is just to enable us have a brotherly situation. These Karimojong are our own brothers and sisters; they are also Ugandans but they should not leave us to suffer all the time because we at least have a way we can handle this.  

I want to also propose that full time security should be provided in the sub-counties that border Karamoja because we are talking of PRDP. The whole of Agago County will not benefit from Government programs if full time security is not provided.  Why do I say this? Because of these attacks. Actually, there have been a number of other incidences apart from the deaths I mentioned and the Karimojong have even resorted to raiding not only cattle but also household property. The ideas I am giving are to provide security roads and full time security. If these two cannot be done, I want to request Government to also give us guns because we also know how to – so that every household bordering Karamoja is able to defend themselves. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable colleague who has given us this information about the deaths of our brothers and sisters and destruction of property in the areas that she has described. First of all, this is regrettable.

Secondly, as the honourable member has said, this issue of cattle rustling and attacking neighbours of Karamoja by the Karimojong worriers is a long standing issue and I am glad that the honourable member says we must work together to find a permanent solution to this problem. In the past two or three years, efforts have been made to try and come to terms with this issue in Karamoja and I will just outline some of the measures that have been taken and the results that we see although the problem is not yet fully resolved.  

A whole division of the UPDF has been dedicated to this area of Karamoja and has also been given special attention in terms of resource allocation, that is, what the Army needs to use to deal with that situation. Alongside that, the Uganda Police force is also increasing its deployment in that area. In the month of December alone, the Uganda Police force deployed 500 police officers in Karamoja alone. 

The Inspector-General of Police has taken administrative arrangements to create two police regions in Karamoja where previously we had only one, given the enormity of the problem. The Anti-Stock Theft Unit has been beefed up and deployed as much as possible along the border between Karamoja and the neighbouring districts. 

However, this is not a purely security or military situation so our role as political leaders comes in here. For the past year or so, we have been holding meetings with our colleagues, honourable members of Parliament from Karamoja, within Karamoja, on a quarterly basis to compare notes on progress and on where we still have challenges. Our strong recommendation is that our colleagues, honourable members of Parliament from Karamoja should also start dialogue with our colleagues, honourable members of Parliament from neighbouring districts so that as the mobilisation is done in Karamoja, it is also done in the neighbouring districts in order to tackle other aspects of cattle rustling apart from the security aspect. 

It is our view that tangible progress is being made in the sense that although incursions are still happening as the honourable member has described, on the whole we see a marked reduction in the number of incidents that are taking place and we undertake that we will strengthen our efforts and work together with honourable members from these areas so that sooner than later, the type of situation that the honourable member has described can be brought to a halt. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.03
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I also rise to raise an issue of national concern. Shortly before Easter, a team of Members of Parliament who subscribe to the parliamentary Committee on MDGs went on a tour to a number of districts, including Kasese. While we were in Kasese discussing with the leaders, one of the problems, which the leaders brought to us as Members of Parliament was the issue of the conflict between the Basongora and the cultivators, which has been going on for the last six months. 

The leaders said that even before we discuss other issues concerning MDGs, Government should first settle that issue. They requested us to visit the cultivators who have been displaced and see the kind of conditions in which they live. We visited the camps where these people are living and what we established, as probably all of us know because this issue has been reported in the media, is that when the Basongora pastoralists invaded the park, there was intervention where Government removed them but tried to relocate them to public land. It happens that there were people who had lived on this public land for more than 30 years and they mainly constitute the Bakonzo and the Bakiga. 

Mr Speaker, I am not a tribalist and I don’t intend to be one but the people on the ground think that the decision, which was taken tended to favour the Basongora against the cultivators because what was done is that the cultivators; around 600 families, were taken to the edge of the public land and told to live there but they were not allowed to cultivate. They are living in very squalid conditions, they are not allowed to dig or cultivate and neither are they given any relief food. They had a primary school in the area, which was destroyed in the process, they also had trading centres, which were destroyed and they have been abandoned without food, education, health or any basic service. We were shocked! 

The papers reported that Members of Parliament cried at witnessing the plight of the people there. We were told by the people that the Basongora herdsmen, whom we also saw, cannot allow to speak to any leader be they Members of Parliament or the district leadership and that they only talk to the leaders from the centre so they are saying that they are protected by Government. 

The cultivators, whom we talked to, said that the Basongora are armed with guns. We couldn’t verify this although I saw one Musongora putting on boots, which were green resembling army boots. While we talked to the cultivators, one of the Basongora herdsmen actually came near us with his herd of cattle and kept communicating and we were told that he was communicating to the forces in Kampala and indeed that evening when we left, we later heard that they speared one of the cultivators to death. 

Mr Speaker, when we discussed this with the district leadership, we brought it to their attention that there was an inter-ministerial committee, which had been established but we were told that the committee hasn’t been helpful to the leadership of the district. Actually, they said that whenever they raise the issue with the concerned ministers, they just rebuke them and tell them that they are the ones bringing confusion on the ground. We also told them that this Parliament had ever discussed the issue of the Balaalo and the nomadic pastoralists and we said that there is a committee investigating the matter. They said that the committee had rung the leadership of the district and proposed to go to the district but they have never gone so the district leadership is in a dilemma. 

Our concern is that while the government tries to solve this issue, the people who have been displaced need immediate attention in terms of food, because as Members of Parliament, we were forced to contribute money from our pockets to buy food for the people and the food is now finished. 

Secondly, the many children in the camp haven’t been in school for the last six months.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought your intention was to report the plight of these people and that you wanted the appropriate authorities to investigate and take appropriate measures?

DR BARYOMUNSI: That is the point I am trying to drive at. They need food, the children who have dropped out of school must be returned to school immediately, they need immediate medical attention, water services and other basic services as the problem is being resolved to resettle both the cultivators and the Basongora in that area. I thank you very much.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I did set up an inter-ministerial committee chaired by hon. Kategaya and they met, including Members of Parliament from that area. Hon. Kategaya will be visiting that area on Monday and also of course, relief will be sent to the affected people. I did also speak with the Inspector-General of Police and he assured me that he had restored law and order. I thank you.

3.10
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the issue of Kyambogo University. You may recall some time back; maybe one and a half years ago when we had an issue with the Kyambogo lecturers; at that time the minister promised that she would settle that matter in the shortest time possible. Since then, the problem has become perennial. You are aware that right now there is no business going on in Kyambogo University and while we were on recess, there were some arrests made of students of the university. I read in the papers that a group of students came to petition your office on this matter. I need your guidance in this House to see how the minister can maybe bring the statement and we comprehensively tackle the problem of these lecturers of Kyambogo University because the students are being affected so much that actually the university has been thrown in limbo. 

Is it possible for the minister to bring a statement here, the relevant committee looks into the matter, brings a report here in the shortest time possible, we discuss it and find a lasting solution for this university? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, but two or three weeks ago I received a petition from the students of Kyambogo University about what was going on there. I immediately communicated to the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Services to study, handle and make recommendations, and I copied this to the Minister in charge of Education. I hope something is being done. That is what I can report in as far as what you have raised is concerned. Yes, hon. Minister of Education?

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Banyenzaki for raising the issue on Kyambogo University. I would like to promise that within one week the ministry is going to come here with a statement on Kyambogo University.

THE SPEAKER: Good.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will note on the Order Paper there is a statement by the Prime Minister, but as I was coming in, the Minister of Internal Affairs who is in charge of the peace talks in Juba, rung me to say he wants to make an urgent statement apparently on what is happening in Juba. I allowed him to do so and, therefore, I am adjusting the Order Paper to allow the minister say what he wants to tell us. Honourable minister, oh sorry, I understand there is another item, which we should deal with first.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

3.13
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2008 be read for the first time.

In accordance with Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001, this Bill is accompanied with the Certificate of Financial Implications dully issued by the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to consider and subsequently report back. But I must observe here that I realise that there are a number of Bills that have been committed to the committees to study and take appropriate action and according to our rules, there is a timeframe within which these Bills should come back, but many have not come back yet. This is to request the chairpersons of the committees to check with their records and take necessary action to ensure that these Bills are returned to the House for consideration.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

STATEMENT TO PARLIAMENT ON THE MATTER OF SIGNING THE FINAL PEACE AGREEMENT WITH THE LORDS’ RESISTANCE ARMY (LRA)

3.16
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a short statement on the signing of the final peace agreement between the government of Uganda and the Lords’ Resistance Army (LRA). 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I recently informed Parliament about the progress that has been made in the Peace Talks between the government of Uganda and the Lords’ Resistance Army (LRA). In the statement I made to Parliament, I informed the House that all items in the agreed agenda had been discussed and agreements reached and signed. What remained to be done was to agree on an implementation schedule and the signing of the final peace agreement.

On 25th March 2008, we did agree on and initialed an implementation schedule. We also agreed on and initialed the final peace agreement. In addition, the parties agreed that formal signature of the final peace agreement would be done in Juba, Southern Sudan on Saturday, 05 April 2008. The Government delegation was ready to travel to Juba for the function.

On 01 April 2008, the government delegation was informed that Kony would not be available to append his signature to the final peace agreement on Thursday, 03 April 2008 as had been agreed. We understand he will be able to do this on Thursday, 10 April 2008. The formal signature of the final peace agreement is consequently scheduled for Monday, 14 April 2008 in Juba, Southern Sudan. 

Despite this minor setback, Mr Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity on behalf of Government, and the Leader of Government Business, to invite honourable Members of Parliament to Juba to witness the formal signing of the final peace agreement that is scheduled –(Interjections)- that is scheduled for 14 April 2008. And I suppose all the smiles and giggling indicate acceptance of the invitation. I thank you, Sir. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Any comment? Yes, Leader of the Opposition, Prof. Latigo?

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is the head of Government delegation to the Juba Peace Process for the statement he has made because what I said yesterday was from the donkey’s mouth. At least today you are hearing of the postponement of the signing from the horse’s mouth. 

I would like to appreciate, on behalf of many of us who have been participating in this process, the efficiency and commitment of the honourable minister, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda and his brother, Henry Oryem. (Applause) The exercise they are in is a very tough one. It is like riding a roller coaster whose frequency varies with every step. You wake up one day, things look really rosy and you think this is it. For them to go through this process and still look as clean and healthy as they are tells a lot about their character. I would like to commend them for the good work. 

We would also like to reassure you that those of us who committed ourselves to support the process will be available. We were ready to go to Juba yesterday; we packed our bags, only to be told the signing had been postponed. There may be a need for some of us to go to Garamba to meet Joseph Kony and I can assure you, many of us will be ready to go because this country needs to end the conflict in the North with the peace agreement so that we can move on. We thank you very much.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. I just want to seek a few clarifications from the minister’s statement. The minister is inviting Parliament for the signing ceremony. I do not know whether the minister is inviting Members of Parliament for both signing ceremonies because according to his presentation, there are likely to be two ceremonies; one, on the 10th April and the other one on the 14th April. I am not sure which one he is inviting us for. 

Secondly, while we do appreciate the minister as a person and his team for their contribution for over one and a half years in this peace process, it would also be good for record purposes for the minister to let Uganda know the reason as to why there has been this postponement. We believe you have been in touch with your other colleagues and many people were expecting this matter to be signed except Ugandans were stunned yesterday when they learnt in the media that the process had been postponed. This is extremely a big concern, especially, for the people who are displaced in Northern Uganda. They want the assurance that this time, this date will not be postponed again. Thank you. 

MR  NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to seek a small clarification from the minister. I see two dates; there will be one on 10th April and another one on 14th April. What is the difference between these two agreements? 

Two, in 1985, we had some peace talks in Nairobi when we were in the bush. Having signed the agreement, it turned out to be peace jokes. We are asking both parties; the government to commit itself on their side and not to turn back and we are asking the other side of Kony also to commit itself to avoid the scenario of 1985. Thank you.

3.24
MR HUSSEIN GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was part of the first team that pioneered to go and meet Kony and urge him to make peace. Mine is guidance and I want to ask Members that from what I am seeing, if we continue with this debate, we may be forced to trigger some things which may jeopardise the peace. My humble appeal to members is that we hold this talk and we move to the next agenda. Thank you. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the last presentation that was made by the minister, we agreed that it was too delicate to discuss the matter and preempt the final peace agreement because we do not know the condition under which the two parties are negotiating. I am standing to support my colleague that we should end these comments because we do not know the circumstances making the two parties either to postpone or not. I beg that we end these comments and wish them well and when the final agreement is signed, we shall debate it substantially.  

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion that we maintain the status quo. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

3.28
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I wish to inform you that Government is aware of the increasing tragic accidents on the roads and loss of life. I assume you have all got copies of my statement because I am disaster prepared and I made 370 copies. We wish to inform you that systematic steps are being taken to cure the problem. The accidents are mainly attributable to the following factors:
1.	Reckless driving and over speeding.
2.	Poor mechanical conditions of vehicles; DMCs.
3.	Over loading passengers and goods.
4.	Absence of speed governors.
5.	Violation of traffic laws especially by “matatu”, that is, taxi drivers and operators and boda-boda operators and driving while they are drunk.
6.	Failure to use seat belts by passengers. 
7.	There are traffic jams which are partly caused by indiscipline “Matatu” operators and boda-boda riders.  
In some countries like Kenya, there is a law which requires all Public Service vehicles which are imported into their countries to have speed governors before the vehicles enter the country. I have requested the ministers of Internal Affairs and Works and Transport to get together and draft a paper, which will be presented to Cabinet by 14 April 2008 by the Minister of Internal Affairs. Thereafter, the Minister of Internal Affairs will make a statement to Parliament and to the nation at large.  

Meanwhile, the Inspector General of Police has deployed more traffic police officers on the roads in the city and on the highways and the traffic officers are enforcing traffic laws and regulations and reducing jams.  You must have seen someone who wanted to bribe a policeman with Shs 20,000 and the policeman disallowed the money; he did not take it -(Interjections)- some colleagues are saying it was too little, I do not believe that- (Laughter) 

Government appeals to the drivers to respect traffic laws and regulations and people travelling in public buses and matatus are urged to report to the Police violators of traffic laws.  I thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.31
MRS RUTH NVUMETTA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate my colleagues for asking, “Which roads”, but even the water transport is really bad. We are talking about the roads now, but we are having so many accidents on the water as well.  

So, I hope the minister in charge, who has given the statement, to do something about it.  I would like to add No.7 to the list which the Rt hon. Prime Minister has given, that is bad roads and No.8 - corruption in the ministry of works.  Thank you.  

3.32
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. First and foremost, I want to thank the Prime Minister for the statement he has given us. I must say that this is long overdue. 

Mr Speaker, I think we have lost quite a lot of people on these roads and there is menace on our roads. I just wanted to find out - I do not know whether the Prime Minister was serious about this statement; this is a very shallow thing, we wanted something much deeper than this; we need to be serious. 

Now, issues like the absence of speed-governors; how many times has Government come out with policies about speed governors; what happens to them? These policies are put out, people even go and fix speed-governors then all of a sudden everything disappears; what is this? I wanted to get a deeper explanation from the minister or from the Prime Minister on this. 

Then on the issue of failure of passengers to use seat belts - this whole place was at one time serious about seat belts, and then all of a sudden things were forgotten. I think Government needs to be more serious than this. If we are going to save the lives of people this is not how to do it. 

Now, on the menace of the matatus, these matatus are too many and most of them are DMCs and they are causing a lot of confusion. One time, were told that buses were coming in, what happened to the story of the buses? 

Then on the issue of boda-bodas - the roads are jammed with boda-bodas. I think the government needs to be serious about some of these things. We really need to come out with polices and enforce them; the problem is enforcement. You may bring in speed governors or vehicles already fitted with speed-governors, but if you do not enforce them, they will be useless.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.35
MR BUSIMA MAFABI (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Prime Minister for giving this statement because the issue is very serious. That is why I did not allow the minister to present it to us. 

Much as I do agree with him, especially on the causes of accidents, I would like to point it out to the House that we have more than what the Prime Minister has listed. One area, which is a major cause of accidents in this country is the poor road design. I sometimes wonder whether we have engineers in this country. The roads are so narrow; they do not even reflect our culture. 

For instance, over the weekend I was travelling from Jinja to Kampala via Kayunga, where they diverted the traffic, there were so many accidents on that road and basically, it was as a result of – (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, before recess, we had a report presented to this Parliament by the committee - it was extensively discussed and the report was adopted by Parliament.  What I expected from the Prime Minister was not just repetition of what we discussed; we wanted action. I consider that we do not have any report or statement to debate.  

I would like to appeal to you, Mr Speaker, that we wait for the comprehensive statement by the Prime Minister and then we can debate that comprehensive statement. Right now, we are just repeating what we discussed last time.

THE SPEAKER:  Well – do you think we should debate this matter? Everyday, we hear about deaths on our roads. He has promised a comprehensive statement – it is coming. But I think let us consider it in the way it is.

MR BUSIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interjections)– hon. Members, just bear with me, I am about to finish. In fact it may even help you when the comprehensive report comes.   

Another area, which we urge Government to look at is the upgrading of our roads. Jinja to Kampala needs a new highway, Kampala-Bombo, Kampala – what do we call this place where someone burnt children, beyond Nabingo - Masaka road. We do not have to bring all this here, but now that it has been brought, the government should come out very clearly on what direction they are taking. The maintenance is so poor – the potholes. 

So, I agree with the Members that we need a comprehensive plan. I have pointed it out that we should have something tangible. Thank you very much.

MR OLENYI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I want to raise emanates from the statement made by the Rt hon. Prime Minister. On page 1, the second last paragraph, he notes clearly that he has requested the two ministers, that is Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Works to have a meeting – a meeting which should feed into a statement which will become a bigger statement to both this House and the nation at large. And in my view and in line with what hon. Okot Felix did make reference to, why wouldn’t we hold our patience to the point when the enriched statement will be brought to this House?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you might have been away on 1st April when we had just come back from Easter recess. The first point that was raised by hon. Alaso was expressing concern about the carnage on our roads and also mentioned the long awaited statement from the minister. But there was no response from Government on the concern that hon. Alaso raised. So this is just to accept that this is a serious matter and that a statement is coming. That is the spirit in which this statement has been made; it is not a substitute for the statement we expect from the minister concerned. 

3.42
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Prime Minister for this statement he has made, but I would also like to add to what he has said – something that we saw on TV about a policeman being bribed and he refused the bribe. 

Many of us in this House have witnessed such incidences; normally, the bus and taxi drivers know how to greet the Police and as they shake hands, they have a system of shaking them – in my opinion the taxi driver was doing the ordinary. So, when we are talking about improving on what happens at the road, the Police should be made more vigilant and do what they are supposed to do on the roads. I think that is very important. They have to ensure that the seat belts are in place and that –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you, hon. Colleague for giving way. If I listened carefully, you said that the taxi man that was captured on television just did the ordinary. And the question which you raised was how we advise them to do it better. Is that the message that you want this House to take? That the driver of the taxi should improve on how to pass the bribe to the Police or you are passing a different message?

MS BOONA: Mr Speaker, I leave that for the Members of Parliament to study and find out what happens in his area because I cannot provide an answer now on how to improve on what was done on the TV.

Mr Speaker, I would like to add that the Police normally watch over-loaded vehicles; in the area that I come from, people overload bananas on lorries. And on top of the banana they put goats and people. And as they are passing, I am sure that the Police on the roads see them and wave and smile at them; they reach the city having driven for over 200 miles.

So, when we are talking about the carnage on our roads, we can also include on our list the failure of the Police to enforce the law. Otherwise, how do you allow a lorry over-loaded with bananas, 10 people and animals on the same lorry and you convince me that it can travel from Mbarara to Kampala without any Policeman questioning them?

More importantly, many of our boda-boda riders are not qualified to ride these motorcycles. Someone gives him a motorcycle on Monday, and so long as he thinks he can ride forward and backward, he feels he is competent enough. So, many of these riders we see on the roads need to be tested and tested again because they are one of the major causes of accidents on the road because they ride on the roads without licences and training. 

This also applies to some of the drivers in the taxies. So, I feel that all these should be added to this list. Of course the unsafe roads have been talked about, but I think that the Police should inspect the driving permits to know how varied they are and who is road worthy or not. 

Ms Namayanja: Motion!

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think this is a serious issue, allow people to express themselves.

3.47
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi, County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity given to me, and I wish to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for his brief statement to Parliament. As the Minister of Works in-waiting, I feel very much concerned when we discuss this important topic relating to road safety and in general, traffic regulation.  

Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister has labored in enumerating factors that cause road accidents. My hon. colleagues who spoke before me have asked that the list be improved and I wish to support that position.  When you look at the list that the Prime Minister has presented to us, he conspicuously avoids what is meant to be a clear responsibility of Government and that is the state of the roads in Uganda today.  Many studies have been conducted and it has been confirmed that the state of the roads in Uganda qualifies to be called poor and the line minister knows this; poor in terms of condition and poor in terms of design.   

It is also fitting that the list contains the factor of poor facilitation.  The minister will know that the recent entire budget, less than one per cent is committed to traffic regulation; less than one per cent of the entire budget of the Ministry of Works and Transport is devoted to transport or traffic regulation; and it is clearly stated in the several policy statements from year to year, that the establishment is lacking.  

There is rampant corruption and this has been clearly alluded to by my colleagues who spoke before me.  I would like to call on the ministry and the government in general to improve on the welfare of the Traffic Police.  Because it is this that tempts them to get bribes from motorists and road users as was clearly seen yesterday in the television clips.  

If I also remember well, Mr Speaker, under the Road Safety and Traffic Act, there are limits of education that are spelt out for anybody to have a road driver’s permit and senior four is the academic qualification that is required.  What has Government done to ensure that this is adhered to?

The Prime Minister says in paragraph 3 of his statement; “In some countries like Kenya, there is a law which requires all public service vehicles which are imported into their countries to have speed governors before the vehicles enter their countries.”  What are you waiting for to implement that law here?  Are you waiting for FDC to come to power before you do this? (Laughter) This is a weakness on the part of Government. It should be the responsibility of Government to draw good examples from other countries and implement this in our own country.  Why does the Rt hon. Prime Minister come here and lament?  I think that is a failure on the part of Government.  

All these causes of traffic accidents that you have enumerated have been mentioned before.  We have spoken day in, day out on this matter but implementation still remains a problem.

Talk about seat belts.  Every body in Government was running over himself or herself to ensure that this policy is brought into place.  Seat belts were installed in Matatus but suddenly Government is no longer talking about them. Don’t you see that this is a problem with implementation?  Can we conclude that the government in power today is actually half-asleep?  I think we need concrete answers to this.  The policy exists; the implementation is where the weakness arises.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I did propose sometime back on the floor of this House that Government considers regulating movement of heavy trucks especially in the night.  Yes, it was vividly opposed but still I would like to introduce this proposal here for Government to think about and to ensure that traffic accidents caused by movement of trucks, especially in the night, are reduced.

Finally, I want to comment on the competition between bus operators - and I say this while aware that some of our colleagues in this House happen to be entrepreneurs who own buses. And to express my happiness to hon. Byanyima, yesterday I heard in the news that as bus owners, they are trying to see how to regulate on their own the speeds at which their drivers move.  This is a good development, Mr Speaker, and I think this should be encouraged.  One of the causes of the accidents that occurred along Masaka-Mbarara road last week was reckless driving and regrettably many lives were lost.  This could have been avoided if traffic or speed regulations were put into place.

Mr Speaker, it is my hope that Government this time round does not only bring statements to Parliament, but they should ensure that what they say is implemented to the letter.  I thank you.

3.56
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the Prime Minister for endeavoring at least to give us something on our road safety.  But I want to add that even the Bureau of Standards, I do not know whether it has to look at the cars that we import into this country; they should also look at the spare parts too. You look at the tires, somebody goes, buys a car from any car dealer and it is a reconditioned vehicle, but he straight away puts it on road yet it might have been off the road for a year or so; they will just drive it without checking the tires and the other parts of the vehicle.

We recently had a terrible accident on Mityana road involving traders who ferry cows into the city and some of the reasons put forward as to the cause of the accident were the fake spare parts. They are very common on our market. We do not know how they get into our market but they are coming. Then –(Interjections)- well they can be cheaper, but they are very dangerous; I think we should put a regulation on that.

The other causes are the traffic lights. We drive our vehicle with full lights because the street lights are not functioning. They have talked about the potholes on our roads, but I think we need to talk about the welfare of policemen. I think the policemen also need a good pay package. They need an allowance, which is commensurate to the job they are doing. We may pretend that they are not working, but they should be well facilitated in order to perform. 

For example, some of them who were recently recruited to help in security are now living in Namboole and I understand they are spoiling everything because they have no houses. Even in the barracks where they stay, they are not well facilitated. Mr Speaker, how do you expect such a person to perform to the best of his capacity? –(Interruption)

MS MUHANGA: Thank you colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, before we broke off for the last short recess last month, I raised an issue of corruption by the police on the road. I also remember I said that I had been a victim sometime. I think we should not apportion blame and say that now it is the police, the most corrupt people in this country are not those who are not well paid, People who are well paid steal even more. Those policemen you see on the road may be taking very little, but if you see the hemorrhage that is going on in the public service and else where, you will realise that the people who are corrupt are the well paid ones and actually the bribes that they take are bigger. 

So, I think that the Police are really taking nothing from you guys. You are the ones who even entice them to take these bribes. A policeman can never ask somebody to give him a bribe. If you look at the taxi drivers, you will realise that they actually do not hand over the money to these policemen like hon. Emma Boona said, they put it at the rear tire. 

About two weeks ago I was in Fort Portal and I saw people seated on top of a mini-bus; people with children? I had never seen it for this rest of my time I have been in the world. I was shocked; I called the DPC of Kabarole, but he told me, “You see, Margaret, people are overwhelmed; there are no cars.” He saw this happening, but nothing- 

So, the clarification I want you to give, hon. Mutumba is that is it not really true that it is because Policemen are not well facilitated, that that makes them corrupt. I thought that there is actually moral decadency and that the most corrupt people are those who are well paid. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: It is good she has answered her question, Mr Speaker. Anyway, the point I wanted to raise was not that the Policemen are corrupt, I was talking about the amount of money that they get; it is little. If we are to give them the incentives to do the work, then apart from being facilitated, they should be well paid –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Sebuliba Mutumba for accepting to receive this point of clarification. When we were preparing, as a country for CHOGM, Government introduced a new uniform for police traffic officers; it is white. This is a very difficult colour to maintain, especially on our very dusty roads. I wonder whether the Minister of Internal Affairs has made special provisions to ensure that traffic police officers who are now donned in white are able – how many pairs of those uniforms do they have? I am asking this because these are people who work up late in the night. At what time do they wash these uniforms –(Laughter)– to keep them clean? Do you provide soap? Again I am asking this because white is a very difficult colour to manage. 

Hon. Sebuliba, I think in the course of your presentation, it would be good if you asked the minister responsible as to whether he has made contingency arrangements so that our police officers remain smart and able to maintain the white uniforms. I thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you for that, but I think you have put the case forward because we even sympathize with them having not been given any top up allowance to maintain these white uniforms. I am saying this because their way of living in relation to the new uniform is very expensive. 

Also, Mr Speaker, allow me ask the minister to tell us who is responsible for the traffic regulations and control in the city. I am asking this because sometimes we see policemen in white uniforms; sometimes we see them in regular police uniforms with white armlets, while other times we see ordinary policemen also doing traffic control. Who is responsible? 

Anyway, Mr Speaker, like my hon. colleagues have put it, roads in the city are becoming totally worse. Look at the road near Mulago Hospital. Go to the road called Sir Apollo Kagwa. On Monday a car landed into a gallery because the shoulders of that road have been washed off completely yet this road is under the Ministry of Works. So, even the roads plus all those factors –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Mutumba for giving way. I would like to say that hon. Mutumba, before he came to this House, was the Chairperson of Kawempe Division and he is now the Member of Parliament for Kawempe South. He definitely knows this city very well both in boundaries and responsibilities. I think I am getting tired of people who keep –(Laughter)– do not worry. I am getting tired of people, especially local leaders who come from this city and who know very well the people responsible for roads in that part of the city, but keep claiming that those roads fall under my ministry when they do not. I have laboured, with my ministry, to take Kololo and Nakasero roads for maintenance until the state of the city is done. The road below Mulago falls under the city council and so are most of the roads in his constituency. Thank you for giving way.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Sebuliba Mutumba for giving me this opportunity to give the House this additional information. Recently while in the Public Accounts Committee meeting we met the permanent secretary, Ministry of works who said that he was responsible for all the CHOGM roads in Kampala. He also said that for all this period he had been asking which roads were CHOGM roads so that the ministry could prepare early to work on them; unfortunately they were given a late time arrangement to repair those roads. So, according to him, people should not blame the ministry because when it starts raining in Kampala, all the roads will be flooded because they never worked on the drainage. The thing is that the time was not available. And therefore that was basically work by Ministry of Works where hon. Nasasira is the minister in charge.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have a very serious clarification to obtain from the Minister of Works. I am seeking this clarification premised on a report that this debate of ours is not going to save anybody this evening. Another seven people are going to die today and I want to ask the Prime Minister, before I get this clarification, what he is going to tell the families of these other seven who will die today as Government continues to systematically -(Interjections)- it is many months. We have the worst record of accidents in Sub-Saharan Africa and we are still here pacifying ourselves and hon. Nasasira comes here to make a modest apology or whatever about the roads.

Mr Speaker, hon. Nasasira knows that he suspended sections 107,108,110 and 111 of the Road Safety Act and because of the suspension, drivers can afford to be reckless. If you listened to the news yesterday, the Commissioner in Charge of Traffic, Mr Kasiima, said that if these sections were there, the Police would be able to penalise reckless drivers. So, what is the purpose of these things of “The road below Mulago” when the whole country is in danger because we suspended sections of a law?  

First of all, this is an illegality; it should not happen. No minister has the power to suspend the law and they go and suspend it. The causes of these accidents are already known. I said – (Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform my honourable sister that I did not suspend any section of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998.  If you read section 4 of that Act, it says that the minister may enforce all sections of this law or part of them. Sections 110,111,112 and even 120 were combining many different traffic offences and you remember, before we put them in force, the Police had actually started arresting people. I was faced with a strike of public transport here if you recall and we decided that Parliament had combined so many penalties in those sections and that is why I have never put them into force. That means that the sections of the whole law are still in force and can be used to charge people.  So, I have never suspended any section.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, hon. Nathan Byanyima, Chairman of the Infrastructure Committee is in this House tonight. They presented a report which is in the records of this House to the effect that this section should be suspended.  

Mr Speaker, if there was a question of bungling up, the minister knows the best course of action is to bring the law here for amendment and not to suspend it.  But, I want to say that it would be in order for the Rt hon. Prime Minister to ensure that the minister gives us the course of action and a report on what they have done. 

Like I said, no amount of discussion this evening is going to save another life because people are going to die. There will still be an accident from an over-speeding vehicle because Ministry of Works has suspended the enforcement of speed governors and they know that.  So, what do we hope to achieve from this politics of pacifying people whose relatives are dying and whose children are becoming orphans every the other day? Mr Speaker, it is unacceptable.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is guidance which I seek from you, Mr Speaker. We have been told by hon. Alaso that some sections of the Traffic Act, including those that cover speed governors have been suspended. In the Prime Minister’s statement, speed governors are being listed among the causes of accidents realised and observed by Government. In the same light, the responsible minister has stood on this Floor to deny the same.  

Now, the guidance I am seeking from you, Mr Speaker, is to ask the honourable minister responsible to clarify to this country what is the status of the Act in total and what are those areas that were suspended, particularly those regarding the speed governors among others? The strike he is talking about that the offenders were striking, of course, the offenders have to face the law. But in an effort to save lives of the public, are we proceeding in the right manner without the minister giving us the true status and picture of the Act and with him being allowed to dilly-dally on the Floor without being honest to this House? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question is, “Do you realise that the non-operation of those provisions is contributing to the carnage on our roads?”   

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, the Rt hon. Prime Minister had said that between me and my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, we are going to come here and give you a comprehensive statement and the actions that have been taken. I hear a lot of mix up, for example that the law on speed governors is suspended. It is not suspended. What I said is that the sections of the Traffic and Road Safety Act 1998 which are referred to by hon. Alaso have never been put in force.  If you look at the business of Parliament, we decided to bring that Act for amendment and I think it is one of the businesses that is here. But, in the meantime even if those sections are not yet in force the sections of the old law have never been repealed by the Minister of Transport and therefore they are still there for enforcement.  

Secondly, there are many statutory instruments dealing with over-speeding and safety belts that have all been put in force which are there for use. So, I think it would be better that Parliament is patient and you get a comprehensive report on how the government is handling road safety. I think that is what the Rt hon. Prime Minister has said in his statement. It will then be easier for you to debate each and every item of the law.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister has made a very fundamental statement that when we were passing the 1998 Act, which to my recollection repealed the 1970 Act; we saved certain parts of the 1970 Act. Is that what you are saying? Yes, because if you are saying the parts which have not been operationalised are still being operationalised by the old law, that means we did not repeal those areas. How could Parliament, in its wisdom, know the difficulty the minister was going to face in operationalising these particular sections and save those without in effect waiting for it to be operationalised? 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Minister, you also suggested to us that the section on speed governors is not in operation. The problem we have now is that, speed governors were initially enforced and now – I travel to Gulu, the bus will pass you at 150. So I am asking, are you enforcing speed governors? Or as you said if you implement a provision of this Act and then you can somehow allow it not to be in operation when you have already implemented.

THE SPEAKER: I think what you are saying is that, the supersonic speed at which these buses ply on our roads is not an indication that speed governors are there. Do you agree?

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, first of all, let me handle hon. Ben Wacha. I do not have the Act here in front of me, and hon. Wacha is a learned friend and I am a trained friend but I think you recall that in most of our laws, there is a section of the law that allows the minister responsible how to put that law into force. There are laws that have a section, which repeals in totality the old law but there are also laws that allow sections of a new law to be put in force either in part or in whole. 

In the case of the Traffic and Road Safety Act 1998, and hon. Ben Wacha you can go and check, Section 4, if I can recall that law very well, it allows the minister to put in force the sections of that law either in part or in full, and at the end of that law there is a section that the minister will use to totally repeal the old law. It is not that because the law was enacted, the old law of 1970 was automatically repealed. 

Mr Speaker, could I answer whether I think that the speed at which these buses travel gives an indication that they have speed governors? I do not want to appear as if I am in the dock or I am a lawyer but what we do is that, we make policies and set up laws as the Ministry of Transport, and then all of us citizens must follow those laws and be punished if we break them.

Now, the situation is that this country of ours is sometimes very interesting. When the Police started enforcing the speed governors, the community – and we are going to straighten this out - or a section of the community, even a section of the political elite were on FM radios, and I know because we have records, condemning Government saying how it is mistreating taxpayers; how they are mistreating bus drivers; and the bus drivers appealed for an extension. An extension was given and by that extension, the Police could not fulfil it. They asked for another extension and another extension; and it is us who asked for the extension of these regulations and it is sometimes us who go on radio to use it to say Government is harassing people. Now, let us agree that we do not politic on people’s lives anymore.

Secondly, I thought this would do it when we bring the statement but you have provoked me. Let us look at the kamunyes that this country imports in order for us to transport our people; these are actually vans from Japan. They come empty; they go to Katwe; the seats are made in Katwe and fixed there. When we try to enforce safety belts in all these seats, either you get strangled in those seats or not. Now, I want this Parliament when we come here to say, “All reconditioned vehicles are banned in Uganda”. You do not bring a new vehicle unless you have in-built speed governors. Let us see our road safety in terms of our own situation in the country and let us all agree as Parliament that when these laws are put in place, we do not go on FM radios to de-campaign them in the name of cheap values of political gain. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a statement by the Prime Minister and we have extensively made contributions for over an hour. The kind of contributions made is indicative of the seriousness of this matter and I think all concerned, including the public, should take serious measures to ensure that we reduce it. 

We have been told that the minister will make a statement after 14th. I think again we shall be able to contribute but evidence has come out that the matter is serious and it should be handled seriously. Because of our rules, I think we should end this debate. [Prof. Nsibambi rose_]. You want to thank them? On record? Okay. (Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I stand here to thank you for your input. Hon. Toskin said it was a shallow statement. Obviously, he must learn to use the right expression. (Laughter) What he should have said is, “It is not a comprehensive statement.” (Laughter) And I knew that it was not. I am not so foolish. The whole point I made is that, the Minister of Internal affairs will make a comprehensive statement. I am a researcher; I could have given you a 30-page comprehensive statement, but I promised that the Minister of Internal Affairs having interfaced with the Ministry of Works and Transport, and having gone through Cabinet, will make a comprehensive statement. But I want to thank you because you have an excellent point. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the debate has ended. Yes?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You know, we have been waiting for this statement for a long time, is it possible to have a time frame other than the continued extension of when it will be made? If we could get it next week, we would be able to appreciate what is happening.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was asking that if the two ministers come with their statement, in the body of the statement there should be an explanation as to whether we are going to continue with the negotiated laws, negotiating with people on the implementation of our laws.

THE SPEAKER: They will tell you that they are going to be making wide consultations. Okay, can we get the time frame within which it will be made?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, whenever there is a function to be performed, it is important to consult those who are going to perform the function. I have consulted my colleagues and they have said that they will make a comprehensive statement on 30 April 2008. They do not want to come here and make a shallow statement, and many of them are busy, for example, my brother here is handling the Kony problems. But I have consulted and it is only fair that we should respect their time frame. I thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for his suggestion. But in his statement, the second last paragraph on page 1, he specifically said that he has already requested these two ministers to draft a paper which will be presented to Cabinet by 14th April. Essentially, it means that by the time the paper goes to Cabinet it is almost ready for presentation before the House. Cannot, then after that, the ministers be given one week to incorporate whatever Cabinet discussions would have been made and they present their paper by 21st April?

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. This morning, I was very upset when I woke up and people had died! You know I come in my office at 7.30. When I came at 7.30, I rung one minister to indicate this time frame but I could not get anyone. But they have indicated to me that this is a more realistic time frame. So, I would like to suggest that we comply with their request and indeed as you know, many of you have made excellent inputs; you have enriched what the paper is and of course they will have to do more research outside the boundaries of this body politic. So, they deserve that time frame. I thank you. The Minister of Works and Transport says he would like to add why they need this timeframe with your permission.

THE SPEAKER: Agreed. Okay, let us agree on 30th we get the statement.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a very important issue because last week in my constituency –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it a contribution?

MR M. NSUBUGA: No, I am just following the timeframe. In my constituency, this borders with yours -(Laughter)- at Kingo. We had a bus which was carrying passengers from Kasese, 50 of them - the accident was in my constituency at a place called Kingo. Hardly two days before, there had been another accident in the same area where we lost about nine people. Mr Speaker, how can a minister who would have even had the courtesy of giving this statement earlier now request that he be given more time to make a statement when people are dying? Can you imagine 50 people dying in one incident! [Hon. Members: “They are so insensitive”] 

Mr Speaker, I am very much concerned because most of us, unless the Prime Minister tells us, here we own buses which are on this Masaka-Kampala highway and these buses if anyone of you has used these roads, the drivers have no courtesy to road users. They hoot and when they hoot you can even fall off. So, I think the minister should have the courtesy of cutting short so that even next week or this week we come up with a comprehensive statement that can curb accidents on the roads. Otherwise, we are killing our people everyday. 

The Rt hon. Prime Minister has just said this morning that when he heard that people had died –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, the debate on the statement ended and we have given the minister the date he has requested.  But we cannot really go on debating this; we have agreed.

MR M. NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I was very much concerned that even when this accident happened, the government never came up with an official statement of condolence to the public. 50 people died in my constituency in one incident in a bus and earlier on nine had died at the same spot and the Minister for Transport uses that very road to his constituency, he never even bothered. Can the government tell us whether they were concerned or not?

4.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Nathan Byanyima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a chairperson of the committee and at the same time as one of the owners of the buses, this Monday we sat in the committee room and all the bus owners were present. The traffic officers were there and the people of transport and licensing board came. 
We all resolved that whoever drives beyond 80km/hr, if he is arrested, the driver is taken to court for prosecution. The owner of the vehicle takes responsibility of taking over the vehicle of the passengers to the destination. We all made that agreement. We want to help all Ugandans, I can assure you. You Members of Parliament we ask you to also help us. If you find a bus zooming very fast, take note. Let us help each other. I thank you.

MR NASASIRA: I am rising to respond to the Member who said that Government does not care neither does it give condolence messages. We have given many condolence messages; we have represented Government on funerals of accident victims and we are all concerned when people die. Of those who die, some are our relatives, friends and most important they are all Ugandans. But we should approach this thing not from a sentimental angle but get to the bottom of it and see how to deal with it. When we come with that statement, maybe you will be informed more of so many things we have done. And you will also get reports because whenever an accident happens, the Police investigate and there is a report of the cause of that accident. We are going to list all the causes of accidents and we will be in a better position to discuss how we are proposing the way forward. But we give condolence messages; we attend funerals and it will be wrong of you honourable member to imagine that this Government is insensitive to its people. 

PROF. LATIGO: I think hon. Mathias made reference to the condolences in good spirit. You know, if somebody dies, as an MP you get the information and what you do is to go on the phone and say, “I am very sorry, I have heard about this death.” It comforts the bereaved seriously. I think what hon. Mathias is saying is that in this case, where 50 people got burnt in the bus - some were buried because they did not know who they were - we have not heard Government making a statement saying that we have heard about this accident and it is very unfortunate and it gives comfort to the country. I think this is what hon. Mathias is referring to.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I think the point is made.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 19/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I rise not to ask this question but on a procedure in respect to this item number 5. This morning, I was brought a copy of the Order Paper showing that I was supposed to ask a question today. I was very concerned because the procedure and the position in this Parliament is that questions are asked on Thursdays unless something is very urgent. I sent my staff back to tell the Clerk’s Office to amend the Order Paper and remove the question and put it either on this Thursday or another Thursday because I do not want anybody to get the impression that the Leader of the Opposition is a special being in this House. When I sent my staff, they were told by the staff of the Clerk’s Office that they did this because there are so many questions that are pending and they wanted to start by getting rid of the paper. I do not want to set a wrong precedent. 

Secondly, according to our rules, it is not even me who is ready. I only receive the answers. According to our rules, I am supposed to receive answers or any of you is supposed to receive answers to your questions at least two hours before the question is answered. The Minister of Finance wrote to me to say that this question is not even in their record in the Ministry of Finance and I can table what he wrote if you want. Prof. Kamuntu, I do not know what is itching you really. I would request that this item be shelved.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Done.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON LUGOGO LAND

4.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before the debate starts, I want to request this House to allow me put one erroneous false statement right. I want to apologise that I was not here yesterday because one senior member of my constituency was slaughtered by thieves in Busitema Forest and he was a manager in Total. I had to go and pay condolences to that family and the people of Tororo County.

In my absence, according to the Hansard of which I have a copy, one honourable member, hon. Lukwago, alleged and lied to the House and misled the House and this matter is very grave and serious. It touches the integrity of myself which I have built over many years; it touches the integrity of the committee which I chair; it touches the integrity of the Office of the Clerk. Hon. Lukwago alleged and lied to this House that he gave me a copy of the minority report; that he brought a copy of the minority report to the office of the chairperson which I head.

I want to thank the Parliamentary Commission that the office of the Chairperson, Local Government Accounts has two secretaries now. We have a stamp for whatever document is received. We have clerks and clerk assistants who operate there. This matter is very grave. I want to seek the permission and indulgence of this House that this matter be referred to the Disciplinary Committee because the attendance record of hon. Lukwago is very clear. The discussion of this matter is very clear and recorded in the Hansard. If we entertain lies and Members who do not attend committee meetings to mislead the House and the country, that is wrong and unacceptable. I want to request this House that this matter be referred for further investigation. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, there is apparently a complaint by a Member to the effect that there is abuse of privilege of the House and that the Member told a lie against another Member. I can only request the Committee on Privileges to investigate and report on this matter next time.  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the report on Lugogo land sale was presented sometime back in this House. I want to report that I received a written communication from the Prime Minister and he requested that the House debates the report and that he has no objection. He copied the letter to the relevant minister, the Minister of Local Government, but requested that the House asks the Minister of Local Government to implement the report the way the committee has recommended and report to the House instead of him.  That is the only statement I would like to add. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As you have heard from the chairperson, he read out the report. I think that was before we went for recess and we had agreed to give one day or two to study the report and come back and then make contribution on the report. I think that is the position and I imagine that you are ready to make your contributions.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, we have had a very heated discussion of the Prime Minister’s statement. I would suggest that we defer this matter and the chair of the committee on Agriculture presents his report so that we can see if we have time to start the debate on this and if not, then we would suggest that we debate the matter tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think you have nothing useful to add on the report and the recommendations by the report. I intend to put a question for adoption of the report.

MR WACHA: I hope we are talking about – is it Lugogo or Nakasero?

THE SPEAKER: Lugogo.  

MR WACHA: Okay.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that we adopt the report of the committee on Lugogo land.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE QUALITY OF SEEDS AND THE FARM IMPLEMENTS DISTRIBUTED BY THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

4.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Deusdedit Bikwasizehi):  Mr Speaker and honourable members, the report looks voluminous but the truth of the matter is that, the actual report is 37 pages. The rest are annexes and I am going to summarise it.

Mr Speaker, I would like to present the report of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the quality of seeds and farm implements which were distributed by the Office of the Prime Minister to the internally displaced people in the North and North Eastern Uganda. 

This report arises from the concern which was expressed by hon. Reagan Okumu, the Member of Parliament Aswa County, FDC and he is the opposition shadow minister of foreign affairs and I am sure there has not been any reshuffle yet; he is still one. 

During the submission on the Floor of the House under Rule 41(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, on Tuesday, 3 July 2007, he alleged that infertile seeds and fake farm implements had been distributed to persons in internally displaced peoples’ camps in Northern Uganda by the Office of the Minister of Disaster Preparedness in the Prime Minister’s Office.  

Mr Speaker, in supporting his claim, hon. Reagan Okumu laid on the Table two farming tools. They were two axes and two hoes and a report which was entitled, “Report on the seeds received from the Office of the Prime Minister as a package for internally displaced returnees under the emergency programme”. 

While reacting to hon. Reagan Okumu’s concern, hon. Omoro Peter, Member of Parliament Soroti County also laid on Table a hoe in support of the concern.  The matter was referred to the Sessional Committee on Agriculture to investigate it and report to the House.

The complaint was that-
(i)	the Office of the Prime Minister selected the following firms:  Crocodile Tools, Kisugu Enterprises and Akuku Company Ltd to supply farming implements to the internally displaced peoples’ camps in the North and eastern Uganda. 

(ii)	the seed viability test carried out by the Gulu District agricultural officer for all seeds showed that four per cent of the 32,000 kilogrammes of beans supplied and 15 per cent of the 23 kilogrammes of groundnuts supplied could not germinate. This meant they were not worth planting. 

(iii)	sorghum and millet were highly recommended for planting because the germination was good.

(iv)	verbal complaints from the farmers also suggested non- germination of certain seeds from the area.  

(v)	 the companies supplied 24,000 kilogrammes of millet only while 32 kilogrammes of beans had never been supplied. 

(vi)	 poor quality items had been procured due to the conflict of interest.

(vii)	the Uganda National Bureau of Standards did not check and certify the farm implements before being imported into the country.  

Mr Speaker, on receiving this assignment, the committee sat and made the following terms of reference in order to handle the assignment:
•	To establish the mandate and role of the Prime Minister’s Office and that of the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and refugees in the process.

•	To establish the origin of the agricultural inputs supplied.

•	To establish the companies which were contracted to supply the agricultural inputs.

•	To establish whether the procurement procedures were followed as provided for in the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003.

•	To evaluate the contracts between the suppliers and Prime Minister’s Office in regard to the matter, the legal implications and the sanctions and penalties for non-compliance with the PPDPA.

•	To establish whether the Seed Regulatory Department in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries had approved the distribution of the seeds. 

•	To establish whether the farm implements were actually supplied by the alleged firms.

•	To establish whether the allegation of the seed viability test carried out by the Gulu district agricultural officer indicating that maize and groundnut seeds had lost viability were correct.

•	To establish whether the sorghum supplied was meant for brewing and not for food.

•	To establish why some companies did not meet their quotas of the delivery.

•	To establish the allegation that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards was not involved in the procurement process.

•	To establish the magnitude of the financial loss as a result of procuring low quality input to both the farmers and the government.

•	To establish whether there is any conflict of interest, and the persons responsible for the irregularities, if any.

•	To establish what measures have been taken, if any, to rectify the anomalies in view of the allegations made against the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees.

•	To establish whether the suppliers had good storage facilities.

•	To examine the transport and handling system used in the process.

The investigation was targeted to take two weeks but I want to submit, Mr Speaker, that we could not complete in two weeks because when we received it, we went to the budget process, then CHOGM came in and we had to send samples to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards to do chemical analysis and that took some time. 

The investigation should be able to establish whether the allegations have merit or not and thus make appropriate recommendations.

Mr Speaker, on page 5, 3.2, we met the following stakeholders, as listed hon. Reagan Okumu, hon. Peter Omolo: The ministers responsible; the seed certification service; the Uganda National Bureau of Standards; the committee travelled to the North and met the leaders from the three regions - the Teso, Lango and Acholi region. We met some of the suppliers and we analysed the listed documents.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, on page 7, we acknowledge the invaluable input by everybody who participated in this.

On page 8, we have the committee findings. As we indicated, we had to look at the Office of the Prime Minister - that is indicated. But suffice it to say that among the responsibilities of the Department of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, is policy management issues on relief disaster and refugees and special programmes on pacification and development of Northern Uganda, among others. That is the mandate of the minister. On page 9, we continue with the mandate of the ministry.

Then on 6.1(2): The Emergency Humanitarian Action Plan. The committee noted that the procurement of seeds and farm implements was part of an emergency humanitarian action plan for LRA affected areas in Northern and Eastern Uganda co-ordinated by the joint monitoring committee, which comprised Government of Uganda, civil society organisations and the donors’ representative. 

Then there was a joint monitoring Committee which was at national level – that is indicated; then the institutional frame work. At the district level, we established that there was a district disaster management committee whose composition is listed.

Mr Speaker, 6.2 is what we found out in the procurement process:

1.	Prior to the procurement process, a needs assessment stakeholder’s meeting was held in Lira on 7 September 2006. The meeting was attended by the leaders from the beneficiary local governments. The meeting agreed on the types of seeds and farm implements to procure for the resettlement of the IDPs.

2.	We found out that through the open bidding system, companies to supply the seeds and farm implements were selected. This was also confirmed in the report of Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority, which also investigated this concern.

On three, I want you to disregard the delivery column because details are in annex one. But the listed companies are the ones which were contracted to supply the indicated items. 

Then we also assessed the involvement of the regulatory bodies: 
One was the Seed Certification Service of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and two, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards.
 
Mr Speaker, here I would want to go deep in what they did. The Office of the Prime Minister requested for the participation of the National Seeds Certification Service of the Ministry of Agriculture, to help in evaluation of bidders. The Office of the Prime Minister also requested for assistance for specifications of seeds and cuttings, those are planting materials, intended for humanitarian intervention of the people on Northern Uganda.

The role of the Ministry of Agriculture in the whole process was only confined to evaluation and selection of the seed suppliers. 

The involvement of NBS.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the UNBS is a statutory body which is under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. This is the agency responsible for matters of standardisation, quality assurance, testing and meteorology – meteorology is management of science.

Also like Uganda National Seed Certification Service, the Prime Minister requested UNBS to provide specifications for farm implements, as per the letter of 20 September 2006. Preliminary analysis on the samples from the different bidders was carried out by visual comparison with samples from the Office of the Prime Minister.

Seven months later, a technical analysis after the supply was requested by the Office of the Prime Minister on the indicated samples. Those are the hoes, axes, pangas and sickles as largely drawn from the consignment. The analysis of the results indicated that the hoes which were Crocodile brand complied with the standard; axes which are Diamond brand complied with the standard; the pangas which were Diamond brand complied with the standard but the sickles which were ND brand failed to meet the standards. They were actually rejected by the Office of the Prime Minister; they were not taken on.

The committee noted that all the procured tools, apart from the sickles, passed the standards. Mr speaker, the Office of the Prime Minister also received donations from China, and these included 7,200 pieces of axes, they were Ant brand, 24,000 pieces of sickles- Ant brand, 26,000 pieces of hoes, Ant brand. These were received from the People’s Republic of China towards the humanitarian action plan.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, when those donated items were tested by the UNBS, they failed to meet the standards as indicated on page 16. That was after the laboratory analysis.

6.3.1, shows annex of the distributed items. Then 6.4 are field visits; we went to the districts and made enough observations and findings which are listed down there. We started with Teso sub region and while in Teso among the complaints was that the soghum varieties that is secodo and Epuripuri were received in the district but there were instances where a bag labeled secodo could be found containing epuripuri variety, and a number of those other findings - from Katakwi, Amuria District, all those findings could be read, which we found because they are listed.

Mr speaker, page 23, we were unable to go to West Nile because it was a very rainy season and we could not make it to Adjumani and besides Adjumani was not one of the major beneficiary district.

Then the technical analysis of the quality tools and on the quality of tools, which were laid on the Table, Mr speaker, as I indicated, the tools- when we went upcountry, we picked some samples and the tools which were laid on the Table by hon. Okumu, he gave them to UNBS on a fee which they analysed and the results are indicated, and in the summary on page 25.

I want to take you to page 27, where we shall look at general observations and recommendations of the committee because that might be a summary of the findings. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like you to allow me to read the whole of it so that I can explain better. The committee observed as follows:

1.	That the procurement of the resettlement kits, that is seeds and farm implements, were of an emergency nature. However, by the time of investigations not only resettlements kits had been delivered save for ground nut seeds - the committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should penalise companies which failed to fulfill their contract obligations.

2	During the procurement process, no seed company had the capacity to supply certified bean seeds. This prompted the option for the lower grade of what is called standard seeds. Mr Speaker, certified seeds are seeds which are grown purely for seed, but when that one was not available, they went for standard seed - standard seed means you go to a market like Owino and buy and sort. So, this is an indicator of a shortage of good seeds in the country.

	The committee recommends that Government takes serious steps to strengthen the seed industry to meet the farmers’ needs.
 
3.	In budgeting for resettlement kits, no budget line was provided for handling and transportation of the kits from district headquarters to the beneficiaries. This made it very difficult for district officials to deliver them to the beneficiaries. This resulted in the delay of some of the seeds in the district stores for up to four months - a district like Gulu. This could have led to the deterioration of the seeds for none of the stores was designed for seed storage for such a long time.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, that was the major complaint from all districts. They were not facilitated because they did not have a budget line.

The committee strongly recommends that in future - I have heard hon. Okumu asking for more relief - the Office of the Prime Minister should provide budgetary support to the districts for delivery of the inputs to the beneficiaries because it does not make sense to budget and deliver them at the district and they do not reach the beneficiaries.

8.4, the committee observed that companies which supplied the procured seeds and farm implements were procured in accordance with PPDA Act, 2003.

8.5, the bodies mandated to ensure quality, that is National Seed Certification Services of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and UNBS, were only involved in identifying and evaluating the bidders. No mandatory body was engaged to ensure the quality at loading and delivery. This could have been the ideal time to ensure the contracted quality is what was delivered, because in most cases they use companies like SGS to ensure that what is loaded is what you bought.

So here the committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should always engage a mandated body to ensure quality during delivery exercise.

8.6 Generally the committee observed that the viability of the groundnut seeds was very low. It was reported that some of them were moldy in all districts that we went to, an indication of high moisture content, perhaps at packaging. When we went to Gulu, the groundnut seeds were still lying in the stores and poorly packaged. We found that they had been packed in imperforated polythene bags, which could have suffocated them, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. The committee feels that this was quite unprofessional of the company, which supplied the groundnut seeds and could be one of the major causes of the poor germination of these seeds. 

The committee recommends that in future the Office of the Prime Minister should properly supervise and monitor the companies engaged in seed production and processing to ensure they do the work in a professional way. This could be done through the strengthening and empowering of the seed certification service.

The committee further recommends – because the seed certification of the ministry is not well staffed; it does not have enough staff - that the Office of the Prime Minister should always engage mandated bodies for quality assurance at delivery time.

8.7 The Crocodile hoes, which were received were of a mixture. When we moved we found that the hoes, which were delivered, were a mixture of 3 and 1.5 pounds. Although the quality of both was good, the value of course differs. The Chillington Tools Company Limited undertook in writing to replace the same hoes, which were estimated at 10 percent of the consignment. The committee noted that this could also have been detected at delivery time if a quality assurance body was engaged at that time. 

The committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister makes a follow up to ensure that that commitment is fulfilled. The committee further recommends that a quality assurance mechanism be put in place by the Office of the Prime Minister so that their delivery balance is of contracted quality.

8.8 The procured axes, which are of Diamond brand, pangas and hoes were of fairly good quality. However, the donation from China, as we indicated, was not of good quality. 

The committee recommends that such a donation should always be tested for conformity with the national standards. This will not only protect the consumers, it will also ensure value for money and actually that is one way of perpetuating poverty because if you spend money and you do not get any value, so you perpetuate poverty.

8.9 Where two sorghum varieties were delivered (Epuri-puri and Sekedo) we realised that the Epuri-puri is more proffered for brewing to food though it does both. The committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should always conduct a needs assessment exercise whose outcome should be adhered to during the procurement exercise.

While in Lira, Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, the committee visited the stores and found the seeds had been stored in the same store with the maize flour (kawunga) and for your information, seeds are always dressed with poisonous chemicals. This can easily contaminate food intended for human consumption if it is kept in such a store. The committee recommends that seeds should be stored in stores separate from those for food meant for human consumption. 

8.10 Due to numerous demands by the LRA affected districts, leaders from those districts not affected by LRA rebels also received implements as indicated in appendix 7. The committee recommends that in case of an emergency, the Office of the Prime Minister should always supply and deliver to the intended beneficiaries first, before considering those not affected.

8.11. The Office of the Prime Minister responded to raised issues of quality. The committee observed that the Office of the Prime Minister responded to the raised issues of poor quality of the kits. A team of experts went to the field to verify and reported accordingly. Also the Prime Minster’s Office rejected sickles, which were supplied because they did not meet the required standards. 

The committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should endeavor to supply these items since they had been provided for in the budget. In fact when you look at what has been delivered, you realise that the 70,000 sickles have not been delivered because the quality was not meeting the standards.

8.12 During an interaction with the regulatory bodies, that is the Uganda National Certification Service, the committee noted the inadequacy of the bodies to carry out their mandate. This ranges from inadequate man power to financial resources. 

Mr Speaker, these are very important bodies and so the committee recommends that they should be empowered to do their work. Failure to fulfill their mandate leads to a flood of substandard products on their market. If translated into financial resources, it means huge losses.

8.13 The committee appreciated information that since the commencement of the investigations, UNBS has observed a significant and drastic change for better quality of imports. This is in a report we received from them recently. In this report they said that as a result of this investigation, now the items, particularly the hoes and pangas from China, are of super quality. The committee, therefore, recommends that the government should increase its funding to improve on the efficiency and effectiveness of the bureau in its activities like manning more border posts, wider market surveillance, increased laboratory testing, capacity building and widening of the product. 

In the course of the investigations, the committee noted that the current penalties in the UNBS Act are not deterrent enough to curb breaking of the law. So, the committee recommends that the UNBS Act be amended to provide for the emerging challenges.

In general terms, the committee recommends as follows: that there has to be timeliness in the procurement and distribution of seeds and tools. A lot more planting materials are needed, for instance we need rice, cassava cuttings, sweet potato vines, sunflower and sim-sim because they are very commercial crops in the area. 

We also recommend that child-headed households and elderly people should be given a pair of oxen and ploughs to enhance land opening, especially now that people are settling.

On the basis that the contract for sickles was signed in February 2007, and the selected supplier had failed to deliver as required, the Office of the Prime Minister must put pressure on the supply of sickles to complete the procurement or award the contract to the second best bidder if the supplier cannot supply the best quality. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the firms which supplied the resettlement kits of IDPs, that is, Chillington Tools Company and New Kisugu Enterprises, Akuku, were procured and contracted as provided for by the PPDA Act, 2003. The firms were not just selected.

The very low viability of the maize and groundnuts in Gulu stores could have been due to the very poor storage conditions as well as over-staying in the store. The seeds were delivered in January and were distributed in May. That was a long time because seeds are living things.

In specific terms as for the groundnuts seeds, the unprofessional handling including the packaging by Akuku Farm Seed Company could have contributed to rapid deterioration.

Whereas the procured farm tools, like the hoes and pangas were of good quality, those ones which were donated from China, as I indicated, were not very good.

Although the epuripuri variety of sorghum is multipurpose- epuripuri is the one from which we get beer and food- its properties do not make it very good for food. It is edible but it is not the best because of its properties. The best variety for food is sekedo as well as other local varieties.

It is true that by the time hon. Okumu lodged a concern in Parliament, Gulu had not received the bean seeds. Actually, I think they went in August. However, as pointed out earlier, not all supplies had been delivered save for groundnuts. It is only groundnuts which had been delivered 100 percent. No single sickle had been delivered to the beneficiary. The broken axes, hoes and sickles which were of poor quality were donated. These are the ones which had been supplied to Amuru district, through Gulu. In fact when you go to the stores of Gulu, you find some of those which were donated from China because Amuru does not have enough infrastructure yet.

District leaders had started being very vigilant in ensuring quality for the supplies in the area. An example here is Lira district. When we visited Lira district, we found they had received a consignment of 6 metric tonnes of bean seed. They tested these bean seeds and found the germination was very poor. I even took the trouble to meet the company which supplied the seed. When I asked them what had happened, they told me they were using a dryer to dry the seed and the power went off so they went home. When the power came back at night, it almost roasted the seed. So, when they supplied the seeds they were not sure of the quality. In fact I commend the DO Lira for the initiative. So, they responded and they were brought back and replaced by better ones.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that this report be considered and be adopted by this House. I beg to move. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, I thank you together with your Members for this thorough job exhibited by the report you have presented. I must thank you for the way you have summarised this report which was frightening people because of the size -(Laughter)- you have been able to present it. Now, Members have got the copies of the report and they have heard from you. I think they need time to go and internalise this so that we start the debate perhaps tomorrow. And because of this I think this is the appropriate time to adjourn the House until tomorrow.

5.22
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Can I probably make an adjournment motion, Mr Speaker? There is this item which was next on the Order Paper, about Nakasero Market and I was supposed to present a minority report. The motion I want to move is that if there is no time to entertain this item today, I pray that I be given time because I am travelling out of the country tonight, to the UK. I am going to have a series of meetings. So, the request I am making, in form of an adjournment motion, is that, since I am returning to the country on 12 April - in just one week - could I be given that time, when I come back, to present it, Mr Speaker? It is a humble prayer.

THE SPEAKER: Granted.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before I adjourn, the Sergeant-At-Arms has informed me that your mail boxes are now ready and you should go to him to get the keys for your pigeon holes. You have been using the back ones but now these modern ones are ready for use. I think you will find convenient time to go to him to get your key. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.24 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 3 April 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)
