Tuesday, 7 April 2009

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
 
PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. In the gallery we have students from St. Francis Junior Academy Bukasa. You are welcome. We also have students of Alliance Standard High School. They are probably not yet here.

Hon. Members, you are invited to attend a tax workshop on mobilisation of domestic resources in the face of the global economic challenges. The workshop has been organised by the Uganda Revenue Authority. It is scheduled for tomorrow, 8th April, from 9.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. at the Parliamentary conference centre. 

You are also invited to the Anglican Easter Communion service today, 7th April, in the Members’ Lounge starting at 5.30 p.m. that is immediately after the plenary. The theme is “Christ’s Death and Resurrection: Our Hope for a New Life.” 

I have just received sad news that two of our members, hon. Madada and hon. Sauda Namagwa, lost their mothers. This was over the weekend. Namagwa’s mother was buried yesterday. Let us stand and observe a minute of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you may have noted, we have an overloaded Order Paper today and maybe tomorrow. You are aware that we are about to start the first stage of budgeting. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tabled the paper last week and the Budget Committee is due to start processing these papers so that we are on time as prescribed on the Order Paper. We are therefore likely to allow the committees to consider these documents and this will affect our work here in the plenary. 

You are also aware that this is the Easter week and therefore members may want to go to their homes to celebrate Easter. I propose that instead of sitting Thursday afternoon, we sit in the morning so that members can then go to their homes in the afternoon. I do not know what you think about this arrangement. Agreed? Okay, if agreed, it means that on Thursday we shall start at 9.00 a.m. and end the proceedings at 1.00 p.m.

3.00
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okollo Country, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter that is causing great anxiety among the people of West Nile. When government committed itself to electrifying our rural side, a company called West Nile Rural Electrification Company was licensed to undertake this programme in our region. Initially, there was a capital outlay of US $14 million together with the old assets of UEB which were handed over to the company. Government, on behalf of the taxpayers, paid US $8 million. 

In the beginning, this company was to provide power for 18 hours and later on graduate to 24 hours. Instead, this company has been providing power downwards from 12 hours, to six hours, and about two to three months ago to two hours. I want to report here that there is no power at all now. 

For some strange reason, when His Excellency the President visited, there was power for 24 hours, but the US $8 million was not paid to provide power only on presidential visits. So I want to ask: is government aware of the development? What message should I take to my people?

Politically, the people of West Nile feel that they are being pushed against the wall. However, I want to assure you that our eyes are wide open. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this important matter. This is an issue for which government, and in particular the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, will provide a statement. I know my colleague, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, will soon come here and apprise the House in regard to developments as far as electricity supply in the West Nile Region is concerned. 

It is true the concessionaire for that region, WENRECO, has had problems. Government, together with WENRECO, had envisaged that by now Nyagak Mini-hydro Power Station would have become operational. Unfortunately, due to a number of reasons, Nyagak has not come into operation as yet. The construction of the mini-hydro power station has not yet been completed due to the problems of the contractor. The contractor has been having discussions with WENRECO and I know it had been agreed that a more competent sub-contractor be sourced so that we can progress with the work of the mini-hydro power station. 

As a result of failing to complete the mini-hydro power station in time, the concessionaire, WENRECO, found themselves having to run the Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) plant for a much longer period than they had initially anticipated. As a result, the financial support they had put in place for the HFO plant did run out. They contacted government for support to be in a position to continue supplying power to the region. Government decided that in order to do so, there was a need to revisit the concession agreement, the implementation agreement and subsidy agreements. 

By the time I left the Ministry of Energy, we had decided that government should step in. However, this required the input of the Attorney-General, who also advised that there must be an audit of whatever contribution WENRECO had come up with to date. This was in order to determine the actual stake of WENRECO and therefore be in a position to determine what other support government needed to come up with in order to participate in the business of providing power on a sustainable basis to the West Nile Region. 

I want to assure you that the relevant departments of government have been holding meetings with WENRECO. I am sure a solution will soon be found and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development will come here and report on the solutions that will have been agreed upon. 

I would not like to give commitment on exactly how soon, but when I get a break from here, I will contact hon. Hilary Onek and hon. Simon D’ujanga. We will agree on exactly when they should come and make a statement to this House and also come up with a statement for the general public and the people in West Nile Region to assure them of the arrangement being put in place to rectify this problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.08
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about the sale of Buhinga Primary School land. 

The land where Buhinga Primary School in Fort Portal is situated belonged to Fort Portal Asian Foundation. On 23 January 1959, the Fort Portal Asian Education Society got the registration of crown lease from Uganda Protectorate Office of Titles, Lands and Survey Department. 

On 30 September 1962, the Fort Portal Asian Education Society surrendered the Uganda Registration of Titles Ordinance Leasehold Register, Vol. 450 folio 6, to Fort Portal Town Council. This agreement was termed as “surrender”. 

On 25 February 2003, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Departed Asians Custodian Board illegally, and without consulting the owners or occupants of Buhinga Primary School, sold plots 19, 21, 23 with all school developments of the said plots to one Mr Godfrey Franco Tumusime at only Shs 18 million. 

It is important to note that this land did not fall under the Expropriated Properties Act 1992 since it is not an expropriated property. The Asian Education Society was a registered trustee under the Incorporation Ordinance, Cap 129, Revised Edition 1951, and therefore was not a property of any Asian. It is clear that this property lies outside the ambit of the Departed Asians Properties Custodian Board and therefore the Expropriated Properties Act 1992 cannot have any relationship with it. If it had, since Buhinga is a government school, government had the responsibility of protecting –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can’t you abridge this? What you are saying is that government has sold property on a mistaken view that it is expropriated yet it is not, and that you need immediate action. 

MR KALIBA: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. I am bringing up this matter to show that government made an error and I pray that they revisit the matter. The Ministry of Finance – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I understand you. You are saying that this property was transferred in 1962 and properties that fell under the expropriated property came in 1972. Obviously, this property could not have been under the custodian board and could not be under Ministry of Finance. Therefore, you are saying that those who did it made a mistake and let immediate action be taken; full stop. 

MR KALIBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. I will rest the matter at that and request the Ministry of Finance together with the line ministries – Ministry of Lands and Ministry of Education - to look at the matter with a possible solution and let the property go back to Buhinga Primary School.

3.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue which my colleague has raised is very important. There is communication which has been mistakenly sent to the Ministry of Finance according to your guidance. We shall route that communication to the appropriate office for attention. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue under contention is of a primary school. Unlike other properties where due to redundancy government may wish to privatise or let go of them, this is a school that has been educating the pupils of this country. Without the technicalities of hiding behind the Departed Asians Properties Custodian Board or any other, I thought that when handling matters of primary schools, due care has to be taken by government. 

Mr Speaker, this reflects in the matter that we have today of Shimoni Demonstration School –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, this was a clear case of a property in Fort Portal and now you are trying to make it a general debate. As we said, given the year – 1962 - it cannot be expropriated property because it was already transferred to the municipality of the town and therefore it was never of departed Asians. I think it was by mistake, and the Minister has conceded and something is going to be done. When we start talking about Shimoni, Entebbe, then it will be a general debate. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Mine was only a point of concern. Matters related to schools have been rampantly abused. That is the point I wanted to put across. 

3.16
MR ROSE AKOL (NRM, District Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue I am going raise arises from your communication. On 31 March 2009, the Ministry of Finance laid on the Table the indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure estimates and the micro-economic plans for economic and social development for 2009/10. I remember I raised an issue asking when we were getting copies for Members of Parliament to start their work. I was happy when the minister promised that on Friday, the books would be distributed to Members of Parliament in order to start their work on time. 

On Friday, I checked with the Ministry of Finance and I was told that the books would be here on Monday. Yesterday, I was prompted to go back to Ministry of Finance to again crosscheck to see when the books would be available for us to start our work. I was told that today by 8.00 a.m., the books would be here. I have gone back again to crosscheck and there is nothing forthcoming. 

In accordance with the Budget Act, with effect from 1st April the sessional committees have only 25 days to go through this document and then the Budget Committee receives reports from the various committees, which will be compiled and presented to you for onward presentation to His Excellency the President. 

It is now seven days into April and we have not received this document and we cannot start our work. I think it is not procedurally right for us to keep on waiting and yet nothing is forthcoming.  I do not know what the way forward is for us as Parliament. Our time has already been eaten up and I really what an explanation on this. Thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by apologising for the delay. The delay has been caused by the printer. When we got out the books, they had lots of printing errors and we did not find it fit to circulate books with printing errors. So we took them to the printer who has been promising to deliver them everyday. I promise that we shall endeavour to submit them by the end of this week. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We understand what the Minister of Finance is going through, but the law is clear. What will be done for the time wasted? Will the law allow us to extend the seven days we have lost so far?

THE SPEAKER: You see, the sessional committees also had their programmes on how to meet the sectors falling under them, but now they cannot start. There is a date when I am supposed to send whatever they say to the President, but this cannot be met. In fact, I would have liked members to have it over the Easter week so that they can go through and when we come back, we can transact business. Isn’t it possible – today is Tuesday – to have this document say by Thursday?

MR BUMBA: Mr Speaker, I will endeavour to provide them by Thursday. 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not want the House to take the minister’s promise seriously if she says that the books were printed with printing errors and they took them back for printing. Before I came to Parliament, I was an editor of a journal. There are two ways in which you commit errors - you have either not edited the document, in which case after editing you have to virtually reprint everything; or we could perhaps say that there was confusion regarding paging, but this has been eliminated by modern systems of printing. Can the minister honestly tell us what the problem really is, because the way I am hearing it from her, it cannot be a printing error.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, I find it hard to classify the errors; I have never been an editor. What I can say is that in the material in those books, there were errors, which needed to be corrected.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the minister has said that the books were printed with errors. There is what is called corrigenda and amendments; why can’t the minister give us those printed books with mistakes with an addendum so that we can follow them up? Otherwise, I think this minister has a problem.

MR MICHAEL OCULA: Mr Speaker, I am getting worried. It seems that we are jumping from the frying pan into the fire. When the hon. Minister of Finance took over office, I had a lot of confidence in her. I thought that many things would be rectified in that ministry. Now we have reduced ourselves from lack of presentation of reports to Parliament to printing problems. This is a very serious matter. 

About a week ago when the Chairperson of the Budget Committee raised a matter which concerned some budget performance documents to be presented to Parliament by the 31st March, the Minister of Finance promised us that she would look into it and make sure that something is done. It was never done. Now this is something that touches on the work of a committee of Parliament. Again, the Minister of Finance is saying next week and she is reducing it to Thursday, and if you put a bit of pressure, maybe she will say tomorrow; I am not very sure about that. 

I think this should stop. We are moving towards a period of budgeting, which is very important for this nation. Can the Minister of Finance be more serious? I thank you so much.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, when the minister was reacting, the first thing she did was to apologise. This is a new culture among the ministers seated there. So if the minister has owned up and apologised, I beg honourable members to accept the minister’s apology and we continue. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I suggest that these books be delivered here by 4.00 p.m. tomorrow. This is because members are likely to travel on Thursday and they should go with their copies. Try to do this.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, I will try my best.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.26
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament. I am going to present a paper on the global economic crisis, the implications for Uganda’s economy and the policy response. 

Introduction 

This information paper explains the origins of the current global economic crisis, its causes, impacts observed so far and the likely implications on the Ugandan economy -(Interruption)

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, this statement has been awaited for a very long time and members are very anxious to follow the minister through her written statement but members have not got their copies, and I do not have mine either. So how do we follow this very important matter, which has in the past been presented in a similar way on the Floor of Parliament? Is she procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Do we have copies?

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, we submitted 400 copies to the Clerk yesterday and as I came into the House, I saw quite a number of copies on the registration table. They were there. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if the copies are available let the members get them. Let something be done.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, we have just been passing by the table outside and there are no copies.

THE SPEAKER: But some have the copies. Well, let this be looked into so that those who do not have copies get them. I think she can continue with her statement as we look for copies, but I see some people waving copies. Okay, if that is the case, since we have many statements, let us get the statement for which we have copies. Which is that? Okay, let the Minister for the Presidency make her statement as we look for the copies of this statement.

3.30
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The first statement I am going to make is on the Prosperity-for-All programme. 

Parliament directed that I present a statement on the progress of the Prosperity-for-All programme and I would like to report as follows:

The Prosperity-for-All programme is enshrined in a policy document, which emphasises improving the lives of all Ugandans in all aspects like increasing incomes, access to quality food and nutrition, social services such as health, education, clean water and physical infrastructure on a sustainable basis. 

In this respect, the Government of Uganda has set a target and committed itself to ensuring that households - the basic unit of our society in Uganda - earn at least Shs 20 million per year through engagement in agriculture as business and other suitable non-agriculture enterprises. Since agriculture is the backbone of the Ugandan economy and the majority - 68 percent - of the households depend on subsistence farming, the major focus is on transforming these subsistence farmers who have productive assets such as land but need support and new technologies, infrastructure and markets to get the most out of their assets.

The Prosperity-for-All programme also embraces the non-farming income-generating groups and will support artisans both in urban and rural areas. The Prosperity-for-All policy document - I have the pleasure to lay a copy on the Table – which has been circulated, addresses all the major elements and principles of the programme, namely the implementation arrangements, roles and responsibilities of different sectors and institutions, monitoring and evaluation mechanisms.

This policy was developed following wide consultations with relevant ministries, agencies and partners in government’s poverty eradication efforts. This statement captures the highlights of achievements in one year and the challenges ahead.

The vision of the NRM leadership, which is driving the Prosperity-for-All programme, is a transformed Ugandan society from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country. The mission is to spur commercial agriculture, improve services and promote industrial production with a focus on value addition for rapid economic and social development.

The Prosperity-for-All programme is built on principles that every household will be guided to engage in profitable enterprise of agricultural production that enables them to generate income on daily basis, generate earnings on a periodic basis, and generate earnings on a long term basis.

To achieve the above, households are being organised: 

•	To select profitable enterprise mix, based on available land size and agricultural zones. 
•	They are also being organised into marketing groups and co-operatives for purposes of achieving enough volumes.
•	They are being organised into members’ owned savings and credit groups, or SACCOs, for financial intermediation. 
•	They are also being organised to effectively link them to national, regional and international markets.
•	To easily access business support extension services and advice on appropriate enterprise selection.

The Prosperity-for-All programme is built on the conviction that government continues to guarantee security, good governance, macroeconomic stability and growth, infrastructure expansion as well as other relevant social services.

The Prosperity-for-All programme calls for hard work. The artisan groups and other urban unemployed will be assisted and given skills to engage in profitable enterprises.

There will be no free money or handouts. Instead, timely information for guiding the farmers, training and access to inputs is being provided.

Government is ensuring that all ministries and departments, both at the central and local government levels, NGOs, private sector and the population have a similar focus and are mobilised to ensure that the initiatives, activities and use of resources are rationalised and harmonised.

Value addition and agro-processing will be an integral part of this programme. Government is in the process of assisting small and large scale commercial farmers and processors to access credit through appropriate financial intermediation.

The Prosperity-for-All Household Selection per Parish

To accelerate the transformation of the households throughout the country, Government has adopted the use of selected households as demonstration or learning centres for farmers in every parish in the country. In fulfillment of the above, the selection exercise was undertaken between September and December 2008.

The country had been initially zoned by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries into production zones, based on production patterns. The enterprises selected under Prosperity-for-All programme take into consideration the uniqueness of these ecological zones, to ensure that the enterprise mix is ecologically compatible and earns farmers daily periodic and long term income.

The Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry continue to spearhead enterprise selection and zoning at the national level to give the country a strong and sustainable base of supply of products demanded by the national, regional and international markets.

In order to increase revenue for the farmers and access regional and international markets, value addition is a component of the Prosperity-for-All Programme. The Ministry of Tourism is responsible for creating an enabling environment for secondary and tertiary processing, while the Ministry of Agriculture through the NAADS programme is responsible for creating and enabling conditions for production, post harvest handling and primary processing.

Market information flow will be a key tool for linking farmers to markets. The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry in partnership with the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology is establishing a market information system in partnership with the private sector to provide dynamic data on market demands for various commodities at the national, regional and international levels and the form in which they are required.

Under financial services framework, government started supporting households to start community based financial SACCOs in sub-counties where none existed, and it is strengthening the already existing SACCOs. A regulatory framework to ensure safe, sound and sustainable management of SACCOs is being worked on.

Government, through the Microfinance Support Centre and Post Bank, is providing wholesale funds for onward lending to qualified SACCOs. In addition to the selected profitable enterprise mix, the farmers will be guided to ensure food and nutritional security.

Mr Speaker, this is my brief on Prosperity-for-All and I want to thank you.

3.39
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has just presented. As you are aware, we have been asking for this policy to come here for members to deliberate on for a long time but it has not been presented. 

I wish to say that the best way to achieve Prosperity-for-All is through the old model of co-operatives. That old model of co-operatives was vested on very important principles of voluntary formation for a common good. We in the Opposition have said this in the past that groups must be based on voluntary membership. The approach we are using now of saying, “form groups” and once they form them they remain waiting for the next word from you, is not driven on the principle of cooperatives. The old model was such that if people identify a common problem, they will identify a common solution. That defeats the problem. 

If you move in villages now, you find groups that have been formed and they wait for you to return saying, “When is he/she coming back and with what?” That is a big problem. Unless we change the approach from a supply-driven approach now where we say form SACCOs to an approach where the communities themselves sit down with guidance and identify common problems and form groups and solutions, we will not be heading very far.

SACCO formations have been extremely politicised. The approach of Prosperity-for-All is such that in every sub-county where there is no SACCO, government will assist that sub-county to establish a SACCO. But you have sub-counties that originally had SACCOS but because of the political connotations, new SACCOS have been established and supported by government leaving the old SACCOS that should have been cheaper to support. That brings in the political aspect and that is going to let down the programme - I have had the former Government Chief Whip saying, “Do we have examples?” Yes, in my sub-county, we had  a SACCO called Kaleli SACCO and when this programme came up, another SACCO at the sub-county level was formed purposely to defeat the other SACCO. This is what we are talking about. 

In this policy that has been presented by the minister, page 21 talks about the composition of the team of seven people consisting of the chairperson LC5, the CAO as the secretary, district MPs, district chairpersons of the ruling party, secretary for production, district population officers, NAADS coordinator. If you are talking about going to the communities with programmes for empowerment of the rural poor, the only way to succeed is to depoliticise them. This is a multiparty system. Why are you talking of a district chairperson of the ruling party? Unless we deal with the fundamentals regarding depoliticising these group formations, we are definitely going to have a big problem.

Politicisation is a serious matter and it is for the good of this country that we are raising this that the people we lead are not necessarily of any party. We are giving this in good faith and we have given it before. We are serving the people of Uganda and when we come here, the Speaker reminds us that “Irrespective of who voted you, you are now a leader of all the people in your constituency.” The formation of groups and the leadership of these groups and the apex organisation in committees must be depoliticised.

There is an issue regarding enterprise selection. Why do you come to my village and then you sit over us and say, “What you need here is basically hybrid chicken”? We have the local hens, cows – I like giving my own examples. In my village, households were given 65 head of cattle over the past two years but as we speak now, we have only 11 hybrid cows. You say we do not want the short horn cows – why not the short horn cows? If you drive this programme using the supply driven approach it is going to hit a snag. 

We have been saying this all along in good faith – come to us we tell you the breeds that we have! We have short-horned cows; the Karimojong took some; we do not know where others went but we can multiply what we have –(Laughter)– because that is the breed that survives under our conditions. When His Excellency the President toured the Teso region, we were very candid with him and we told him, “You cannot say have a group of 30 people of 30 homes in a community and you say here is one small hybrid cock” – a young one. We showed them to him when he was there. What do you expect that cock to do?

You have a situation where a whole sub-county is given two he-goats! For example, my sub-county is divided by the main road; there is the left and the right part of it. And do you know what happened? They gave them two he-goats, one for one side of the sub-county and the other for the opposite side of the road. But surely when you look at that, what are we doing? Let us focus on what works for the communities – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you see, we have four statements, each of which has to be debated. So, if you are to take all that time, I do not know how we will work it out; try to keep time.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Anyway, we are saying all these things in good faith. Let us go back to the old model of cooperatives that are guided by voluntary membership, common good under one man, one vote and we move on.

In terms of the regulatory framework, yes, we have adopted the framework of SACCOs but as we speak, the promises in the policy of Prosperity-for-All, about enacting a regulatory framework for SACCOs has not come about. It is good that the Minister of Finance is here while this matter is being debated on the Floor. For example, you promised to bring the SACCO Specific Bill September last year, but this is April and nothing is forthcoming. You also promised a Regulatory Authority Bill for the microfinance sector by December last years, this is April and it has not come about. What is the problem?

Note that we adopted the SACCO model for channelling Prosperity-for-All funds to the people of Uganda without a regulatory framework. So as we debate the global financial crisis, this is what we should be talking about – the lack of a regulatory framework that eventually will lead into an unmanageable situation. Mr Speaker, those are the views I had to air. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Seninde, but let us restrict ourselves to three minutes.

3.50
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the hon. Minister, for this statement. However, let me seek some clarification. Whenever we go to our constituents, we mobilise them into joining one of these three programmes: SACCOs, NAADS or to be ready to be selected among the six families to benefit.

However, what I found in my constituency yesterday is not good for my people. They are complaining - because as Members of Parliament, we have not had the time to look at the guidelines well. For example, for the SACCOs to operate well there are certain guidelines that people are supposed to follow in order to benefit. The same applies to NAADS programme.

When I met my constituents, they complained that when the selection of the six families took place - what surprised me is the fact that they were even saying that for a person to benefit, they must have three or more acres of land. And that if a person is to get cows, he/she must have a certain number of such animals. That is not bad because we appreciate that you cannot give out money to somebody who does not have experience in handling such. But on the other hand, people are wondering whether this programme has come to only benefit the rich. I would like to request the hon. Minister to give a clarification on this. I am saying this because my people have told me that neither of the families that were selected was in the NAADS programme and SACCOs; they had not made any contribution. I just want to seek your guidance on that, hon. Minister and I will be glad if I get this clarification.

3.53
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to say that I am one of the Movement MPs, but still I have failed to understand Prosperity-for-All because of what is happening on the ground.

When you look at the families selected to benefit from this programme, you fail to understand the whole thing because what the process says is not what is being practiced. For example, you will find a person, because of the support he had during elections and that person may not have even one or two acres of land, being the one getting the pig as part of this Prosperity-for-All. If two pigs are given to a person who does not own any land, then who is going to feed the other? Is the pig going to feed the man or the man is going to feed it? (Laughter) You can see how Prosperity-for-All will fail to take on in that given area.

As you know, campaigns are going on and you are hearing how those people who benefited are telling you that their chairmen gave them pigs although when you get to see the said pigs, you will find them malnourished. In some of the sub-counties in my area that I have visited, the situation is bad; the programme has not been embraced properly. The way it was initiated was wrong; the involvement of the different actors was not brought on board. 

When you look at the SACCOs, yes, they have been there; many have been formed, but I would like to mention that we still have a problem of SACCOs having to start their work. They have waited and waited the members have been trained, but I will tell you that up to now, Bundibugyo has not received money for some of the SACCOs. You can get to the ground and see what is happening.

I would like to ask my government to go back to the drawing board, if we are to see the six families achieve the Shs 20 million. The person who was given this chicken or the pig, I do not think can get Shs 20 million by the end of the year. That is why I am saying that we should get back to the drawing board. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we would get to hon. Sebuliba, but you are an urban MP; does this project work in urban areas? Okay, let us have hon. Epetait.

3.57
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the fact that government recognises that the biggest population in Uganda relies on agriculture; that is not questionable. The problem comes about during resource allocation. One gets amazed why government perpetually under funds the very sector that sustains majority of the population. There is need for us to make a focused budget targeting majority of the population by way of empowering Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

I have realised that we are putting the cart before the horse. Government quickly and un-preparedly encouraged the formation of SACCOs in the various parts of the country; thousands of SACCOs have been formed but as we speak, the regulatory framework to ensure they are safe, sound and sustainable is just being worked on. That presupposes that the SACCOs we have now, in the absence of a regulatory framework, are unsound, unsafe and unsustainable. Is this what we targeted? I think there is need for government to always get ready with all the frameworks and mechanisms implementing any programme.

The intertwining of Prosperity-for-All and the NAADS programme has caused problems even in my district. In the recent visits that the President made campaigning for Prosperity-for-All programme, he promised some of the farmers heaven on earth. For example, he would tell some of them thus: “Okay, I will cause a borehole to be drilled in your farm.” But later on he pushed all such pledges to NAADS, which was not prepared for that kind of budget. Many of the farmers that were promised a number of such things are now crying fowl and accusing NAADS of failing to implement the presidential directive.

Anyway, I have told most of them that it is not fair for them to start pointing fingers at NAADS over pronouncements of the head of state; he promised all that without comparing notes with what was on the ground; what was being planned under NAADS.

I think the design for the NAADS and Prosperity-for-All programmes is a matter that has thrown everybody into confusion. And like my honourable colleague from Bundibugyo has said, we have also failed to understand that programme of prosperity for six households per parish. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from hon. Sebuliba. No, please wait because there is a point of procedure.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a procedural question and I would like to request that you guide us. My procedural matter emanates from the statement that the minister has presented. She rightly says that Parliament directed that she makes a statement on the progress of Prosperity-for-All. But when you read through this statement, you realise that it is more of a concept paper, detailing what shall be done and what is intended to be done, yet we thought, at this stage – because it is true that there have been positive steps already done, but when the minister  says that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is responsible for creating an enabling environment for secondary and tertiary production, and that they are intending to select families at this stage, I do not understand that. I think you should guide us properly. 

My sense is that we expected the minister to tell us what has so far been done. What capacity building have we so far achieved? How many farmers have benefited? What is the progress out of the Shs 20? What is the trend? What has so far been disbursed and so on? Otherwise, this statement is just a concept paper that is detailing what is intended to be done and not the actual progress in respect of NAADS. I request that you guide the House.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what you are saying is that you are not satisfied with the statement? That if you were the one to write it, we would be having a different paper? (Laughter) But I remember this matter came up when the Minister of Finance made a statement here and we thought that that minister was encroaching on the portfolio of another ministry. Do you remember that the Minister of Finance tried to say something about Post Bank, NAADS, and we queried why she was doing that?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: That is when we required the minister responsible for these sectors to come up with a statement. That is how this matter came before us. I hope you remember.

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. But I would also like Members to recall that this same House has asked the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to present an update on the progress of the NAADS programme. That is the report that will give you an update on the progress that hon. Ssekikubo is talking about.

I would like to make one clarification that as we debate this paper, we should remember that at the time Prosperity-for-All programme was designed, the government decided that as far the 68 percent households that were to be involved in subsistence farming were concerned, it would be the Ministry of Agriculture, through the NAADS programme, to deliver services to the people. I think it is a mistake for people to think that NAADS is meddled up with PFA; NAADS is only delivering PFA to the agricultural sector. That is what I wanted to make clear so that as you debate this issue, you have that in mind. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have also remembered that the other issue that came up was that the ministry was carrying out a function of the Ministry of Lands and that they were giving people money to acquire land over which we said, “Why not such arrangement to be done under Ministry of Lands?” I think that is how this matter came up -

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to make some clarifications, especially in regards to the NAADS programme in view of Prosperity-for-All, so that the House debates from an informed position. There is a lot of mix up on the six households. Previously, under NAADS, we had only one demonstration at the sub-county so under Prosperity-for-All we wanted to create more demonstrations that are closer to the group members at parish level. As such, we created six demonstration sites at every parish.

Who is it that selects these five households? People should not be confused that these households or demonstration sites where we have designed farmer field schools are selected by the farmers in the NAADS programmes.

Secondly, what are the criteria for selection? The criteria for selection are that somebody must have where to demonstrate. He must also have registered success on any enterprises and he must be able to write. He must be able to teach. He must be able to be visited. His farm must be owned by the group as a learning farm field school -(Interruption)

MR OCULA: Clarification.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I am making a clarification so let me finish then you can ask. 

About NAADS, I have heard speakers confusing NAADS with PFA. Previously, we were running programmes in government in an uncoordinated manner. As such, what the Office of the Presidency is doing is to coordinate all activities that are geared to economic prosperity, and NAADS is one of them. Under Prosperity-for-All we have roads, public administration, health and education and we want to deliver these services in a coordinated manner, that is, economic prosperity.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like you rightly put it, both statements: the one on NAADS and the one on PFA, should have come today and then Members would have made a decision accordingly. But the confusion is emanating from the fact that there are so many policies which have been brought here in Parliament and then taken outside without being given ample time to mature before we come up with new ones.

In the 1980s we had PAPSCA and then Entandikwa. We then we had PEAP from which came PMA. Now NAADS -(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Clarification.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Clarification on what? I am developing a point and now you are seeking clarification? I think the professor should seek the clarification after getting my point.

We are ending up with another programme which they are calling Prosperity-for-All. Where are the loopholes in NAADS which this programme is trying to address? In fact, when you read this one, it is a mirror image of NAADS. The only thing that the minister has brought here, or that the President is doing, is bringing new terminologies. 

When you talk about commercialisation of farming or farmer driven, or bringing money to the poor, you are almost saying the same things. If you look at the first statements where the hon. Minister is saying, “… the PFA programme as enshrined in the policy document,” we are asking: which one? 

The other time hon. Kisamba Mugerwa was all over Parliament trying to come up with a national plan from which we are going to benefit and get policies, budget for activities and come out with something tangible. However, before the plan has even come out, we are coming out with a political statement on Prosperity-for-All.

Mr Speaker, we are going to confuse the entire nation. This statement is coming at a time when there is already a financial meltdown that is going to affect our people. Therefore, I would prefer that the minister goes and sits down with all the sector ministries so that they come up with a definite policy that looks at exactly where the loopholes in NAADS are. They should bring the policy here so that we formally debate it, improve on the NAADS Act and see what we can discard and what can work instead of coming up with new terminologies which are actually working on the same lines as the previous policies.

Yes, the minister has been talking about, “This one is talking about roads; this one is talking about the other infrastructure like water and the rest.” It is all there in NAADS! Everything is there but the problem is that most of the pillars have not worked and that is why they have come up with micro-finance just recently. And now they are trying to improve it with SACCOS. They are not going to work. As long as we continue to ad hoc with these policies, we are not going to take our people out of this poverty. 

Madam Minister, you are a vet doctor and you have seen some of the problems. If I look at some of the materials which have been in the previous NAADS, the animals they are giving people - they bring a he-goat at Shs 600,000 and it is as small as a squirrel. (Laughter) These are the things we should be addressing. You bring one cock and the entire sub-county depends on that one cock. Which cock can fertilise all of these hens? Even the money is selectively given to people. These are some of the loopholes! So, go back to the drawing board and improve on these policies rather than coming up with new terminologies. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kajeke -(Prof. Kamuntu rose_) Clarification? Ok. Hon. Kajeke will come in after.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the minister for her statement. But surely, the programme, Prosperity-for-All is part of a social contract that was entered into by the ruling party when it used it as a platform for the election process. It encompasses -(Interjections)- you know this is very true. I am not playing with words. Consequently, Prosperity-for-All enshrines or includes, from the statement of the minister, improving the lives of Ugandans in all aspects. And it includes increasing incomes, accessing financial services, education, health and infrastructure. Consequently, NAADS is simply a component of Prosperity-for-All and it should not be confused. Yes, it is a classification and the procedure or principle -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the problem that we see that has cropped up in villages is that because you are insisting on selecting six people in the parish, some people have started saying Prosperity-for-All means “prosperity for the six”. That is the confusion that is coming up. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There should be no confusion about the six. The six is like you Members of Parliament; you are here and how many of you are there across the country but you provide leadership across the country. Yes, it is true. Don’t you provide leadership across the country? Isn’t it true? The six selected per parish are intended to be an example for the emulation of the rest but it is not that they would be the only ones who are going to participate in Prosperity-for-All. Simply by seeing, the rest will believe but -

THE SPEAKER: I think that requires further explanation so that people understand because I think the minds of those saying so is that they think that these six are lavishly assisted when they themselves are not. That is why they are interpreting it that way.

MRS WABUDEYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to clarify on the matter of the six farmers per parish. Mr Speaker, I need your protection, I need to be heard. 

First of all, I would like to refer the hon. Members of Parliament to the policy, which everyone has a copy of. This is the policy that we are talking about. On page 11 of that policy, you will find the criteria for the selection of the six households per parish. If I am given permission, I could read it: “Prosperity-for-All Policy: Tackling Poverty at Household Level.” I make reference to it and specifically page 11, which has the criteria for selection. I want to read it: “The criteria for selection are that each selected household should already be undertaking some income generating activities within the locality; should be ready and able to change from subsistence to commercial farming; should demonstrate willingness to allow other households to gain free access to the demonstration enterprises; should demonstrate the ability and willingness to pass on knowledge to other households; should demonstrate the ability to keep minimum records and be an active and committed member of or willing to join a registered farmers group.”

The agriculturalists and extension workers who are in this House know the value of demonstration. The value of demonstration is what Prosperity-for-All is trying to benefit from. This programme is for everybody but for you to be effective and for our farmers who have not known good technologies of production, they need to see in order for them to believe. I am trying to use very simple words here because people have had this document and yet they debate as if they have not read it. 

You must be able to show a village farmer that it is possible to make money from a certain enterprise if you do it the right way. That is why the programme thought that if we have six demonstration farms within the parish, they would be a good example to the rest of the farmers. I want to tell you how this whole thing will work and please give me an opportunity.

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for the Minister for the Presidency, on behalf of government, to take Ugandans for a ride? This programme called Bonna Bagaggawale was a campaign slogan and the people of Uganda have a contract with the ruling party for five years to make sure that every household is rich to the tune of Shs 20 million per year. Is she in order to continue misleading the country that Bonna Bagaggawale is making progress and yet if you look at the pillars on which they are supposed to be measured, increasing household incomes to Shs 20 million per annum has not been realised? As we speak, if you look at the quality of food and nutrition for the country, people in Uganda have no food. In Karamoja people are dying!

Mr Speaker, go to the education sector. The quality of education has gone much lower; primary leaving examination pupils are failing. Is she in order to continue misleading the country?

If you look at physical infrastructure, in the last few months we have had the worst roads. Is she in order to continue misleading the country? Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ocula, I think that you have just used a point of order as an umbrella to enable you make a contribution and you have made it. 

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just saying that these six households are going to be used as a demonstration facility. I would like to go ahead and explain how it is going to work and I want to beg to be allowed to conclude this matter before I am interrupted.

In every home of the six households -(Mrs Kavuma rose_)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Members, point of information, you are in the hands of the person holding the Floor. She has said she does not want to be interrupted.

MRS WABUDEYA: Mr Speaker, can I finish the next sentence, before she can raise the information? [MRS KAVUMA: “It is burning”) What is burning?

MRS KAVUMA: Mr Speaker, I must say this is burning because all the issues that she has gone through which we have raised and all the things that we have been talking about do not include, anywhere, the peasant fishing communities. Where are they? How are they going to be selected among the six households? All these are the things we have been asking all the time. How are we going to sort them out? They are not there! We have spent an hour here, talking about nothing but agriculturalists and farmers. Where are the fishing communities? [HON. MEMBERS: “Demonstrate.”] How do they demonstrate?

MRS WABUDEYA: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Kavuma, for raising this matter once again. I want Members of this House to note that there is no prescribed pattern; enterprises will be selected according to the local conditions. I talked about ecological zones. So if we are in Kalangala, the agriculturalists who are there will guide the people on which enterprises to undertake. There is also the idea of value addition where Kalangala will benefit from, definitely on matters of value addition.

I would like to explain how the demonstration units are going to work, or how they are working. At every one of the six households in a parish, farmers will form a class. There will be a group of farmers who will be training from the home of the six selected households per parish. At the end of the day, in one parish, the number of farmers who will be getting the technologies and the guidance will be six times the number of farmers who will be coming to study at their homes.

And it is anticipated that once the demonstrations are carried out at the home of those six households. The other farmers will adopt, at their own homes and they will do exactly what they have learnt from these six households. That is how demonstrations work and I have tried to put simple words to it so that we can all follow it and understand how the six households will work.

I also want to demystify the fear that this programme has been politicised, because if you look at the committee which helps to supervise the selection, we have put there people who are elected in many places, some of them are not even members of NRM. If for example you look at Bukedea - (Interruption) 

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving way. We are in a multi-party dispensation. In all the sub counties we also have chairpersons of other parties other than NRM. Can you clarify why you have decided to put an NRM chairman on the committee and you leave out the FDC, UPC, JEEMA chairmen, when we are in a multi-party dispensation?

I want to tell you so that you know that some other people, for example, my people, will always say, “This is an NRM thing, that is why they have decided to put an NRM chairman”, and your chairmen at sub-county level, for me in Gulu they say, “This is our money, we must first select our people, the FDC can wait, the UPC can wait.”

Hon. Minister, you have to clarify to this House how public funds have to go to one party and then the rest of the people just go to hang. We wait to hear from you -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, really I am perturbed! We are spending about two hours on this statement; don’t you think maybe we need a workshop where we are going to discuss this subject rather than a parliamentary debate? Wouldn’t that be better for you? Otherwise, we have spent almost two hours on this subject. I think you should organise a workshop for us so that we discuss these things. Don’t you think so, hon. Minister?

MRS WABUDEYA: Mr Speaker, we shall be very pleased to come and facilitate a workshop organised by Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: No; organised by you.

MRS WABUDEYA: By Parliament, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You should organise and invite us.

MRS WABUDEYA: Okay, we shall look into the –

THE SPEAKER: Because, really, we are going nowhere.

MRS WABUDEYA: We shall look into the matter of having a workshop, but can I just clarify the matter which my colleague of Gulu has raised on using the party chairman -

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. Let us have a workshop -

MRS WABUDEYA: Just one, Mr Speaker. My colleague from Gulu has just been complaining about the inclusion of the ruling party chairman as a member of the sub county committee. But I want to allay her fears and use the very Gulu example and remind her that in Gulu, I believe that most of the LC III chairmen are FDC, DP or UPC, and not NRM. And these are the chairmen of these committees. 

I also want to remind you that when money is sent to the sub-county, there is a sub-county chief, who is the accounting officer of the sub-county and the political head is the chairman, LC III. In the case of Gulu, maybe an FDC chairman. The ruling party chairman is there for purposes of monitoring and ensuring that his party programme is not sabotaged –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us agree that we should have a meaningful discussion of this subject elsewhere and not here. We have spent almost two hours on just one statement. We have five statements and if we go at this pace it would mean we shall not do much. I suggest that instead of having five statements on one day; let us have another statement tomorrow and another one on Thursday because there is also important business of the Uganda National Health Research Organisation Bill. The minister can explain to us the importance of this so that we see why it is important for us to consider this business. 

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed we have this very important Bill for a second reading which I thought would come today thus the Uganda National Health Research Organisation Bill. Uganda as a country has bid to host the East African Health Research Commission. One of the requirements is that we must have this law in place and if we do not then the hosting will go to Tanzania, Kenya or Rwanda who have also bid, hence the importance of passing this Bill. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you see the urgency of this business. I suggest that we do not receive any other ministerial statement today; we shall receive it tomorrow and on Thursday so that we can undertake this business which is important.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.36
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. This paper is on the global economic crisis; the implications for Uganda’s economy and the policy response.

This information paper explains the origins, causes and impact observed so far and the likely implications for the Ugandan economy of the current global economic crisis that has arisen from the recent contraction in the national outputs commonly referred to as recession of several developed countries.

This crisis has been rated as more severe than any other similar crisis over the past 60 years. The crisis that was triggered by the collapse of financial markets that intensified in the last quarter of 2008 has now affected the real sector of the world economies leading to a decline in global economic growth.

The objective of the information paper is to explain the origin, causes and the government policy response.

I will spend a bit of time on the causes. The global economic crisis has largely arisen from imbalances in consumption of the US and European communities which were funded largely from savings of developing economies and the Middle East. And these countries invested their surpluses in the financial markets of the West and this led to excessive liquidity in the markets and therefore the banks started to carry out careless lending to borrowers who would not ordinarily qualify and these are termed as sub-prime borrowers and this triggered the crisis. 

It was made worse by laxity in the supervision of banks in the US and the West. As a result, the banks have incurred losses from these so-called sub-prime borrowers and as a result unusual instruments have been created, like derivatives that have placed further stress on the financial system of the advanced economies leading to what is termed as the credit crunch. This has created mistrust between the financial institutions and even the borrowers. The banks cannot lend to each other because they are worried that they might inherit credits which are termed as toxic products.

From the transmission mechanism described above, the globalisation and close integration of markets have helped to accelerate this problem because we are now an integrated market – what happens in one country affects other countries. Through close integration of economies and financial markets the contamination or contagion efforts across the world have been sped up. 

It is important to note that Uganda’s financial sector has not been affected by sub-prime products and I want to emphasise this. The careless lending has not yet affected us given the stringent financial supervision and regulatory environment of the central bank. The economy and our financial sector are not as integrated to the industrialised economies and therefore we face limited exposure from the financial system of the US and Europe. 

However, we shall experience some fall out from the global economic contraction as demands for our exports decline and prices for exports fall. And the consequence of this financial crisis and credit crunch emanating from the global consumption and saving imbalances has finally led to contracting of national output of the developed economies and this contraction has got a national and global economic output commonly referred to as the recession, which has led to a decline in our economic activities in the last two consecutive quarters, leading to reduction in the Gross National Product usually characterised by falling income and employment. 

The economies of the developed world have dropped by varying degrees, but which are quite substantial. As a result of that, over all global growth is set to shrink for the first time in 60 years from the general growth rate of 3.5 percent in 2008 to a decline of negative one percent, this current year. 

It is this world recession, especially in the industrial countries that will affect Uganda, channeled through a decline in demand for Uganda’s exports and export receipts from the advanced economies and Asia as the global demand for commodities and their world prices fall. 

However, I would like to say that the economic crisis presents regional and domestic opportunities that mitigate the impact of the global crisis that government is poised to exploit. This is because Uganda and the region have not been consuming to their full potential. That is why there is still market. At the same time, there is a market in the region; domestic markets and regional demand especially for food products and our industrially-produced goods. It is clear that Uganda has got a comparative advantage in meeting increasing demand for agriculture and products that are manufactured locally.

On the Balance of Payment, I would like to say that the total export earnings for the first half of the Financial Year 2008/2009, increased by 1.6 percent from the figure that was recorded in the previous financial year. On a calendar basis, export receipts grew by 34.4 percent over the 12 months period from 2007 to 2008.

Private transfers, including remittances, declined. The strong export growth and stable official development assistance has minimised the negative impact on the Balance of Payments. I can add that import demand has remained strong; it is expected to increase by 29 percent in the first half of the financial year on account of the private sector imports.

The rising oil prices amid strong domestic demands were among the reasons for the strong import performance. The impact of global recession on Uganda’s economy will be mitigated through exports for regional trade by investing in areas, which make cost of doing business in Uganda cheap. The opportunity that this provides has prompted government to explore avenues through which domestic supply, particularly of food products, can be harnessed.

The foreign exchange markets, Mr Speaker, have been fairly stable. The volatility has not been so high despite the sudden exist of shore investors in Uganda, which caused the shilling to weaken against the dollar by 20 percent in December compared to its value in September 2008.

The interest rates on Government Treasury Bills and Bonds have also increased. This has led to increased bank lending rates. And despite the increase in interest rates, the demand for domestic bank credit has remained strong, which is suggestive of vibrant economic activities.

In the past two financial years we experienced a sharp increase in other foreign inflow comprised of aid loans, grants, remittances and NGO inflows, incoming earnings, foreign direct investments for portfolio flows and the private sector credit.

However, over the last three months, some of these inflows have declined with two direct effects on the depreciation of the shilling and increase in domestic interest rates. On a positive note, I can say that the official development assistance commitment to the budget have remained fairly stable. Our donors are still meeting their commitments; there is no indication that they will be reduced significantly in the near term. This is partly because of the existing contractual commitments.

The Bank of Uganda International Reserves currently stand at US $2.2 billion, which is the equivalent of five months’ imports. This position, compared to those of other countries, is considered to be reasonable. For example, in Zambia, they have less than one month. The same applies to Ghana. I would like to add that these reserves are kept in severe institutions, mainly multilateral or institutions that are backed by the reserve banks of the respective countries.

In spite of the problems, there are both regional and domestic opportunities that mitigate the negative effects of the decline in global demand. Regional demand for Uganda’s exports is on the rise. For example, export receipts to Sudan and Congo grew by 43 and 53 percent respectively, in the last six months of last year. The growth in Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania – the figures are given respectively. Food prices have been rising at the rate of about 27 percent per month from July last year.

I can report that the banking sector remains sound. This is due to the strong regulations. Although Uganda is a home to subsidiaries of international banks, the local subsidiaries have no exposure to sub prime products or toxic acids, as they are referred to these days. All the subsidiary banks have coupled from their parents banks; they have stood along capital requirements and complied with Bank of Uganda requirements. Their operations are, therefore, independent of their parent banks abroad. Their remittances abroad are controlled by Bank of Uganda and the assets are strictly watched by the central bank.

There is some subjective evidence that some large companies, which access credit abroad, have now been curtailed and are, therefore, borrowing locally. This has created some imbalance because the demand on local resources in the banks has gone up. This is indicated in the high interest rates and in the higher bidding rates for government securities, particularly in the last quarter of last year.

The fact that these companies are willing to borrow at a higher cost demonstrates the profitability of doing business in Uganda and confidence that those companies still have in Uganda’s economy.

The challenge that this pauses is finding balance between maintaining sufficient liquidity in the system and mitigating inflationary measures. It is therefore, imperative for government spending agencies to effectively and efficiently utilise budget funds on the specific problems, to address constraints on access to markets and production of goods and services, government being the biggest spender.

On the fiscal sector, although revenue collection grew some time last year, it was below the projected figure by 22 percent, leading to a shortfall of Shs 108 billion in that period. 

The recent performance however, is showing a positive recovery in collections. For instance, URA collections for February were above the target by Shs 19.4 billion and last month’s performance is expected to be even better. This was mainly because of direct domestic taxes. 

In the real sector, Uganda’s economy, which has been growing between 7.4 and 8.7 percent, is projected to grow at 6.2 percent this year as a result of the slowing down of the global economy. Future growth will be driven mainly by increased regional trade especially in consumables and food crops. 

The increase in regional trade has had an impact on domestic prices. Consequently, inflation in the last three quarters has averaged 14.5 percent. The latest monthly inflation data shows a deceleration of inflation in recent months. If this continues in the financial year 2009/2010, inflation might go back to a single digit. 

The all-items monthly inflation rate reduced by 1.1 percent in February, and 0.3 percent in March. The monthly inflation rate, which excludes food crops, energy, fuel and utilities, decelerated from 0.7 percent to 0.3 percent in the same period while monthly food inflation also reduced from 16.6 percent to 1.1 percent.

Government Policy Response to the Crisis

In view of the food export opportunity available in the region, Government has put up programmes to increase food production and to address bottlenecks to production and export markets. In this regard, government has allocated another Shs 36 billion for agricultural production. 

Additionally, government is working with commercial farmers to increase production. We are coming up with deliberate plans to catalyse the commercial farmers to produce in order to enhance our exports and also to complete the value chain.

In light of the crisis, it is imperative that the Government of Uganda responds by stimulating further production in commodities for which Uganda is capable of producing most efficiently for both increased domestic and regional markets.

Government’s response also requires the removal of inefficiencies, which I have already alluded to.

Government is providing a physical stimulus through road construction and other infrastructure, including ICT, with the view of creating jobs and also investing in human resource. There is a provision of Shs 1.1 trillion for road construction and a substantial amount for the energy sector. We would like to expedite the construction of the ongoing works and the new works in order to get this money injected into the market and to create jobs. 

In the ICT sector, the main priority area, because we need communication, is implementation of the second phase of the national transmission backbone which will complete interconnectivity of the entire country.

The other government programmes will continue. In addition to the agricultural stimuli, government will be introducing a credit guarantee scheme to underwrite the risk for people involved in commercial agriculture in order to encourage commercial banks to provide credit to agriculture and agro processing projects. This will be available for projects appraised and vetted by the commercial banks for which the scheme will guarantee 50 percent of the cost of lending. Of course an agricultural bank would have been the most appropriate, but we are going to do this in the interim while we think about the agricultural bank.

On macro-economic policy management, we are taking precautionary measures to preserve our foreign exchange reserves and to be more vigilant in the supervision of the banking sector. Prudent macro-economic policies have ensured macro-economic stability and have been instrumental in sustaining high economic growth rates. This will not be compromised in spite of the prices.

As the global financial centres seemingly headed towards a meltdown in September, which was domestically partially manifested in the pressure on the shilling/dollar rate, the Ministry of Finance adopted a number of measures, which included the following:

1.	Reviewing the fiscal programme to accommodate lower domestic revenue compared to the budget time objections.
2. 	Recalibrating the government’s liquidity management programme.
3. 	Revising the inflation and balance of payment outlook consistent with the latest developments.
4. 	Bank of Uganda adjusting the sterilisation mix, that is, buying and selling money on the market to emphasise preservation of our foreign exchange reserves.

The Ministry of Finance has also considered the implications of fiscal policy in view of the emerging decline in tax revenue. The current policy stance is that provided revenue shortfall is not so significant during this financial year, it will be compensated for by low absorption in some budgets instead of going in for a deficit budget.

To ensure that growth continues to be sustained at a high level, government will continue to increase investment in areas that address the constraints which I have already alluded to. As a consequence of these, domestic expenditures are targeted to increase from Shs 1.4 trillion actual spending in 2007/2008 to close to Shs 2.9 trillion that has been budgeted for in the current financial year. The full implementation of this will translate into a four percentage point of GDP increase, which is a much bigger stimulus than what is being offered by the developed countries.

In addition, government will speed up efficient and effective implementation of planned public investments directed to growth enhancing areas such as the roads, which I have already alluded to. This will in turn support domestic brands and address import medium-term growth and productivity.

Government will review its policy framework with a view to enhancing the flexibility of the economy to adjust to external shocks and to maintain competitiveness of the tradable sector of the economy. 

With the firm implementation of the policies outlined above, the economy will be able to maintain growth rates around the long-term average of six to seven percent even in the face of the global financial crisis. This rate, although lower than what we achieved last year, will be much better than many economies.

In conclusion, the outlook for Uganda’s economy still remains positive despite the current global crisis. The current policy framework remains strong and the overall economic fundamentals remain sound while the global economic crisis appears to be severe among industrial countries. 

The limited integration of Uganda’s economy into the global economy provides a safety net for the economy on three fronts: the regional demand for Uganda’s goods, which is robust; the structure of Uganda’s economy, which is such that we are engaged in production of commodities whose real output is not being compromised; and commodity prices on the world market are falling thus providing cheaper inputs for Uganda’s manufacturing sector. 

Measures have also been taken to speed up investments in infrastructure and accelerate intervention in agriculture to increase productivity so as to take advantage of the increased regional demand in order to sustain our balance of payment. These measures include strengthening the capacity of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) through increased technical assistance, reforming and refocusing NAADS, ensuring value addition, and catalysing commercial farmers to complete the value chain. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for the statement. Members, as we start please note that you have limited time; it is not open ended.

5.00
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Charles Oduman): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for finally coming up with this statement, which has been long awaited. 

When all is said and done, the situation is on the decline as properly painted by the honourable minister, and the overall effect is that we have anticipated growth going down. The importance of growth cannot be over emphasised in terms of the effect on the numbers of poor people. Research has shown that for every one percent drop in growth, there is an increase in the number of people captured in poverty by about 20 million. Now economic growth is anticipated to fall from the expected 8.7 percent to 6.2 percent; that calculation is self explanatory. The situation is quite bad and the impact of these crises directly goes to the poor. 

Arguments have been made in the past that the financial sector in Uganda is not extremely monetised especially for the rural poor. However, hon. Minister, you have painted the picture on exports and their outlook for the future; what kind of exports are we talking about? These are exports of largely raw materials, and it is the rural poor that are involved in that. 

When all said and done, we need to draw lessons from this crisis. The first thing is to accept, and I thank the honourable minister for doing that. In the past the ministry allowed everybody to issue a statement denying yet this does not solve any problem. Hon. Minister, I need to draw your attention in respect of this matter to the Public Finance Act section 10, paragraph (b) regarding the role of the Ministry of Finance. It says, “Keeping Parliament fully informed of the state of the economy of Uganda”. This is the role of the Minister of Finance and we expect you to carry it out, not at the prompting of the Opposition or the newspapers. It is your role to come here, pre-empt and show concern for the people who are directly affected by this. 

As I asked: what lessons do we learn? There is an umbilical cord that connects us, the poor nations, to the rich ones especially those that are directly affected now, namely the US and the UK. We are suffering and we should accept that because companies have collapsed, people have lost jobs and we have lost revenues from their earnings. So because of that umbilical cord, we must manage our dependence. What are you planning to do to deal with the dependence problem? 

Tomorrow we are going to have URA taking us, the MPs, through how best we can improve our tax base to reduce on dependence. I think that is a very good move. However, as we struggle with this and look at exports dwindling, especially the difference between exports and imports, it is going to be very bad over the long term. That reduces our long-term ability to sustain debt. 

Over the recent past we have gone through debt forgiveness but all of a sudden we are again seeing a barrage of requests and briefs to Parliament about borrowing. Given the declining position in terms of the trade balance, what are we doing to cope with the burden of debt given that the net debt position is going down? This is a critical area for us to look at. We must borrow only when it is inevitable. 

Talking about dependence, we need to guard all the national resources that are Ugandan. Ugandan resources must remain Ugandan reserves, and I want to talk about the issue of oil. As we speak, Nigeria is grappling harder than us because of the over integration of its economy into the international economy arising basically because of the oil sector, which they allowed to be driven by the international companies. Therefore, as we talk about oil, let patriotism come up at this stage and let nationalism arise. 

The oil reserves that have been discovered are Ugandan reserves. The way that we are going to proceed in the management of these reserves will determine how vulnerable this economy is going to be to external shocks, which we are exposed to because of dependency. Why shouldn’t we, because of nationalism, incorporate a Ugandan company to manage exploration? Why don’t we say, “Here is the oil that we have, let us hire somebody to explore this oil on our behalf”, and we pay this person; rather than saying, “Look here, we have oil, come and explore for us and pay some of it to us”. Who is the owner of these reserves? 

As we move forward from this point, and I know that most of these agreements have remained secret, we need to focus on the model that we are going to adopt.

Mr Speaker, about regulations, the UK and USA are where they are because of regulations. What are we doing to regulate secondary trading of instruments and mortgages? We have just passed the Mortgage Act here. The problem started because of prices of mortgages going down, the cost of borrowing going down substantially and everybody rushing to borrow using their homes and the subsequent trading in those instruments. There was no regulation at that secondary trading level. What are you going to do as the sector minister to deal with the regulation regarding secondary trading?

In my view, you need to take interest in the actions of Bank of Uganda. As you know, they have just reduced the bank rate. They have also, in the past, suspended trading in Treasury Bills. Whereas Bank of Uganda is autonomous in driving macro-economic policy, I think that the Ministry of Finance needs to take keen interest in the actions that are taken by Bank of Uganda in terms of their impact on the economy. 

We have said in the past that the way to reduce lending rates and the cost of borrowing would be for Bank of Uganda to reduce the bank rate. It has not done that in the past but has done it now. However, we have already moved to the alternative of having alternative lending arms like SACCOs for money to reach people in the countryside although that could have been done in the first place by Bank of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR ODUMAN: In summary, we are dependent on this country and it is good that the minister has come up to accept this. The way to proceed is to admit and say, for where there has been a shortfall, let us deal with it. Trade is a big problem, debt is going to choke us up and spending must be on priority programmes so that we weed out wasteful expenditure and move towards recovering this economy. I thank you.

5.11
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the minister for her long awaited statement. When I listened to the minister, her statement reads like, “It is terrible out there but Uganda is insulated; don’t worry, we are okay”. But in simple language, to me the statement reads like, “Things are bad and incomes have fallen”. So any sensible person must take steps to cut costs. This is what is happening everywhere. Companies and organisations have laid off their labour and there is a worldwide campaign to switch off power for one hour and to generally cut costs. 

Even for ordinary people out there, the first thing that they do when incomes fall or when hard times are expected is to sit down and think of cutting costs. People reserve money for rent and school fees and the first things that go out are beer and other luxuries. What I would like to ask of the minister is: what are we going to see in the next budget that will show that Uganda is worried about the recession? Where are we going to see budget cuts?

Mr Speaker, I was very interested to see what happened the last time we were invited to a US sponsored conference at the Protea Hotel on gas and oil. They invited many people and many Members of Parliament were there. The only refreshments that they served were six bottles of water, which were served to the front bench. The rest of us came, sat, listened, debated and after that went home. They did not serve tea, water or anything. They just hired a room and flew in an expert from the USA. I do not know whether they paid honoraria. I think hon. Mukitale was the only one who drank a bottle of water. 

The reason I am bringing this up is because we spend so much here. In Parliament, you go to a committee room and there are 20 people and loads and loads of tea, mandazis and chapatis. At the end of the year, I do not know how much we spend on that. Out of 20 people who are supposed to come, usually the average is about eight people so the rest of the food is usually taken away. 

Mr Speaker, now we have two presidential jets parked in the State House backyard. It is true! I think this is the only country that has two presidential jets. I am talking about things that are within our control. As regards the other things that the minister is talking about, we can try to do them and we hope that they will work but there are things like cutting our budget that are definitely within our control. We spend Shs 100 billion, I understand, in our budget on vehicles and their maintenance. I hear now that State House needs an extra Shs 20 billion or thereabouts and that hit the headlines. 

I would like to know from the minister what steps the government is taking to reduce our budget. I have heard the minister say for instance that arising out of the world recession -(Interruption)

MR SEBUNYA: I rise on a point of order. I think hon. Kamya is deceiving the House. When you encourage government to reduce spending - government is the biggest spender and the spender we all depend on - you will not be able to stimulate production or employment. In fact what we should encourage government to do is to spend on domestic arrears and domestic debts that we have such that the economy is revamped. We should not call for the government not to spend. Otherwise, the whole economy will be stuck. [HON: MEMBERS: “Order”.] She is not in order to encourage government to strain. (Laughter) 

Is she in order to suggest that the people of Uganda should be strained by this so-called cutting of costs and yet, when we cannot produce, we strain our population? She is not in order! (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think it is in order to listen to that information. Thank you for the information; you have passed on the information. (Laughter)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for giving way. Yes, you are right, government should spend, but when it is spending we should not again borrow from the same sector on which they are supposed to spend. When it is a deficit budget - I want to help you in economics –(Interjections)- yes, what it means is that the government goes to the public, borrows money, which should have been in the public for investment and employment. You cannot say the government should spend by borrowing from the same people. So I think what the honourable member is saying it is true. Where there is a deficit budget the government should cut its spending and when it cuts its spending it means that it should only spend where it is productive, not in consumption. (Prof. Kamuntu rose_) professor, you do not know anything. (Laughter)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi for that intervention. I think hon. Kasule Sebunya has to make a distinction between misuse and spending. I am talking about misuse of government funds. This has been a matter of public outcry; money should be put where it is productive like my colleague said. When the companies reduce expenditure on wages and other things, it does not mean that they do not want to spend. It means that they are controlling their expenditure and putting money where it should be put.

I am very interested in reducing government expenditure and putting money in investment. I would like to know whether in the coming budget we are really going to see the impact of money being - for instance, reducing money from fuel consumption to other investment programmes. The minister promised that we are likely to see an increase in domestic expenditure arising out of an increased economic activity, presumably the result of the credit crunch out there. 

But we know that about US $1 billion of our revenue comes from income from abroad, kyeyo, and we know how that happens. These people send it to their brother or their mother to build a house and to pay school fees. We already know Ugandans living abroad who send this kyeyo money how they are very worried about - many of them have lost their jobs and many of them are likely to lose their jobs. What is the impact of the likely loss of this second biggest revenue earner to the economy of the country?

The minister projected that Uganda is likely to benefit from reduced world commodity prices by buying cheap inputs for our manufacturing industry and therefore increase - that we will have a positive impact on agricultural sector. It seems to me that the minister seems to assume that the credit crunch will not affect Ugandans. Ugandans will have all the money to spend, while all the other people are so affected that prices go down. In Uganda we shall have all the money that we need to spend, that we shall be able to buy the products at the fallen prices. Is that what the minister intended us to understand?

And finally, I have stood before this House and bore testimony which I would like to bear once again as I wind up my submission that leaders should be mindful of reducing costs. At one time after CHOGM, I had the opportunity to go to the UK aboard Emirates and I travelled with three heads of state on a commercial airline. These were the Presidents of Guyana, Cyprus and Malta. They travelled business class with me and I actually sat and chatted with them. I did not see a very elaborate entourage around them; I did not see anything that showed that there are three heads of states in business class on Emirates. This was on the 24 November 2007 after CHOGM.

Is it possible that the leaders of this country, as we promote patriotism and as we respond to the credit crunch, is it possible that we can put these two things together and cut down our costs? I want to add that Malta, Cyprus and Guyana, each of them has almost twice the per capita of Uganda and the GDP of Uganda. In fact, I did ask them, “Why are you travelling like this?” and they said, “Our countries cannot afford it.” And I asked them, “Is it possible that you do not have private jets for heads of state?” And they told me, “We cannot afford it.” 

Mr Speaker, I thought it is extremely important that I bear this testimony to this country and I beg the ruling party to take this as information that could help us to show how other people show patriotism to their countries. I thank you.

5.25
MS ABIA BAKO (FDC, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, ARUA): Thank you, Mr Speaker. St Francis of Asisi at one time prayed to God, “Give us the strength to change what we can and the wisdom to understand what we cannot change.” It is a crisis and indeed I thank the minister for coming up with a statement. 

But fundamentally, we are a consumer nation. You are aware that the Shs 19.4 billion you got in excess just a month ago is a result of consumption tax and you have gone ahead to speculate very well how your Shs 36 billion investment in agriculture is going to deliver some stimulus in production in order to see us out of the food inflation.

The minister is interested in working with commercial farmers but we are aware, for example, that what is going on in this country at the moment is that commercial farmers include tea producers, sugar cane producers, the flower industry, limited dairy production at the rate of 32 percent for now and therefore the simplistic implication is that the food inflation is the result of restrained production. What does that mean? At the household level where consumption is at the peak, production is declining. 

Last year, food production declined by 6 percent; the year before it had declined by 8 percent and the cash crop sub-sector has continuously been declining in this country except for the flower industry. 

The most immediate implication is that this country is no longer food self-sufficient. Injecting Shs 36 billion only now in the commercial farms is a misdirected investment. Because if you walked into a household today and you looked at the farm size and the various crops that are being produced, you cannot put Shs 36 billion into commercial production and expect to stimulate production that will get this country out of the current food crisis and hence the food inflation.

In order for us to get out of this crisis, the kind of channelling stimulus packages for investment in various sectors needs to be people centred. How many commercial farms are we talking about? How much is dairy production? I buy milk on a daily basis and a litre of milk is going for Shs 950, and if I am to buy a tin of NIDO which is 900gms, I pay Shs 6,800. How much of this Shs 36 billion can secure Christine’s household milk self-sufficiency?

The stimulus package that the minister is proposing here in terms of road construction is no news. Where is the explanation for the Shs 1 trillion that this country invested in the ending financial year for us to demand that? Give us another explanation to address the crisis that we are facing? 

The preoccupation of the ICT ministry in this ending financial year has been the second phase of the national transmission backbone. Therefore, this is no news. If, Madam Minister, you went into the records, in fact the last policy statement, this is no news. And -(Interjections)- I am totally informed for now but maybe at an appropriate time - we are talking about investment in the public private partnership in the energy sector. As I talk now the current stimulus for revenue collection in this country rests on two prominent countries, the DRC and the Sudan. And Arua happens to be the regional capital for this kind of trade. 

As I talk now RECO that is supposed to provide electricity is insolvent. It has shut down; over 5,000 people have lost jobs. What is this joke about partnerships that they are going to generate some kind of employment when a whole region that feeds the treasury is in darkness? That is a big joke.

I am wondering how at a policy level USE and UPE are going to deliver us from the immediate crisis. When you are talking about reaping out of such investments, it is long-term. But we are saying the crisis is here. Here comes a situation where we are talking about guaranteeing a 50 percent loan for investment in agriculture. It is high time as a country we thought more than just surface thinking because without a national bank for proper investment in agriculture, with proper reduced streamlined lending rates, we are big time jokers because out of all the micro-finance institutions, none of them is very interested in lending for agricultural production because of the risks involved. My minister is ware of this. So, how can you say you are going to underwrite a 50 percent? This is a critical joke. (Laughter)

When I look at the minister saying in her concluding remarks that we are going to perform miracles by reforming and refocusing the NAADS and ensure value addition; has she looked into the PMA platform? And what is this value addition? How many projects have been in the Ministry of Agriculture related to value addition for this to become an issue that can be presented to an honourable House to demand the attention that this is going to deliver us out of a crisis? 

We are looking at a scenario where NAADS itself has been questioned and, Mr Speaker, you are even seeking for a workshop. Now we are waiting for that workshop – the crisis is here. What a big joke! 

5.33
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the report but I have some few clarifications. I would like to seek clarification from what has arisen from the presentation of the minister. 

One is on the interest rates. I have tried to follow this credit crunch crisis on radio and TVs as it affects other parts. What I learnt is that the interest rates are falling world over and in some places actually even below 1 percent. When I compare with the scenario here, the interest rates have actually gone up. Since Bank of Uganda is the regulator, what is it doing about these increasing interest rates here locally yet the world over, due to the credit crunch, the rates are actually falling?

Secondly, is the issue of our reserves; I believe our reserves are somewhere offshore and not locally in our Bank of Uganda. I do not know where our reserves are held but out there, banks are collapsing and they are being helped to survive. I was wondering whether our offshore reserves, especially government foreign exchange reserves, are kept safely. Are we safe? That is the clarification I want to seek. 

And with this crisis, which we are not sure when it will end, isn’t it logical that we relocate these reserves, perhaps in our own bank if it is possible? 

Thirdly, sometime back when the Shilling was appreciating very fast against the dollar, Bank of Uganda intervened to ensure it does not appreciate to affect some of the activities that are going on in the economy. But as of now, the Shilling has depreciated very much but I am not seeing any intervention by Bank of Uganda as they used to report in the papers. So, isn’t it time that Bank of Uganda intervened? About six months ago, the Shilling was at 1,650 to the dollar but now it is at 2,200. What intervention is Bank of Uganda planning to help the Shilling not to depreciate further? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.37
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to thank the minister for the comprehensive submission on the global crisis. I know we shall definitely be affected as a country, our Balance of Payments, GDP and everything, but that is not a problem to be put on the minister or the government because it originates from somewhere else.

However, there are issues we need to look at domestically. The minister has said that the growth of our economy will not be affected mainly because of the global economic recession. She has put rightly the measures that the government has put in place. I agree with her that the government has tried its level best. When we talk of growth, it is okay, but we are missing a point somewhere because growth and development in economics are two different things.  

We are looking at Uganda growing but is it growing with the majority of the citizens? So, that is an issue that you need to look at frankly because the majority of our people are growing poorer and it is just the few of us who are growing richer and richer each day. This is a problem that you need to look at so that the citizens of this country can enjoy. 

So, we should not promote growth; we should look at development in the true sense of it. This is because we can have the majority of this country being poor but the country moving on well. For instance, you find someone owning ten cars and someone else who cannot afford to buy a bicycle. This is not the country we need to live in. Madam Minister, you need to note that planning in this country has been ineffective somewhere. For example, the NAADS programme was running for a long period but later in the course, the President came up and said, “The thing is not functional,” and I agree with him. That means the planning is ineffective. We should have been able to detect this in the first or second year of its existence. But because we have ineffective planning, it took almost six to seven years and NAADS went on without the ministers noticing that there was a problem. This is very unbecoming, Mr Speaker. 

We need to take this country seriously. It is good that we have put the National Planning Authority in place although we do not know how it will work. We need to put our priorities where we have comparative advantage. For instance, when you look at agriculture, it is good that everybody admits that agriculture is the backbone, but it is also true that 68 percent are still engaged in subsistence farming. It is surprising that in our budget we are allocating less than 4 percent to this ministry. I fail to understand what direction we are taking. How can we say that this is the backbone of our economy but when it comes to budgeting we only allocate it less than 4 percent of the budget to it? Are we putting our priorities where we should put them?

People talked about value additions which have added to our comparative advantage. But that is just in words; I do not see it in practice. In reality we need to get organised and not deceive ourselves. We should first accept that there is a problem but that problem can be rectified. 

We can talk of developing but with the rampant corruption that we have in the country – and we have got to be serious – and I have examples in point. We say roads are the central point in development, that is true; but the type of roads matter. During the CHOGM period ministers came here requesting for money, Shs 1.1 trillion, to do and repair roads in Uganda, but go and see them now. We need to take our country seriously because we are not going away tomorrow. 

Also we should not politicise issues but give credit to government when it performs and criticise it where it fails –(Interjections)– yes, I am on the government side. There is no question about that but this is about our country. Whether you are on the government side or not we are here to live and our children will live in this country.

The other issue I have seen is that we are taking too much at time. For instance, the honourable minister talked about the social contract. It is true that the NRM has a social contract with the citizens of this country but we should not say, “We must complete everything within the five years.” This is why the SACCOS are failing. We took on, I think, over 1,000 SACCOS at a go instead of taking on one in a district and seeing how it works. But because we want to complete everything within the five years, which we can’t do -(Interruptions)- I understand the social contract very well. So, I think we need to be serious. 

All in all -(Interjections)- I am winding up. I am happy with the measures the government has put in place. I am happy with the progress because nobody in their right senses can say that Uganda is not moving on well. It is true we are moving on well but we are leaving the majority of this country outside the process of development. That is the problem. 

Otherwise, hon. Minister, we welcome you and we know you are going to move very well. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I think Rev. Kabushenga is coming to collect you soon. As I indicated earlier, there is a communion service for the Anglican Members. So, I think we should conclude this business by 6 o’clock. The Leader of the Opposition wants to make a contribution but I think it will be fair to give chance to the former Chairman of the Committee on National Economy also. (Laughter) 

5.45
MR IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI (NRM, Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this report. 

I realise that on page 3, the minister talks of the exports having increased by 1.6 percent compared to the same period the previous year. It would have been important that we know and compare it with what was planned because we had definitely anticipated an increment. So, it will really help us to get the right picture. 

On page 4, No. 11, the minister talks of remittances declining slightly. “Slightly” is relative. I would like to know how small “slightly” is or how big “slightly” is.

And on No. 12, the same page, she talks of the interest rate on Government Treasury Bills increasing. Since these bills are sold by Bank of Uganda and we are in this financial crisis period, wouldn’t it be appropriate for Bank of Uganda to keep the interest rates as low as possible so that the interest rates charged in commercial banks are also controlled? 

I do not agree with the minister when she says, “Despite the increase in interest rates, however, the demand for domestic bank credit remains strong, suggesting vibrant economic activity.” If there is no alternative, what did she expect the people who had taken up loans to do? They are definitely pressed but this is an addition to the high cost of production of our products and definitely it is reflected on the price of how much an ordinary person buys a commodity.

I would have loved the minister to tell us the effect of the financial crisis on employment. How many people are being laid off? We have heard that some companies are already laying off staff and it is alleged that it is a result of the financial crisis. Can she tell us to what extent Ugandans should get prepared?

Also, I know that the Minister of Finance came up with a supplementary expenditure which was approved by this Parliament. However, when we are in such a situation, should we look at spending more or we should look at readjusting our expenditure? And if we do so, on which areas should we concentrate? 

Mr Speaker, I want the minister and the entire government to know that the credit crunch is not a problem of Uganda and they should, therefore, prepare Ugandans for what they should expect. If we camouflage that things are normal and that business is as usual, people will continue with their usual ways when actually there is a big problem which Ugandans need to get prepared for. 

I, therefore, request the minister to help us provide to Ugandans more information about the effect of the credit crunch to an ordinary Ugandan. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.50
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA-LATIGO (FDC, Agago County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for her presentation but I thought it important that we really bring this discussion in proper perspective.

First of all, the minister rightly says that the crises were triggered outside of Uganda but she does not alert us to the fact that if there was an underground earthquake somewhere in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, it could trigger a Tsunami. Now, depending on whether you are positioned in the path of that Tsunami, although it has happened somewhere else, you will be swept.

Unfortunately the minister’s presentation, as my colleague who has just left the Floor said, did not give a projection as to the likely impact of what has happened outside us. On the contrary, when you look at most of the statistics that are provided for the minister to make a statement, the statistics are merely an attempt to calm our nerves and honestly play to a dangerous risk. For instance when you go to page 3 and you are talking about balance of payments, you will find that the statistics given after 2007 are those of the first half of 2008 when the problem had not even begun. Now that it has begun and reached us two years later, the comfort that these statistics give will not help us. 

MR OKECHO: Thank you for giving way, Leader of the Opposition. In situations like these where a crisis has just happened the impact are seen from marginal figures that changes from the previous period to this particular period. So I agree with the Leader of the Opposition that the whole picture should have been presented on a marginal basis. Thank you very much.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Secondly, I will give one single other statistic. The minister, on page 4, says that import demand remained strong and is estimated to have increased by 29 percent in the past half of the financial year. 

At the same time, they quietly say that the problem has been the high oil process. I suspect that these statistics were during the peak period when oil went up to US $140 per barrel. Obviously you will get an increment in import charges of this nature. It does not reflect comfort to us at all. 

Again when you look at what the minister said, she tells us that there is an opportunity in what is happening in regional trade and gives figures of increments of exports to regional countries. On page 5, she says, consequently food prices have been rising at the rate of about 27 percent per month between July 2008 and March 2009. This is to suggest that we are getting more money from food imports. 

But when you go to page 6, they talk about real sector. “While monthly food inflation also reduced from 1.6 to 1.1 percent ….” This is obviously a contradiction. If you have increments in food prices at a level of 27 percent, you cannot have a reduction in food inflation. It is not possible. 

Therefore, if you use these statistics and try to make us believe that things are okay, you are only deceiving yourself because at the end of the day, it is you the Minister of Finance who will be responsible for what will emerge. It is also important for your technocrats and unfortunately most of them supply side economists to help you give the right picture.

I want to also reiterate what my honourable colleague said about agriculture. When you talk about seizing opportunities in agriculture, just look at the example of Malawi and Kenya. What are the critical constraints in agriculture that you need to address as an intervention to ensure that you seize opportunities? Simple constraints like fertilizer prices. Because of the rise in fuel prices, fertilizer prices hit the roof. A bag of 50 kilogram fertilizers, Diamonium Phosphate, costs Shs 120,000 and to increase your production you need fertilizers. 

What Malawi did was to heavily subsidise fertilizers and make them available. Kenya recently said that by next year, they should be able to feed themselves as they heavily subsidised fertilizers. In our situation, that is not the case.

Finally, on interest rates, I want to reiterate what my brother said. If there is a credit crunch outside there -(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, let us put these figures in their proper context. I am going to inform you from the figures here. If you look at page 9, this is a very central figure. The point is made regarding the extent to which Uganda’s economy is integrated in the world economy. This is paragraph 31. To the extent that Uganda’s economy is 68 percent subsistence based, that provides a safety net, which should inform you without any cover up or giving you false comfort. This is a statistic that is very significant in the debate. 

I want to give you another statistic in the debate. I just want to show you on page 4, paragraph four where it says that Bank of Uganda reserves are currently at Shs 2.2 billion, which is sufficient to cover five months of imports. You know it only too well that in most countries the standard is three months of imports and this is five; others are one month. There are standard statistics and the professor knows it. I don’t need to labour this point. I can go further. Thank you very much.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank Prof. Kamuntu for the information. I will start with his last information. On page 8(d), the measures that you are now putting in place, you are saying that Bank of Uganda is adjusting the sterilisation mix to emphasise preservation of our foreign exchange. This tells you that inflows are being adversely affected. You admit that in your own statement when you talk about the economy not being connected to the international economy - every time you read your statement at the beginning of the year, you talk about the economy diversifying. We keep telling you that the economy is largely subsistence and to break out of subsistence, you have to invest in the subsistence sector, which is the agriculture that I was talking about -(Interjection)- let me finish the point that I was on. 

When there is a credit crunch outside and people cannot borrow from outside, there are two things that will happen. One of which my honourable colleague has said and that is that they will borrow domestically. 

The other thing that is a habit of the banks in this country is that you have let them fleece us when there are years when they get profits of 120 percent. Is it that the bank immediately adjusts for potential losses and the interest rates go up? This is what is happening. It is not increased borrowing by big companies but adjusting for potential losses. In fact they are just opportunistic and that is where regulation of interest rates matter. 

Lastly, in all those countries when they have got that kind of crisis, they need to make cheap credit available so that people can produce. On the contrary, our interest rate is going up. But when the Tsunami arrives, Madam Minister, we shall request you to make a further statement on this matter. Thank you very much.

6.01
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank all the contributors. Hon. Minister of Finance, I would advise you not to assume we are in a good place; we are in hot soup and I want to show you how you are. 

The moment Treasury Bills go up, that means most of the commercial banks will go to buy the Treasury Bills. That means money, which will remain for the private sector will be minimum and if it is less, that means it will be too expensive and lack of money for investment will lead to unemployment.

I want to also tell the minister, if she has been careful reading the newspapers, that there are many adverts in the papers by commercial banks advertising properties to be sold. Have you taken interest to know why? Under note 13, they are advertising properties for failure to pay loans because they have become too expensive to maintain. Even ministers are here running up and down and I am sure Prof. Kamuntu knows this.

This country of ours is an import country. An import country means we need dollars to import. If there is a credit crunch, that means remittances from abroad have gone down, and when remittances go down, it means the demand for the few dollars will go high, that is why you see dollars appreciating. And the moment the dollars appreciate, the imports will go down because the cost of goods will be high. And the moment the cost of the import goods is very high -(Interjections)– yes, I am teaching those of you who do not know economics. The moment the import goods go high, the imports will go down and URA collections will go down, and the moment URA collections go down, then the gap for the budget deficit increases. That is the dangerous point where we are.

To make matters worse, if the donors have a credit crunch in their country, the donors - you have even mentioned it yourself in section 13, you said that from October the inflows started declining. I can assure you the donor part is also going to decline and the moment the donor part declines, that means the part which is funded by donors will be affected -(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: For a change, hon. Nandala-Mafabi can give way. Let me just draw the attention of the House to page 5. You see, you could have remittances coming down from Ugandans working abroad; you could also have your exports in Europe coming down. But when we talk about export diversification, this is compensated for by a rise of export in the regional market, and that is the point being made on page 5 of the minister’s report.

A point is made that exports are on the rise; export receipts to Sudan and Democratic Republic of Congo grew 43 percent and 53 percent.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I thought Prof. Kamuntu knew what he was talking about. I can spot a full lorry of matooke, which is equal to maybe US $200 and they bring a pickup of goods from Kenya which is valued at more than US $2,000. So you can see the weights -(Prof. Kamuntu rose_)- please, professor, you should have some economics.

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up, hon. Nandala.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, on page 5, the minister very well says that international banks are here, that is very good to note. That means all the profits they are making in Uganda are being taken to their countries and you do not notice that. Bank charges are very high, if you went to the bank, if you have a lot of transactions on your account, you will discover at the end of the month you are spending half a million in form of bank charges.

The minister has left the populace to the mercies of these foreign banks. If these banks were local banks, like Nile Bank which Prof. Kamuntu let down, the money would have stayed in the economy but this money now goes out. This is very dangerous, Madam Minister, and you say you are patriotic! You are talking of a stimulus in the road sector, yes, you are right. We are happy that the government has put a stimulus in the road sector, Shs 1.1 trillion, but who are the contractors? Look at them; again they are international firms. 

You are referring to a stimulus in UK and in Spain because the money again which will be made here will be taken and what would be the stimulus here -(Prof. Kamuntu rose_)- you see Prof. Kamuntu, if you knew very well - you are not aware, but coffee prices have gone down. If you wanted to make a stimulus in Uganda, you should invest in the agricultural sector and that is what would have been the best stimulus but not you telling us that the road sector is doing that.

Mr Speaker, I want to conclude. A few minutes ago I checked on the exchange rate. Now the dollar is going at Shs 2,183. The minister is telling us on page 8(c) that she is revising the inflation -

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. You see professor, you are in charge of the ministry -

THE SPEAKER: The minister made a statement, those contributing if they had ideas of improving the situation, they should have indicated that, rather than – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Planning should have helped the Minister of Finance. I was talking about the exchange rates; right now it is Shs 2,183, which means when the minister says two things: one, the inflation has been revised, I do not know what you mean by revising inflation. If you revise upwards, you are telling us that we who have fixed incomes or whose incomes have fallen we should tighten our belts. You cannot tell us that the economy is stable when you are revising inflation.

Two, when you talk about having money, US $2.2 billion to cover five months, and you say standardisation mix – that means Bank of Uganda is not willing to go to the market. If it went there it would reduce the cover from five to three months, which is very dangerous. And then you come here and say our economy is doing very well! Madam Minister, for God’s sake, if you have a problem with your advisors in the Ministry of Finance, I am here to help you. I thank you.

6.10
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for the report. But as you are aware, the world underwent global financial crisis some time back. Unfortunately, it is today that we are receiving a report from the Minister of Finance on the effect of global financial crisis on our economy. It is again unfortunate that even in this report we have not seen highlighted impact on the citizen and the economy as a whole. 

What is here is what we have been doing. For instance, the Minister of Finance is saying we have injected Shs 1 trillion on roads as a way of stimulating our economy. But this is money we had given a long time ago and we are coming to the end of the Financial Year 2008/09. Hon. Minister, what you have given us here does not relate with what is affecting the common person in the country. I want to give an example: we had the problem of the crisis where you know our economy is dependent on imports. If you go to Kikuubo, our market vendors rely on products from Dubai, China and outside the Ugandan economy. But again you know there is increase in the prices of these products in those foreign countries and when it comes down here to our economy, the buyer who is the common citizen is buying it at a higher price which directly impacts on the income of this person. This is what we are not looking at.

If you go to the same Kikuubo traders, the URA is still taxing them the same amount of money that they used to tax before the credit crunch and financial crisis. You move down there and you will find most of them being thrown out of the market because they can no longer buy the products in Dubai and China. This is because what they are receiving and the tax being levied on them here has remained constant. So in the long run for them to increase on their sale and production they need to be supported by the ministry so that they can curb the effect of the high taxes. But this is what our ministry is not focussing on. 

The minister was talking about using education through USE and UPE as a way of stimulating the economy. The same ministry has taken almost three to four months without injecting funds to this UPE and seven months without injecting fund to USE. And then you are saying that is the basis of improving the economy and stimulating it? 

Lastly, what do we mean by economic growth versus economic development. I think the Minister of Finance needs to sit down and scrutinise economic growth versus development. Our growth is increasing and every financial year we come with a report of increasing economic growth and GDP, but if you go out and inspect the standard of living and the welfare of the citizens, it is apparently not seen. 

How do we relate economic growth with economic development? This is something I look at – we are not talking of how our economy is improving. Our economy is improving with what impact on the citizens? This to me should be the focus of the ministry. When we are talking of agriculture, how much are we injecting there? How have the standards of living of the people improved? By how much have we increased our economy as a result of injection into the agricultural sector? I look at the report itself telling us the trend of how we have been moving without showing us the impact of the global financial crisis into our economy. 

In my view, I think this report should not be thrown out but we should improve it because it does not reflect what is domestically happening to our economy. It only reflects on the statistical data from the Bank of Uganda and what we have collected but it does not show how it affects the citizen and how we can come out of the crisis. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank you very much for the contributions. I hope the Minister of Finance has taken note of the various views expressed and she will analyse them and use them for the betterment of the situation. We have come to the end of today’s business. 

The first item tomorrow will be the Bill the Minister of Health wants us to consider and then we shall consider other issues as they arise. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. You are invited for the communion service in the Members’ Lounge; you are encouraged to attend.

(The House rose at 6.17 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 April 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
