Thursday, 9 April 2009

Parliament met at 10.15 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are welcome and thank you for coming and keeping time.

10.16
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, you made it very clear that Parliament would sit at 9.30 a.m. This morning, I met two members of the Buganda Caucus and they told me that they were going to Garuga to meet the Vice-President and two coasters were parked here to pick members. I wonder whether you are aware. You made yourself very clear that Parliament would be meeting; now, what is the other meeting all about? They have four days from tomorrow free to do that business; why should that meeting interfere with the work of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: What I can say is that I am not privy to that meeting. I am not aware. You see, we are trying to clear work which is pending before us and then when we get disruptions of this kind, it is not good.

10.17
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter that touches the livelihood of my people. You remember since the beginning of last year, the Minister of Internal Affairs has consistently been saying a report regarding the settlement of the cattle keepers and cultivators will surface on the Floor of this House. Before we broke off for Christmas, I knew during such festivities leaders interact with their electorates, and I knew that my people would ask me together with my colleagues who come from the district about the fate of their wellbeing in the absence of this report. 

A promise was made that the report would be made before we go for Christmas. I waited and it never came. We went for the Christmas break and I told the people to be patient that the report would come as soon as Christmas ends. When we came back, I raised the same issue and the minister continued indicating to me that it would be made. We are again breaking off for Easter and I know I will interact with my people and they will seriously ask me about their fate. 

Like I told you, my people are cultivators and cattle keepers; they are basically peasants. Their life depends on soil. Some of them have been denied access to their gardens and these are almost four seasons before they cultivate and that means even the grazing is not taking place. I told this House that they can no longer get school fees for their children and yet government is advocating for education for all. They are now in absolute poverty.

The other day when I raised this matter, the Government Chief Whip rose to make an undertaking that they would come up with this report. I remember I asked the Government Chief Whip why he was making unnecessary obligations on behalf of the other ministers. The Chief Whip did indicate to this House that they were doing this work collectively and that it was not a responsibility of any single member of Cabinet to come up with this report, and owing to the fact that he was in charge a report would find its way to the Floor of this House. 

I would like to ask the ministers who are here and have always told me that they do it as a collective responsibility: can you tell me what I should go and tell my people about this report that is supposed to find its way to the Floor of this House regarding the settlement of cultivators and cattle keepers in Kasese? I have nothing to tell them. Otherwise, I am about to say that I am now at liberty in the absence of the government report to give them my personal opinion. Can I be guided on how to proceed?

THE SPEAKER: It is clear that there was an undertaking of a statement and unfortunately I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs here, but since there is a senior minister here, she can help.

10.21
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the issue being raised by my colleague from Kasese. I will undertake to bring to the attention of the Prime Minister this very urgent issue and he will be directing the minister responsible to give an answer to the Member of Parliament. Right now, I cannot exhaustively give any guidance to the issue which she has raised.

THE SPEAKER: I think to be precise, let the minister make a statement on Wednesday next week when we reconvene.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling. I have realised that in this Parliament when we give ministers days, they tend to assume that days are still coming. When you tell them a Thursday, they will tell you, “but another Thursday is still coming and I can make it on a Thursday”. I think it would be sufficient to even quote the date so that we know the exact date when the minister will be coming in with the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Wednesday, 15 April 2009.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am comfortable with that.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE SPEAKER: I think the question has been overtaken. It is about local elections and yesterday there were nominations and we know next month elections will be held. The process has started. Do we have to receive this? 

MR DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the guidance. But I think we are setting a very bad precedent, which is not in compliancy with our Rules of Procedure, especially in respect of members of Cabinet. This particular question was submitted to the Attorney-General, who is the custodian of all laws in this country, on the 25th day of January 2008. 

Even if we are saying this question has been overtaken by events, I would like to report that even in the ongoing by-elections for local councillors, the election for youth councillors is not reflected. I have received calls from the new districts that were created like Dokolo, Abim, Koboko and so on, from the youths who are intending to represent the views of the youth in the district, municipal and sub county councils complaining that this election is not reflected anywhere in the ongoing by-elections.

As I said, Mr Speaker, we are setting a bad precedent; ministers must respond to questions as required by our Rules of Procedure. I am saying this because Rule 31 (3) is very clear. If I had got the response from the minister – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think some weeks ago, I am the one who suggested that we need to look at our rules in respect of these questions so that if a question is supposed to be answered within three weeks, our rules should permit us to put that question on the Order Paper on the due date so that we see what happens. What I am saying is that this requires revising our rules to expressly say so. If this is adopted, I think your problems will have been solved.

MR KUBEKETERYA: To add on what hon. Obua was saying, the current by-elections of the local councillors are very selective. For example, in my district, elections for an LC III chairperson can take place but one councillor, say for women, is not elected. I have about four sub counties that have been affected in this way. It is on this basis that I support my colleagues in ensuring that the Attorney-General answers this question. 

THE SPEAKER: No, if this is what is happening, you can clearly state it in view of this and that. Ask why is it that in these sub counties, elections are not being held so that he can answer.

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, I feel the question is still valid. I am saying this because even the LC I elections have not been scheduled for elections. The minister responsible should inform us when these elections are going to be conducted. I would pray that the minister responds to this question especially in respect of those councils that have not been scheduled for elections. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, he cannot do that because the elections that you are talking about cannot be conducted because there is no law that can enable the country conduct them. The law requires adjustment following the case in the Constitutional Court. The administrative councils are not catered for. So, the law needs to be changed. I think what you can ask is the time when the law is going to be changed to allow such elections take off. That is the position. Can we get on another issue?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT BORROW UNITS OF ACCOUNT 52 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE TWO BUSINESS, TECHNICAL, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING INSTITUTIONS (BTVET), PLUS REHABILITATE 42 TRADITIONAL AND CONSTRUCT 15 SEED SECONDARY SCHOOLS (ADB EDUCATIONAL IV-POST PRIMARY EDUCATION AND TRAINING EXPANSION AND IMPROVEMENT) PROJECT

10.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow units of account 52 million from the African Development Bank to finance two business, technical, vocational education and training institutions, 42 traditional secondary schools to be rehabilitated and construction of 15 seed secondary schools. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, go on.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, this proposed project is linked to Uganda’s second and current long term and holistic education sector strategic plan, which has been running from 2004 and is expected to end in 2015. 

The project is underpinned by the country’s stated national goals for education: to promote citizenship, moral, ethical and spiritual values; to promote scientific and technical, and cultural knowledge, skills and attitudes; to eradicate illiteracy and equip individuals with basic skills and knowledge, and with ability to contribute to the building of an integrated self-sustaining and independent national economic. 

Two, the universal post primary education and training policy which is to cater for the lower secondary education from senior one to senior four, and primary seven enrolling institutions under the business, technical, vocational education and training (BTVET)

Objectives and goals 

The overriding development goal of the project is to develop the Government of Uganda to build a human capacity necessary for the country to reach its economic and social development goals.

Rationale

The proposed project focuses on the expansion and access by rehabilitating existing schools and adding new classrooms and other learning facilities. The other one is to cover expanding 15 seed secondary schools that were constructed under the ADF-Education-III project and have already shown progressive enrolment plus constructing new seed secondary schools. 

We also intend to improve quality through adequate training of school managers, teaching and support staff and providing learning materials. 

The Government of Uganda is targeting a selected number of old schools for rehabilitation and expansion to accommodate more students and for transforming them into regional centres of excellence.

The twelve new secondary schools have been located in sub-counties which do not have any form of USE participating schools in those sub-counties. 

All the schools covered under the project will be equipped with furniture, laboratory equipment and reagents, student textbooks and teachers’ guides as well as workshops for ICT equipment.

The terms and conditions of the loan
The African Development Bank loan will be extended to the Government of Uganda under the following terms:

1.	Loan amount units of account 52 million approximately $82.7 million
2.	The loan maturity will be a period of 50 years including 10 years of grace period and a service charge of 0.75 percent per annum on disbursed and outstanding balances.

My ministry considers the lending to be highly concessional and therefore submits it to this Parliament to approve accordingly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us now hear from the chairman of the committee.

10.34
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I present the report for the Committee on National Economy and a proposal by government to borrow units of account 52 million from ADB to finance two BTVET institutions, rehabilitate 42 traditional schools, expand 15 seed secondary schools and construct 12 new seed secondary schools under ADB for the post-primary education and training expansion and improvement project.

The background of the project

The loan request was brought to this Parliament by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development two weeks ago on 24 March 2009. This loan request was referred to our committee to scrutinise and subsequently bring this report as per the requirement of Article 159(3) of our Constitution and as per our Rules of Procedure, Rule 152. 

The proposed project is part of the ongoing intervention by government and the education sector to expand equitable access to primary education and training. 

Following the introduction of universal primary education in 1997 and universal post-primary education and training in 2007, the enrolment into both primary and secondary has drastically risen. 

As the sector implements UPET to expand equitable access to secondary education, government has planned to rehabilitate and develop 42 traditional existing secondary schools and expand two BTVET institutions as per Annex 1, 2, and 3. 

Annex 1 at the rear gives the list of the 42 beneficiary existing traditional schools plus the two BTVET schools. Annex 2 provides for the 15 seed secondary schools and Annex 3 provides for the new 12 seed secondary schools. 

The majority of the existing schools badly need rehabilitation as they are currently in a dilapidated state due to old age. During the 70s and 80s, there was no rehabilitation done to these schools. 

The 15 seed secondary schools constructed under the ADB III are to be expanded under the ADB IV loan. Twelve new secondary schools are to be constructed under this loan in sub-counties without any form of secondary school.

The introduction of UPE has augmented the problem, meaning that the number of pupils who are successfully completing primary education has increased and yet most of these schools have limited capacity to adequately accommodate the big numbers of students.

The rationale for this project therefore is, according to the overall goal of the loan and project, to help government build the human capacity necessary for the country to reach its economic and social development.

The project focus is to expand access by rehabilitating existing schools and adding new classrooms and other learning facilities to expand 15 seed secondary schools that have already shown over-enrolment, and constructing the 12 new schools. 

Of course, this will improve quality through training of school management, teaching and support staff. 

The project will target selected old schools for rehabilitation and expansion in order to accommodate more students and transform the schools into regional centres of excellence throughout the country.

It is expected that the centres of excellence will give the students across the country an opportunity to equitably compete with students attending the best schools in major urban areas.

The project will have a countrywide focus with the aim of benefiting secondary schools from all the regions of the country. School management and teaching staff in high enrolment schools will also benefit from further training. 

The criteria applied in selecting

The committee had to interrogate the criteria applied in selecting the existing traditional schools to be rehabilitated, expanded and transformed into these much needed centres of excellence. 

The important elements included, among others: 

Regional distribution whereby the committee requested the ministry to generate a map, which I will lay on Table, indicating distribution pattern of the cited locations. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, there has been an attempt to consider regional distribution, gender, meaning including girls secondary schools, the ownership and foundation body of the schools with preference to government founded schools, enrolment with original establishment of at least 600 students including three streams per class for ‘O’ Level and two streams per class for ‘A’ Level and equity especially addressing special needs education including schools for the severely impaired. 

In the case of existing seed schools, 15 of the schools showed that they were already over enrolled within the first two years of the operation and there was clear need for additional facilities to match the enrolment. The 12 new seed schools have been located in sub counties with no form of USE participating schools.

Mr Speaker, the committee methodology was as follows: 

We met the Ministry of Finance and in particular the Minister of State for Finance in charge of General Duties, hon. Jachan Omach. The committee used this to further understand loan performance, the debt strategy and how sustainable our debt is. The minister presented to the committee the debt strategy, which I will lay on Table. We also requested the minister to avail more copies to Members of Parliament.

In that meeting, the committee sought explanation regarding non-performing loans in other sectors. I would like to lay on Table a copy of the respective document and I request that at an appropriate time, the minister briefs the plenary about the performance of other loans.

The committee also met the Ministry of Education and Sports as we wanted to find out how education has been using their loans. It was reported by Ministry of Finance that Ministry of Education is the best performer in as far as loan performance is concerned. We would like to thank the senior Minister, hon. Namirembe Bitamazire, for making sure that our loans are not left non-performing.

We also met technical staff from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and others from Ministry of Education. This was because the committee’s interest was to make sure that there is planning and harmonisation between Ministry of Finance and the implementing ministry in this case Ministry of Education.

The committee then visited some of the earmarked schools for rehabilitation, some already existing seed schools and the ones to be expanded including the BTVET institutions. I refer you to Annex 4, which clearly shows the schools that the committee visited. We have to break into three groups: the eastern route, which started from Jinja Vocational through to Busoga College Mwiri up to Iganga Bukanga Seed School, Mbale Special Needs School, Bugunzu Seed School in Sironko, Masaba SS in Sironko and Nabumali High School in Mbale.

The first group to the east was led by my able vice chairperson hon. Wangwa Nagudi. The second group took the direction of Nakasongola, Luweero and Wakiso where we visited Kalongo Seed School, Luweero Seed School and Naguru Seed School in Wakiso. The third group took the direction of Masaka road starting with Mpigi and visited Bulamu Seed School, Kabasanda Technical Institute and also the central school of Kololo SS where it was unfortunately found that whereas the ministry is going to put money there, Uganda Land Commission has given away some land to a developer under unclear circumstances.

The committee noted that some schools that were originally listed at the time of loan request are since missing in the list. This is despite the fact that the committees of Social Services and Economy were consulted during the negotiation stage. These include Kigezi High School, Masaba SS and Kabalega SS. The minister tried to assure us that there is a bigger loan coming from World Bank, which should cater for these schools but the committee’s position is that it is wrong for technocrats to change what was originally presented to us. We therefore request that these original schools be included.

The committee further observed that access to quality education is hindered by exorbitant fees charged by some of the schools, which are fully funded by government. Some of the schools that we are going to rehabilitate are very good schools that most of us went through and are very proud of but it is true that these schools that used to admit people from all over the country and help us in the much needed patriotism are now only being accessed by the very rich and they are the very schools charging a lot of fees. We would want the ministry to regulate and make sure that these schools are affordable and that there is a ceiling on the school fees that they will charge.

The committee further observed that under decentralisation, there is a semblance of supervision and control of primary schools and UPE under the district. However, much as there is still room for improvement, the districts have no direct control as regards supervision of the secondary schools. We request the ministry to make sure that this anomaly is streamlined.

The committee further observed that some schools have no lunch arrangement for their children. This has affected enrolment in some of the seed schools where a lot of money has been invested by government. And the committee further observes actually that this lack of lunch is also one of the causes of high drop out and non competition in USE.

The committee also observes that there is high competition for good urban schools. This strains the facilities of the old schools in the urban centres.

We further noted cases of minor cracks on the floor of some of the seed schools under ADB III. The committee was however assured that cracks identified shall be rectified during the mandatory 12-months defects liability period.

The committee on this note will request to work with the sessional committees to step up monitoring and supervision of the performing loans so that after approval of this loan, the sessional committee working with the Committee on National Economy go further to see if the implementation is really being done.

The committee also in some instances found poor community mobilisation by people in some areas where seed schools have been established. We need to improve on this.

The committee also observed, if you see the distribution pattern, that the project was not mindful of emerging issues that there are some areas where there is increasing new population because of the oil discovery and the project does not seem to be taking care of that.

In some schools, work is behind schedule and we request the ministry to step up supervision to make sure all seed schools are completed.

Teachers Accommodation 

It was observed that the initial conception of the project did not anticipate staff accommodation. But we were informed that the project has since reviewed some costs including the metallic and chain link fence they were supposed to have and some money is being raised to make sure some staff quarters can be put in place.

The committee observed that most of these schools do not have land titles themselves. The titles are reported to be with the ministry. We would request that at least copies of these land titles are availed to these schools to avoid a scenario like Kololo SS where Uganda Land Commission can still give away their land.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommendations are as follows: 

The education sector should plan for rehabilitation of schools which are not covered by ADB IV project and we want assurance that this kind of project is going to roll out to all other very many deserving schools. 

The committee recommends that the ministry should consider regulating fees in these schools which are government-funded to avoid over-charging parents and to enable their access. 

Much as the ministry did inform us of the bursary which the project is going to give to about 1,000 children, we are interested in the criteria of how this bursary will be able to target and be accessed by the much needy in the rural areas.

The committee further recommends that as part of the project activities, the ministry plans to introduce awarding of scholarships for the needy but bright students. So, if the needy have to access these centres the committee recommends that the ministry must come up with a clear transparent criterion for awarding scholarships which must be presented to Parliament prior to implementation.

The sector should closely monitor construction of new seed schools and rehabilitation to be undertaken in the 42 traditional schools.

The increased population in Kampala and other growing urban centres has a direct effect on the enrolment in these schools. The Ministry of Education and Sports should address this through adequate resource allocation. 

The ministry should also empower districts to have a hand in management of secondary schools.

The ministry should also bring in emerging issues like what is expected in the Albert rift valley where we expect even the new loan possibly - when you talk of the technical schools, there is a much needed technical school to prepare Ugandans to get vocational skills as far as the early production scheme is concerned.

The committee further recommends that the seed schools which have no provision for accommodation of teachers, yet these are being built in very remote areas - the ministry must put up staff quarters and make it as a priority for every seed school.

The committee further urges the ministry to put in place mechanisms for continuous rehabilitation of schools and technical institutes. The schools on their own may not afford periodic maintenance. 

The committee did observe that there is very poor maintenance in schools. We need to step up the culture of maintenance by our head teachers, much as they are not engineers.

The committee recommends that whereas the ministry is putting more emphasis on secondary education, the committee strongly urges the ministry to urgently plan for more vocational and technical institute for practical training- because we believe most of our children will not access university tomorrow but we also know vocational and technical education is more relevant for these citizens when they come out.

The committee wishes to point put that the stakeholders are not yet aware of the Education Act, 2008 that was passed by this Parliament. The committee recommends that the ministry should sensitise the education stakeholders and work together with local governments to make sure that important provision of the Act is being operationalised.

The committee further recommends that government and the ministry must secure and get land titles for all government schools and institutions without the certificate of registration.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee on National Economy wishes to request this august House to approve this much needed loan so that the Government of Uganda can go ahead to conclude the loan documentation with the African Development Bank and be able to roll out this renovation and construction of these much needed schools.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and Members of the committee. I have just seen Annex 2 on your report, which lists over enrolled seed secondary schools for expansion. I have looked at it and seen one school has 395, another one has 160 and another of 142 - is that over enrolled? What does this over enrolment mean?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, we are talking of new seed schools day schools which actually do not have HSC. and have not gone up to S.4. So in some schools they have S.1 and S.2 as per USE; the best ones have up to S.3, which is the year of USE.

THE SPEAKER: What do you mean by over enrolled?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, what we mean by over enrolled is that the seed school is being given a single stream structure which should be ideally 45-50 per stream but some of them have already gotten enrolment up to 90 and 100.

THE SPEAKER: So these figures are in respect to one class?

MR MUKITALE: Yes, one stream. 

11.00
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report. I want to start by seeking clarification from the committee chair on the actual figure we are talking about. When you refer to the brief to Parliament presented by the minister, it includes tables that indicate a breakdown that finally comes to US$57.78 million. However, at the end of the brief, it talks about a need for Parliament to approve a loan of US$52 million. What is the breakdown of US$52 million? The breakdown we have is for US$57.78, so what brings about that difference?

Secondly, these are very hard times of the economic crisis. The minister on Tuesday presented a statement indicating to us the state of the economy. Yesterday, we received reports and presentations from URA where the minister also made a statement. The picture painted by URA was showing very difficult times in the economy. It indicated a drop in exports, a drop in remittances, and a drop in foreign direct investments.  

Sometime back, I also had a privilege to attend another workshop for accountants where we had a presenter from Economic Policy Research Centre – very seasoned – a former employee of Bank of Uganda. He painted a similar picture showing a drop in all those positive indicators. The statement we received on Tuesday only presented a political perspective using the same data from Bank of Uganda. Both these politicians and technocrats are using the same data from Bank of Uganda but arriving at different conclusions. So, Mr Speaker, I would urge Members to accept that the state of the economy is very bad and plan what to do. 

As we move in the direction of spending on infrastructure through borrowing, we have to ask a hard question. At a personal level, before you borrow money, you have to ask: “What am I borrowing money for?” obviously, you cannot go and borrow money from a microfinance institution or a SACCO to spend on chips. Like the minister said yesterday, the saving culture in Uganda is very bad, therefore when you do not save, you have nothing to invest! So she urged us to spend wisely and not on consumption expenditure. I thank you for that strong statement. 

As we look at this loan, which is well intended, I want us to weed out unnecessary spending within the loan. There has been a tendency to borrow money which is loaded with administrative costs. Those costs are usually an incentive to borrow because they provide employment. As we try to cope with these hard times, I am again urging Members to let their patriotism rise now and weed out these costs. 

The terms of the loan are that we repay the loan over a period of 50 years - ten years grace period and then 40 years. Mr Speaker, if you count 40 years from today, most of us will have reached our final destination. Therefore, who is going to pay this loan? We cannot borrow now to spend on tea and mandazi in the offices and offload that cost and burden for the next generation. It is very unfair and unpatriotic! I am going to move later that we remove such costs and find ways of meeting those costs within our local resources. 

Mr Speaker, if you look at the brief to Parliament by the hon. Minister, specifically on page 7, there are a lot of issues that are loaded there. It talks of goods works, services, operating costs and miscellaneous, on table 2 on page 7. Operating costs are taking two percent of the budget. Physical contingencies – we do not know that those are – take seven percent of the budget. This is on page 7 of the brief to Parliament by the Minister of Finance. It was presented sometime back.

THE SPEAKER: Which brief is that? I thought we are discussing a specific item.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I am discussing the report of the committee because it was based on the brief of the minister.

THE SPEAKER: But which brief are you referring to?

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, these briefs are presented to all Members of Parliament before the committee comes to present a report. So their report is based on the brief of the minister. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, you are referring to a document I do not have.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I can pass on my copy because I have what I want.

THE SPEAKER: But you are using it.

MR ODUMAN: I have what I need. 

So, we have administrative costs at two percent; physical contingencies at seven percent; and other contingencies at seven percent. So, we are talking about 16 percent of what is not directly going into infrastructural spending. 

During these hard economic times, yes we must spend but what should we spend on? We must spend on infrastructure. We cannot offload administrative costs to the next generation. I really want to emphasise that. Therefore, I move that Members consider this loan purely on the specific components that go directly into infrastructure and exclude the loaded administrative costs. 

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, my colleague, for giving way. You had earlier on asked a question as to whether it is 57 million or 52 million. That actually also explains your second concern. There is government counterpart funding and government is going to get a loan of only 52 million but the difference of about 5 million is going to be met by the Government of Uganda and that is the component which is covering other than infrastructure development. I think that is in the positive direction because when you borrow money and use it for infrastructure, you are helping the economy so that we are not affected by the credit crunch. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you for that information but as I said earlier, honourable members, we do not have a breakdown of the 52 million that we are requested to approve now. We are committing public funds, we are committing the nation and we are committing the next generation; we need that breakdown so that we are able to pronounce ourselves. That information is good but let it be here and we make a pronouncement on them.

The other issue is the issue of sustainability of these loans that we borrow. As I said the other day, a lot of requests are here for us to consider borrowing. My concern, and I share this with many Members, is the sustainability of these debts. There are benchmarks of assessment of how a nation can be deemed to be capable of meeting its loan obligations or not. Sometime back, there was a question on this Floor by a Member of the House, hon. Ross Euku, on debt sustainability. It came on the Order Paper but it disappeared. Now, we are moving to approve loans but we do not yet have the comfort regarding the direction in terms of committing the country. That statement is very urgent; it is very important and it is overdue. It should have been here yesterday. Because as you know, we have just woken up from a period where we have been begging these countries to forgive us and the countries are now sick. How can you beg a sick person to forgive you of his debts? 

Sometime back in 1929 during the great depression - Mr Speaker, this is useful history - the countries that were affected most were the countries that were indebted to the US, and that included Great Britain, Germany, and Latin America. What happened at that time is that when the US went into very bad times – (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, we are looking at the loan and the honourable colleague is telling us about the economic depression which all of us are aware of. Is it procedurally right for him to continue meandering on the past instead of telling us the merits and demerits of this loan? I discover that he is really derailing us. My opinion is that we must talk about this loan. So, is he procedurally right to continue meandering around and using a lot of nomenclature? 

THE SPEAKER: It is high time you really concluded.  

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. What I was saying, as I was concluding, is that the more you are indebted to a person in need or a country in need, the more you are vulnerable; that is a good case for Uganda. The countries we depend on have been literally defined as being in “intensive care”; that is what we are saying. I am saying that we should be careful about the extent and the level at which we are committing the country in debt because the countries that we are borrowing from are sick and that affects the long term sustainability of these debts. We are passing these debts and obligations to pay to the next generation. 

So, what happened then was that the US had to recall the loans back and Latin America now had to offload the products they had stockpiled into the market at cheap prices and their economy literally collapsed. This is as defined, Mr Speaker, the worst ever recession that we are having next to only that one. So, we have to be very careful.

As I conclude, hon. Minister, it is overdue that we receive an assurance from here in form of a formal statement regarding how we can sustain these debts. Actually I request that before you come back here for another loan. I thank you.

11.15
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Education is the key to life for everybody. If we did not have minimum qualifications to come here, we would not be here. So, I support any motion for money being borrowed to support education.

Mr Speaker, at one time my position was exactly like that of hon. Okello Oduman. I was scared of borrowing every week, every month but considering what happened a few years ago where the lenders pardoned us and cancelled all our loans and we started afresh, now I have no fears. (Laughter) Because the rate at which we are borrowing, and considering where our economy is going, there will soon come a time when we will be unable to service these loans and they will have no choice but to pardon us again. (Laughter) So, let us borrow and borrow and borrow. 

The only problem I have with borrowing money in this country is that the money is not seen on the ground. If actually we were using all the loans that we have borrowed properly, there would be no murram roads in Uganda by now. We would not have third world schools in Uganda by now but it is the use of the loans that we should emphasise. However, I have confidence in the Ministry of Education particularly in the minister. I believe that being an educationist, she will put the loan to the right use. So, I support this motion. 

Mr Speaker, I have seen in Annex 4 that Kololo S.S. is one of the beneficiaries of this loan but this school’s land is being given away for somebody to build a hospital there. Now, how will this affect the utilisation of this loan? I seek clarification from the minister and the chairperson of the committee. If the school has no land, let us shift the money for Kololo S.S. to another school. Was the land given away with the consent of the ministry? I do not see how Uganda Land Commission can go on giving away land of government institutions everyday and the ministries concerned or the departments concerned keep quiet.

If the construction of the hospital has not started, I would recommend that we reverse that allocation because Kololo S.S. is a very big school and it is still expanding. The minister should tell the House how her ministry would allow the school land to be given away. 

Mr Speaker, the selection of the beneficiary schools; I really prefer that all the stakeholders should be involved because when you bring it here, for me I see schools already selected. We also have schools with problems. Maybe if you involve Members of Parliament, you would really spread this thing better rather than coming here with the final decision that these are the schools which are going to benefit. It is not fair! In my constituency, I have three sub-counties without any secondary school. I am surprised to see that Chua is not featuring here. I think in future, let us do things openly on the table so that we serve the entire country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

11.21
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this motion. I would like to thank the minister and the committee for the reports brought to this House. 

I would like to declare that I support the motion because it is something that tries to address the educational needs of this country. Even if I support this motion, I have got concerns that I would like to bring to the notice of the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Finance and to the committee. 

One is how this money is going to be spent. It is my view that in their report, the committee has not been able to address this particular issue. I would have expected in one of the annexures the committee to have come up with estimates in terms of figures of the amounts of money that will go to particular schools. I know it is not too late to do this and I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Education to furnish us, even if it is at a later date, with the details of estimates of amounts that are expected to go to each of those schools.   

Secondly, I want to comment on the claim that this loan would lead us to the establishment of centres of excellence. I call this a claim because this is something we have been fighting about for a long time now. You will recall that many years ago, when most of us went through the educational system in this country, indeed we had centres of excellence in schools that produced high quality of citizens or students of this country. However, over the 23 years of the NRM Government, we have seen a downturn in the level of excellence in the schools in this country. Lango College, where I went through, was a super school and I am proud that I went through Lango College. Layibi College, Kigezi College, Kibuli Secondary School, Nyakashura Secondary School, Tororo Girls Secondary School, Nabumali High School were all centres of excellence. 

THE SPEAKER: St Mary’s College Kisubi.

MR AMURIAT: Yes, it still is -(Laughter)- I know that is in the interest of the Speaker; it still is.  Teso College, Sir Samuel Baker; most of these schools have got eroded systematically and can no longer pride over being centres of excellence. 

MR ODIT: Thank you, honourable Engineer for giving way. May I inform you that the same Lango College also produced one of the best economists we have as the Minister of General Duties in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Mr Omach Jachan. Thank you very much. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, for that information. All along I thought that he had gone through Nyapea College. But what am trying to develop is the fact that infrastructure alone is not going to cause change in education. We might have beautiful schools, beautiful chairs and desks for the pupils, beautiful compounds, we may even survey the pieces of land on which these schools stand but this alone is not going to bring change to the standards of education in this country. I would, therefore, like to be persuaded by the Ministry of Education and Sports how they would like to bring this dream of causing this change into reality so that once again in this country we might have centres of excellence in secondary schools?

I would like to agree with the committee when they equivocally raised the issue of school fees to secondary schools. Mr Speaker, today the school that you went to, a student coming from a rural area like my village cannot afford to go to. St Mary’s College Kisubi stands at about Ugshs 1.0 million when you want a child to enrol in senior five or senior one. So, I would like to demand of the Ministry of Education and Sports for a formula that they are going to use to ensure that children who are brilliant and yet unable to pay fees can be accommodated in these schools. Remember that it is posterity that is going to pay back this loan, as our Minister of Finance so clearly elucidated, and that posterity should benefit across the board both poor and rich. 

My other concern is whether the construction projects are going to be fully funded. Many times, we have passed loans here but government goes and burdens the peasants that it is over stretched beyond capacity to produce building materials. How far will this co-funding go? Is it going to demand of the local communities to contribute bricks and other local materials? Are these full contracts? If they are not, we need to know so that we may go and help our communities or mobilize them. 

My second last point, Mr Speaker, is whether within the infrastructure, development laboratories are catered for. Science is at my heart, on top of my agenda, and I believe this is the direction that the country is taking. So, I would like to know whether science laboratories are specifically spelt out especially in the 12 new seed schools that you intend to construct. 

I would like to know what happened with the policy of technical schools per sub-county. I remember this was a high flyer of government; they came here to tell us they support technical education as a means of offloading some of the UPE graduates that may not have the opportunity to pursue secondary education. This has fallen on hard grounds. I do not see government going in the direction of developing technical institutions in the sub-counties. Certainly, in my sub-county there isn’t one and I would like to ask you, hon. Minister, to afford us an explanation. 

Finally, as I sit down, I would like to offer thanks to government for at last remembering Atutur Secondary School. We have pushed so hard over the years to ensure that Atutur sub-county, which is in my constituency, could get a secondary school. At long last, I have seen the efforts of my struggle and I would like to thank you for accepting to offer us this secondary school albeit under pressure. I know this probably would not have come. We as a community will be keen to look at the standards, to supervise this work and ensure that construction is done according to standards.

Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity and I beg to support the motion before the House.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have realised that many of you want to make contributions on this motion because it is affecting all of us. Good enough, it is spread all over Uganda as I have seen from the list of schools. I would, therefore, appeal to you to use only four minutes and when you are about to reach four minutes, the bell rings so that I can cover as many as possible. Otherwise, if we go on for 15 minutes then it will not be possible. 

11.33
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy for the good report. I just have a few comments to make.

I support the motion and I want to urge the Members to support it because it is only patriotic that we support the education sector in this country. Having said that, I just want to raise some few issues, some of which will require clarification either from the chairperson or the minister. One, probably we need to review our rules so that a loan like this that affects a sector where there is a sessional committee handling that sector, somehow that committee also gets involved to support the National Economy Committee. 

If the social services committee at some stage had also got involved, probably we would have provided some useful information to the ministry or the committee. I am hearing voices but I am the vice chairperson of the committee and formally, I am not aware. I am sorry if the committee did get involved but in the methodology presented by the committee, I do not see the Social Services Committee mentioned. If we had been consulted, we would have advised on issues like laboratories, teachers’ houses, technical and vocational schools. We would have improved the kind of issues which are being suggested for this loan, if we are going to improve the quality of education in this country.

I do appreciate that the ministry has tried to include various schools cutting across the regions, the foundation bodies and many interests especially when you look at the traditional schools. However, I do not know the criterion that was used by the ministry to come up with this list. If I focus on our region, Kigezi, you talk of traditional schools and schools of excellence but you leave out Kigezi High School, which was started in 1922 and has produced very many distinguished members of society like hon. Bahati, the Governor Bank of Uganda, the Minister for Security and many others. For us in Kigezi, we feel such a school should not miss on this list. 

I would like to know how transparent the process was in arriving at this list, so that all of us get satisfied. We are the ones to help you explain when we go back to the people because some of these will raise political questions. We want the minister –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Chris, for giving me an opportunity to give some information to you. When you consider the list of the 42 traditional schools, they are very well known. When you go to the North, you know Lango College cannot miss on the list. In the east, Teso College cannot miss. If you go to mid-west, Kabalega cannot miss on the traditional schools’ list. However, if you look at this list, out of the 42 traditional schools, 12 were established after 1980. That cannot be a traditional school in my opinion. We are talking about schools that taught hon. Kivejinja, Mama Bitamazire and people of that nature. 

The first list that was given to this House had all these traditional schools, and I think we should not allow this kind of doctoring and moving of information by the technical people. That is why the committee said it is not too late; the House can even make some resolutions and recommendations about traditional schools so that we are sure we are talking about traditional schools. These other schools can come later in the loan that the Minister of Education is talking about. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, hon. Bahati. That is a very good submission you are giving. However, I would like you to clarify whether that submission you are making, since you are a member of the committee, is captured within the report you have given us - that as Parliament we can include these traditional schools that have not been included. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, hon. Banyenzaki and hon. Bahati. The issue being raised is that a list was submitted to this House and at some point, without consultation, the list was changed. We would want this process to be transparent. I think as members are saying, it is not too late for us to take back this list and necessary consultations are made so that we come up with a list which is acceptable to all of us. 

Finally, the committee correctly observes that some of the seed schools which have just been constructed, some of which have not been completed, already have cracks. One of the problems we have in this country is that there are a number of projects which are executed by the central ministries and they do not involve the local governments. This not only happens with Ministry of Education but even Ministry of Health and Ministry of Works. There are contracts which are awarded from the centre and the districts are not informed or even involved and they do not supervise these works. 

We have had problems in Kanungu where roads are constructed by contractors identified from the centre and when they are handed over, two percent of the work has been done. There is a specific road on which Shs 500 million was spent but the road is impassable two months after completion. 

I want to urge the ministers to come up with guidelines so that even if a contract is awarded at the central level, the district engineers and the leadership at the district level are involved in the supervision and monitoring of the works which you have commissioned. Other than that, we are going to spend billions of money and the work which is being done will not be quality work. 

I support the motion but I request that this Parliament resolves that this list be revisited so that all of us get satisfied, especially some of us who have regional issues that would address our politics but also satisfy the concerns that we have. Thank you.

11.41
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and I request that we pass it now because it is very important. I thank the committee for the field visits they made. What they have seen on ground is reflected on paper, and therefore I am happy with the work they have done. 

About the seed schools, I want to talk about the design and award of contracts from the centre. These schools have been designed centrally, and the contracts have been awarded from here. These people just go on the ground to set up the schools. However, when you see the design, the contract and the amount of money awarded just for a classroom, in my district it would be money that can even build two blocks or complete a classroom plus a teacher’s house. So, I am wondering why it is very expensive to build just one classroom in the central region and not in the districts, yet we use the same currency. These people are not using different currency, say the dollar. I wish the chairperson of the committee would make that clear to me.

Despite that, I would like to support the committee’s recommendation to build teachers houses in these schools; that is very important. I am saying this because the schools are located in isolated places, especially in my district. The teachers sleep about five kilometres away. Head teachers have to ride bicycles every morning to the schools to perform their duties. In the evening when all of them leave for their homes, the school property is left unattended to and anything could happen. So, when Government builds houses within the schools, it will help save this situation. The teachers could even provide security, in light of what is going on in our schools; our schools are burning day and night.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Government for considering Yumbe in terms of education, the quality not being an important issue. When people talk about traditional schools, there is nothing in Yumbe to talk about because we have just come on board. It is this Government that has built blocks for secondary schools from one sub-county to the other. Therefore, credit needs to be given to Government.

Lastly, I would like to say that I hope and pray that the schools listed here do not disappear at the implementation stage. I am saying this because I am worried. My district is one of the beneficiaries and if there will be any district to be deleted, it might be the one. That is why I am praying that this should not happen. I also pray that the schools that are not appearing on this list be considered. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.46
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for coming up with the design to utilise this loan. However, I would like to say that we should stop this politics while rendering services to this country. Let us be more genuine. Some people say while the sheep must be protected from the hyenas, the hyenas should not go hungry. You are talking about traditional schools, but anybody who has been to Mbarara – I studied at Kabalega S.S.S. - can look at Mbarara High School and Mary Hill; you would not accept to grant any shilling to those schools. You would not!

My request is for you, hon. Bitamazire, to put the map of Uganda on your table and let people go there to physically visit the traditional schools you are talking about. There are some schools that have been around for so many years and are now dilapidated; they need some bit of coating and some extra buildings. 

You people who go to Masindi, look at Kabalega S.S.S and compare it with Mary Hill in Mbarara – new buildings are all over –(Interjections)– Yes, that is where I come from but I am a nationalist.

Secondly, why should we have this politics of fidgeting around with schools? One day you will pay for your sins. Do you know that people have been accusing me for having not constructed roads in my area yet I chaired the committee on works? I have told them that I was more concerned with the roads in Kisoro, Bundibugyo, Kapchorwa and Karamoja. That is what we should do as leaders.

It is true I do not have a tarmac road to Bukanga, but when we talk about seed schools, – I took the whole committee on Social Services to Bukanga – everything goes to Isingiro but hon. Minister, there is s difference between Isingiro and Bukanga. The Bukanga that is appearing here is in Busoga. Don’t you think we should have something?

My suggestion is that we should be consistent. If you are saying the project will cover one secondary school per sub-county, let your officers get out of that building, go and visit the whole country. We can get in touch with them as Members of Parliament. Yesterday, for example, we had very good discussions with URA and we were able to compare notes on a number of issues.

Like hon. Okello-Okello said, let us put things on table so that we do not continue getting complaints. That way, we will all be happy. You have the money and that is why Ntare School is in good shape. The President goes there to give them money, but do you know how much the schools fees is? It is Shs 700,000. My young boy is in Buddo and we pay Shs 700,000 but they do not feed them. So, why do we have to add more money to some of these schools that are well off with the students paying handsomely? Look at Nabinsusa; do you know how much the students pay? As the Minister, you know that you cannot even write a letter to the headmistress of Nabinsusa for a place; you cannot!

My other suggestion is that we should look at the genuine traditional schools. We should be consistent so that each sub-county in this country gets a seed school for us all to move on. The other time we approved 61 seed schools for some districts but some had only two, and I can see some of them appearing in this list. Are we really doing a service to this country?

I support the motion but I would like to ask you next time to be more nationalistic. We should not be swept by trivial interests. I thank you.
11.50

MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion but with reservations right from the first page of the committee’s report on the notion of existing traditional secondary schools, to the annex here attached. 

I would like to get clarification from the Minister on which schools are traditional secondary schools. I know that Kabalega Secondary School was established in 1964 and has been constructed under the IDA I Programme. The two blocks were constructed in 1968 under the IDA II Programme. However, if you visited this school today, you will find it in a dilapidated state.

When the minister presented a summary of this loan to this Parliament, the list of traditional schools was presented here and these schools were there. I wonder how the minister, all of a sudden, brings in those schools which were constructed in the 1980s. We have so many schools which were constructed in the 1980s and now they constitute the traditional secondary schools? I want a clarification on this issue. 

The district leadership was consulted when the ministry was going to meet the donors concerning this loan, and they know that these traditional schools are supposed to be part of the schools that have to be renovated. It is on this note that I want to urge this House to demand for the original list of the traditional schools which was submitted before this House. Otherwise, if we leave it to go the way it is, we shall have so much of what ministers present before this House altered at the end of the day.

Mr Speaker, on page 2 the committee talks about the targeted secondary schools for rehabilitation to accommodate more schools and to transform them into centres of excellence. Now, I have gone through the map of Uganda which has been laid on the Table. I would like these centres of excellence to be equitably distributed throughout the country. On this map, the whole of the northern region - Kitgum, Kaabong, Kotido, Moroto and Nakapiripirit - does not have any school which is supposed to benefit. When you come down, you will see that Kiboga, Masindi, Buliisa, Kibaale and even Mubende also do not have any schools that are supposed to benefit. 

We are saying that we have to build this country and each part of this country has to receive the facility like any other citizen. So, I would love the ministry and even the Ministry of Finance to go back to the drawing board and make sure that these centres of excellence are equitably distributed throughout the country.

The committee has talked about the expansion under the ADB IV and the constructing of the 12 new seed secondary schools. The justification is that these seed schools are going to be constructed in those sub-counties which do not have any secondary school. I feel this statement is not complete. I am aware of those sub-counties in my district which do not have any secondary school. These are sub-counties like Nyangahya, Karujubu, Tujunjubwa. These sub-counties do not have any secondary school and yet here we have introduced UPE. Can we know first and foremost which sub-counties are going to benefit? Two, can we also be informed of when these other sub-counties which do not have secondary schools will get secondary schools?

I also want to talk about the committee’s observation No.4 on children not having lunch. Sometime back in 2008, we passed the Education Act and we included a clause which gave a parent a voluntary option to contribute towards his/her child’s education. I feel that we shall need to amend this clause of that Act one time because once we leave the parent to volunteer to contribute to his or her child’s education, then we shall not be helping this country. I think that is even why some of the parents are failing to feed their children. They are just volunteering. 
I feel we need to go back to the drawing board as Parliament and as a ministry and see how we can help these children to be fed. If we leave this clause in the law that we passed, we are likely to lose out because you cannot do anything when a parent is only being a volunteer. It is up to him or her to feed the child or not to. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

11.57
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I respect the opportunity. 

I want to thank the committee for the report and in particular for the visit they made to Masaba Senior Secondary School although it has been deleted from the list now. I also want to thank the minister in charge of borrowing for borrowing this money for the infrastructure in many schools.

Mr Speaker, if the principle is that traditional schools must be rehabilitated, we must stick to that principle. If you mention traditional schools in eastern Uganda and you mention Teso College Aloet, Ngora High, Nabumali High, Mbale SS, Sebei College Tegeres, Tororo, Bukedi, Kachonga, St Peter’s, Busoga College Mwiri, Iganga and you do not mention Masaba SS, the list is not complete. (Applause)

I will only support the motion if –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The minister is giving you information.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. The ground at Masaba SS will be broken in May, that is, next month. Masaba SS is under the project which is codenamed “ADB III, Phase II”. I will be there to break the ground for Masaba SS. I thank you. (Applause)

MR KAJEKE: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for that clarification, but that is not the end because other traditional schools like Kabalega, Kigezi High and Mbarara High School are not part of the project. We need all these traditional schools to be part of this project. Otherwise, the principle of – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member isn’t No.5 satisfying?  

MR KAJEKE: Mr Speaker, I am talking about the principle of traditional schools. I have already seen Mbale SS.

THE SPEAKER: Mbale SS is a traditional school. It was founded in 1954. Isn’t it a traditional school? Ok you proceed.

MR KAJEKE: Mr Speaker, I am aware that Mbale SS is part of the traditional schools and I am very happy that it is on the list. However, I am saying that other traditional schools must also be on the list so that we develop the country equally.

THE SPEAKER: But the other members were saying that we should look at the country as a whole because you have to look at Yumbe, Abim, Kisoro, Masaka, Kalangala. That is how you become fair.

MR KAJEKE: Mr Speaker, this is why I am talking about Kigezi High School, Kabalega and even Masaba Senior Secondary School, which is not in Mbale but in Sironko District. I am talking generally and saying that all traditional schools must be rehabilitated countrywide.

I have a lot of attachment to Masaba Senior Secondary School, and I am happy that the honourable minister has said it is going to be part of the project. This is because if it was not for that school, you would not be here with me. I went to that school right from senior one to senior six. I passed my O’ Level in first grade and I also passed A’ Level and joined Makerere University on government sponsorship. By the way, that time they were only admitting 2000 students so when you see me serious on the issue of this school, it is because I have those emotional attachments.

Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with the committee on the recommendation that we should not only emphasise secondary schools but technical schools as well. We have Mbale School of Hygiene in Mbale, for example. The situation there is bad. The last time I visited that school, I was told that hon. Gabriel Opio had been there. This was before he moved to gender. I want to report to you that the situation has worsened. The principal has been there for 16 years and the board for five years without any changes or meetings. The situation is very bad and I would like the Minister of Education to take note because the school is in a sorry state.

Finally, I want to humbly request those who are going to implement this programme that this money must serve the purpose for which we are approving this loan. Many loans have been approved but when you go on the ground, there is nothing. This time round, please be patriotic. We need this money to serve its purpose. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.03
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise with the motto of St Mary’s Kitende in mind. I was teaching there before I joined this House, and the motto is: “Giving education as a priority”. 

I thank the minister so much for bringing this loan request and I thank the committee for its observations, recommendations and bringing the report in time. I want to assure the minister that as regards education and health, when you come seeking for a loan you will never go wrong with this House. We will always give you support so long as we bear strong attachments to the areas to be covered.

I feel that after the renovation of these traditional schools, the next agenda on the ministry’s list should be staff quarters. In fact, talking about the traditional schools propels me to think about the issue that the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak raised in this House on structures that were roofed with asbestos. It is my humble wish and prayer that after this money has catered for those schools, the remaining will be used to address other areas that warrant urgent attention. 

Going back to the issue of teachers’ quarters, I speak for the plight of the female teachers. Because of lack of staff quarters, very many schools in the countryside do not have female teachers. We go to mentor the girl child and you have no female teacher to refer to. Those who are there ride long distances with children on their backs to go and teach. This is too much for the 21st Century when we are talking about the modernisation that we feel we have. 

Because of lack of teacher’s quarters, we are producing very bad results as far as third world schools, schools in newly formed districts and those in hard-to-reach areas are concerned. So honourable minister, it is my dream and prayer that next time on your agenda and at the back of your mind, you think about teachers’ quarters as an urgent matter; and the earlier, the better.

Page No.4 of the committee’s report handles lunch for the children. I will not dwell on this much because it has already been echoed. However, I want to look at this in view of guarding the school land that we have. Government is on rampage as far as giving out land is concerned. I have been attending the Public Accounts Committee since I joined this House. You really feel your heart becoming bitter when ministries come professing that they are against giving out ministry’s land. A case in point is the Ministry of Information on the UBC land around Nakasero and Bugolobi. The ministry protested this. Hon. Mukula is also on record and even supported a motion in this House against the giving away of the Butabika land. 

I feel that the ministry should guard school land especially those schools that are 100 percent government aided and owned. If we had organised administration in schools, they would even be producing food. We used to have school gardens during our times and some schools can even produce potatoes, cassava and maize to supplement whatever is given to the children as lunch.

Still on Page No.4 - cracking of the structures - something was mentioned about the ceilings. It states here that the issue of the ceilings came as an oversight and the monies that were supposed to be used for the structures will now be used for some other things. Next time when we are planning, we should not look at this as an oversight. A teacher cannot teach when the rain is hitting very hard on the roof and you expect communication to take place. When you give information, the students are supposed to give feedback to prove that they understand. If the rains are going to fall hard on the roofs that are being constructed by government in 2008, 2009 or 2010 - I would expect them to be decent classes not classes where the teacher is competing with the rain by shouting at the top of his or her voice. 

As I look at the list on schedule (b), I want to say that each time results are released by the Ministry of Education, my heart beats very hard. I know Kaberamaido will again be leading from the tail among the worst performing districts. In your list of the seed schools, I do not see Kaberamaido anywhere around the corridors. I have nine sub-counties but even the town council does not have a school that Government can claim ownership. I have Ochero Sub-County, I have Lwala Sub County; all these do not have a single Government school, not even a private school. So it is time you thought about us and considered us.

I want to thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and I pray that the loan does what it is intended to do. (Hon. Odonga Otto rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But I chose hon. Akena and I think he is covering you. Hon. Otto, Akena can represent that region. (Laughter)

12.25
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister and the committee for having come up with this loan and for a good report. Let me take this opportunity to guide the country in my new portfolio as a Shadow Minister in charge of Information and National Guidance. (Applause)

If we want this country to develop, if we want Africa to develop, we must work on our human resource. We must develop and give resources and skills to human resource. We should be asking ourselves why we are endowed by nature and yet we are backward. The only missing link is highly developed human resource. The moment we have done that, we will transform our natural resources into finished goods and we shall not need to borrow. This loan therefore meets my objective and my interest. 

When you look at what they are calling “traditional schools”, some of us failed to understand which policy this government is pursuing in as far as education is concerned. Last week, I returned from Kenya and I passed via Tororo. I looked at Tororo Girls School where the Minister of Education and Sports I understand was a headmistress at one time, the school is in a sorry state; none of you here can take their children there. So, this is the best thing that we could do as a country, as Parliament. 

I understand there are so many private schools in the country which are good, but I have said in this House and I want to say it again, the role of developing human resource lies solely on the shoulders of Government and no one else. That is why I support this loan request. 

The biggest issue I have is that these schools are charging the highest school fees in the country and yet they are Government funded. Some of us expect them to be reasonable to regulate private schools, but nothing! 

When I went to school, we had what we called development fund, which was included in our school fees. The import of these monies was to maintain schools. May I know why these schools are not being maintained and yet you are charging high school fees? Where are we putting the money? Why don’t we develop a culture of maintenance in this country? This is even the same reason why our roads are in a bad state as we watch; the culture of maintenance is not part of us. How can you charge Shs 1 million per student and you do not even buy paint to facelift some of these schools? You are forcing Parliament and Government to borrow money even when you are making money; does it make sense? But we shall give them the money.

Mr Speaker, we should be very careful about the way we use terms and words. What do you mean by “traditional schools”? What about some of us in Kasese who saw the first secondary school in 1973? Does it meet the term you are using? I am glad that my school of 1982 is included on the list of the traditional schools. (Applause) My prayer is, let us not use terminologies to confuse the public and the House. We should have said we are beginning with the first schools and then we move on to ours which started in 1973.

I would like to inform you that this school you have selected from Kasese is near my home. I expect that the money you give this school will be spent on that school, otherwise we shall cause problems. We shall do the supervision the way it is demanded from us. So, do not mess with that school. It is under the watchful eye of our kingdom –(Interjections) - The Rwenzururu Kingdom; you know it. 

I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members for giving me the opportunity to guide the country and pass the information. (Laughter)

12.17
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to raise a voice of caution. Much as I support anything which will deal with education, I am cautious at the rate at which we are borrowing. I do not share the sentiments that we should continue borrowing because we are going to be forgiven of debt.

We must be cautious about how we handle these matters, and the caution I wish to extend is that recently, I was touring certain parts of Eastern Uganda and the weather had caused a lot of damage but the buildings that suffered the most damage in the area of education were schools built in the 1990s. The schools which were built earlier were able to withstand the vagrancies of the weather. Now, if we are borrowing money to put up schools that will not last until the next Parliament and yet we have 50 years to pay, I worry. 

Already in the report, there are new schools which have cracked floors and other problems. This loan is going for 50 years. Long before we get the benefits from this loan, the institutions established may not be in existence. I only wish and pray that from all this money that we borrow – because we have borrowed a lot since I joined this Parliament – we see results. With this 10 year grace period, members of the Tenth Parliament are going to be the ones beginning on the payment, but have we seen the results? Those are my areas of caution on borrowing.

On the distribution of schools, I think there is going to be a lot of concern. I am thankful for the members who have raised the concern about Lango College, which is in the area I represent. However, I am also grateful that Dr Obote College and St. Catherine’s have been included. I am still cautious that those that were not included were told, “Don’t worry, we are going to borrow again from World Bank –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I think it is really in order that Dr Obote College is considered because that is where the father of this nation had his primary education and it was up-graded, as a reward for our Independence, in 1965. Thank you. 

MR AKENA: Thank you for that information. I was raising the concern that everything we do as far as development is concerned is based on borrowing. On one side we say that we are able to raise a lot more revenue and that the economy is growing, but for everything that we have to do in development, we have to borrow. 

We have loans lined up for health. What happens to the revenue that is locally generated; where does it go? Do we borrow for things that are important, which we know the House will accept, and then when it comes to issues like a new presidential jet we pay from local resources! Honestly, there is a lot of money which is disappearing. 

This year, we did not get money for PRDP but when I look at the money involved in buying the jet, and money spent in Garamba, that was enough for PRDP in this year. It would have benefited thousands if not millions. It also touches on the area of education. We need to sort out our priorities and please, let us borrow cautiously. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is high time we concluded this debate. We seem to have agreed on the principle of the loan, but I think it is a question of the list. Maybe the minister will tell us whether it is possible to adjust. I think that is the only issue.  

12.23
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion, and I thank the two ministers, that of finance and of education, and the committee. 

As colleagues said, investment in education is proper. I am one of those who are not disgruntled with the distribution because in Kabarole, we have two schools and one of them is St. Leo’s, my former school. However, in the next schedule, Madam Minister, consider Nyakasura School because it is one of the oldest schools in this country and it is not here. I would not complain because according to the criteria followed, where we have to consider religion and other things, it would not come up because Kyebambe is already there and it is Church of Uganda founded. 

Mr Speaker, the rehabilitation of the schools is much needed. When you go around the country, they are in a sorry state. As colleagues said, there are some sub-counties where we do not have schools at all. In my county, Kichwamba Sub-county does not have a single school and yet there is a policy. I do not know whether we are diverting from that policy.

The other issue is about the management of those schools. These schools are dying because the management committees at times are composed of people who are not educated at all and the head teachers play on their psychology.  

On the issue of school fees, it is true the poor of this country are getting poorer because their children cannot access education like some of us did. So, we need to consider this. There are many brilliant children from poor families who are left out as if they are not citizens of this country.

Colleagues talked about the land issue. Mr Speaker, you remember last time I talked strongly about the Butabika issue and now it is coming to schools. I wonder where we are moving to as a country. The Uganda Land Commission acts as if it is independent from everybody else. I remember on the Butabika issue – I am sorry to divert a bit – Parliament had passed a resolution that there should not be any other issue on that land like leasing it, but Uganda Land Commission went ahead and did it. Now it is Kololo S.S. I think, Madam Minister, you need to move very fast and rescue this school.

The other issue is shoddy work. We are borrowing a lot of money in this country but when you go to see what this money is doing, you may shade tears. Within two years, the walls are cracked, the floors are cracked and nobody bothers and people get away with it. I think this time the Ministry of Education should really supervise what is going on. In my county and district generally, there are many schools that have crumbled within five years of construction. You find someone constructs a latrine today and the following day it is down. I do not know what we are doing. 

The other issue is work behind schedule. This even involves roads; I remember people were talking about the Northern Bypass. Mr Speaker, it is as if we do not mind about the future of this country. 

It is good the issue of scholarships has come up. Maybe the needy student will benefit. I speak with an open mind; there are scholarships that we do not know as Parliament. People speak about State House scholarships; it is a shame if we, Members of Parliament, cannot explain them yet this is tax payer’s money. If I asked any Member of Parliament, very few would explain. 

MS KIIZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. When I was a member on the Committee on Presidential Affairs, we tasked the Minister in charge of the Presidency to give us the criteria which they use to select the beneficiaries of these State House scholarships. The minister told us that the scholarships are a prerogative of the President. So, I do not know whether the scholarships in the Ministry of Education are also a prerogative of the Minister. 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you. Vocational and technical education is very important in this country. We had mentioned back a vocational school in every sub-county sometime back. I think this is gradually dying out because it is no longer talked about. 

As Parliament, we should not be taken for granted; we should not come here and they ask for a loan when we do not have the breakdown. I know colleagues have talked about this, but it is very important. We should not be taken for granted. We are intelligent people, we understand, we represent the people and we must explain. 

The other issue is that when we get the loan, we must get periodic reports from the ministry telling us, “At such a stage, we have used this amount of money”, and then finally, we must get a report on completion. 

Mr Speaker, I am sorry to divert a bit; there are many loans we have approved, including the one for CHOGM where we constituted a committee here. However, members are not aware of how much money was spent on what. We need to be serious as Parliament because this is an honourable institution.

12.28
MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Surely, I would get out of this House very dissatisfied if you had not given me this opportunity because I was among the first people to sit here, and I came prepared to make my contribution. 

Mr Speaker, I represent the people of Buyaga and they have a great demand for vocational education. They think the energy we have put in UPE and USE should be the same that we put in vocational education. They have seen children who have gone to these vocational schools giving immediate results to respective families where they come from. When you come here to ask for a loan, I would be happier to see more of these institutions coming in. Maybe, tell us the plan that you have on them.

The second issue that I would want to raise is on the share that you have allocated to Bunyoro as a region, notwithstanding the fact that we have an outstanding secondary school called Kabalega S.S in the entire region. We have other important institutions that are more traditional than the one that was selected. We have St Edwards, Duhaga S.S; we do not see them and they are in a sorry state. I happen to have studied in Hoima Town at St John Bosco Seminary. I used to visit Duhaga. By the time I was in secondary, the school had gone to the dogs. Today, you would not want to enter the gates; it is so bad. 

I also want to add my voice to those who have spoken before; as much as we are interested in building capacities of the traditional schools, we should look genuinely at those that are in dire need. I share the sentiments that some schools are charging sufficient fees that can maintain and even construct new buildings. I agree with the issue the honourable from Bukanga raised. I have been to Mary Hill and they have new fantastic buildings and they are charging good fees. They are able to sustain the buildings they have and even build others. Why don’t you raise up the schools that you have set up, which are in dire need of accommodation?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, although the shadow minister raised the issue of cost of administration, let me say something about it. The MP for Butambala was giving an explanation that the extra cost of Shs 57 million is the co-funding from government and it caters for this increment in percentage of the administrative cost. When you look at the administrative cost of two percent and contingency of 14 percent, that adds up to 16 percent and yet the 52 million is 91 percent of the total cost. So, his explanation is not realistic. I think, hon. Minister, when you are implementing this project, seriously look at these areas. We cannot plan for a blank cheque. 

In modern budgeting, you cannot talk of contingencies. What are you going to do with it? In a modern era of transparency, if there is additional work to be done, you bring it to the contracts committee and they approve. Variations are provided for. We cannot sign a blank cheque. So, we ask the hon. Minister that in the process of implementing this programme, make sure that these people do quality work. I thank you very much and I rest my case, Mr Speaker.

12.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report and to add to the concern of hon. Chris that it is very important to include the appropriate sessional committees when considering these loans. For many years I was on the National Economy Committee in the Seventh Parliament. We sometimes ended up in conflict because we made decisions based on assumptions, and yet the sessional committees would bring in things that would have been corrected. Otherwise, I thank the ministry for presenting this loan request that we fully support.

Secondly, we sometimes take these documents lightly but when I picked a copy, I had a big complaint. I was listening to the debate when I was in the office and they were talking about secondary schools, and then when I picked the report, I saw “42 technical schools”. I kept asking, “Where are the secondary schools? Why are they talking about secondary schools and yet the report is talking about technical schools?” So, it is very important –(Interjection)– Yes, you just look at your copy of the report; the title talks about 42 technical schools. It is very important that when you prepare these documents, you actually take care.

The other issue that my colleague who has just walked out mentioned is very important. I used to prepare reports for our committee. Sometimes some of the information that you receive, the rest of Parliament does not receive. It is important to bring it so that people do not stand up to repeat things that are actually in the project document and things that are actually already there. For example, if you gave a list of the previous schools being supported, one would stop asking these questions. 

I looked through this and walked out to call the ministry because a school in my district was being supported under the African Development Bank but when I saw a different school, I said, “These guys are now going to give me political trouble if they have transferred that school.” I had to call the ministry and they told me that with that school, work is going on. So, it is very important to include this.

We talked about regional criteria. I know that Karamoja may be represented or catered for in another project, but when you are talking about regions, if you leave out a whole region like Karamoja, you are just glad, Madam Minister, that the Karimojong are not here but I am their neighbour –(Interruption)  

MS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I think I have said this before but I will repeat it just for the sake of the Leader of the Opposition. Karamoja region has 13 centres of excellence. The Irish Government has provided Shs 24 billion to construct 13 schools in Karamoja and construction is about to be completed. 

I was there with the Irish Ambassador to break the ground last year and I believe that many of these 13 secondary schools in Karamoja will be centres of excellence in that region. We are very proud of that offer from the Irish Government.  

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Minister, for the information. Again it brings me back to that point I was making; if that information was given in three lines, we would not have any headache. I sat here wondering where Karamoja was and if I did not mention this, the information you are giving would not have come to the House. So, it is still good that you gave this information. 

I chaired the committee that worked on the platform of my party, the Forum for Democratic Change, and we talked about manpower development and we dealt with the issue of secondary education. In our party platform, what we discussed was that we should, as a country, do complete rehabilitation of traditional secondary schools in phases in all the sub-regions of Uganda. We said that if you do not have money, start with one school; for example, in Acholi one school, in Lango one school, in Teso, one school, etc -  the traditional districts. What you should do is to make sure that you do these schools comprehensively. 

When you look at the budget of 52 million, it is for rehabilitating 42 schools, expanding 15 and building 12 new ones. When you look at the average costs, the kind of money involved may not be sufficient to do comprehensive rehabilitation of those schools. The best we could have done - and I do hope that this can still be considered - is to do complete rehabilitation. That means everything, including teachers’ houses, would be done. 

Secondly, there is the idea of scholarships in those schools. We had them in our platform. Our argument was simple; the schools that we went to were schools which were national, not by force but by the character of the students who went there. In Sir Samuel Baker School, although it is in the heart of Acholi, in HSC we constituted 25 percent of the class. The rest of the class came from as far away as Kigezi, Buganda, Karamoja, Toro, all over Uganda. The fact that when I travel I know somebody I went to school with is what nationalism is hinged on. It is also where you can collectively build patriotism. Therefore, when we rehabilitate this school, and we are talking about scholarships, let us call these national scholarships. 

In our proposal, if you rehabilitate Lango College, you will say that 25 percent of the scholarships will come from the North, 25 percent of the scholarships are for the east, 25 percent for the west and 25 percent for central. Because of need, even when somebody is not interested in going to that place, they will go get education, learn the culture of those places and begin to interact, and that is how we will rebuild a sense of nationalism. 

Otherwise, the seed schools that we build to facilitate education in our country are like the decentralisation that has been going on. We just decentralise nationalism. We decentralise the country and in the end, we would have decentralised our idea of Uganda. So, it would be very important that in the next programmes that we have –(Interruption)

MR KADDUNABI: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that the committee was informed that each traditional school that is going to be worked on will benefit up to US$ 2 million. The 52 million is units of accounts and the entire project is about US$ 97 million. So we were informed that each school will get about US $ 2 million, which you can literally say is about Shs 4 billion. I think that can do some substantial work towards the centres of excellence. 

PROF. LATIGO: Okay, thank you for the information. I would like to end by again echoing the appeal of my colleagues; hon. Oboi talked about science education. There is a school called St Charles Lwanga S.S.S in Kalongo, not the Kalongo of Nakasongola which I saw but the Kalongo where I come from in Pader District. This is a school that was started in 2001 and until recently, it was the only HSC school in Pader District. However, when there was money to build a laboratory, a decision was made in the Ministry of Education to build a laboratory in Atanga Girls, which was a displaced school. 

I struggled in the ministry just to bring rationality to the decision process. I told them that Kalongo is not displaced; it is the only HSC school. If you build a laboratory there, it helps. Could the minister, the ministry and government as a matter of urgency consider those schools that represent education centres for many key places so that facilities are provided for them as urgently as possible? 

Otherwise, we have always said, Madam Minister, each time you come here you have the support, I believe of the whole House, because you have done your best. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. As I said, the consensus is that the motion is supported but there was only that issue which you need to explain. Is it possible to revisit the list on the three sets that were in the report? Secondly, is the point taken that maybe in the future, the relevant sessional committees get involved earlier?  

12.48
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Bitamazire Namirembe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the members for the very constructive comments and remarks they have made, and I want to specially thank you for supporting this loan request. 

Without going into details, I am happy to note from your comments that you all realise that we need to reform and rehabilitate our education system, especially at the post-primary level, which is exactly what we are doing. I will not go line by line but let me make two or three remarks. 

First, the report we are discussing today is about ADB IV. So, that means ADB III, which was debated here sometime back, has been going on and there are schools which are already being constructed under ADB III. So, that clears the air regarding some of the schools which have not been listed like we have talked about Masaba, Kabalega, Mpanga S.S.S, Kigezi College Butobere, Lango College and Kololo S.S.S. Those projects are already going on under ADB III. I do not know the bureaucracy, but the African Development Bank codenames –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, sorry to interrupt. Is it possible to give us the list with different programmes so that we know? Maybe the complaint raised here would not have arisen if we had that information. Tabulate it in such a way that we get informed and then we get satisfied. 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, that is possible. I think in order to cover the entire African Development Bank grant to Uganda, we shall give the list for ADB I, ADB II, ADB III and ADB IV and the list of schools which have benefited so that everybody knows African Development Bank has been supporting Uganda in the education sector. 

Secondly, I want to inform this House that we are not yet done. We are mobilising resources for more schools to be expanded, rehabilitated or built. I will not at this stage name the next source of our funding, but I will be coming to this House very soon to ask for another project to be approved so that we can continue rehabilitating and expanding especially those schools which might not appear on this list. 

African Development Bank and other donor agencies are coming to our rescue because Uganda seems to be one of the very few countries in Africa which has ventured into universal secondary education. If we were not going on recess, or even if we do, Mr Speaker, I will soon ask you to put this on the agenda so that colleagues debate some other programmes which are in the pipeline. That time, I am sure many schools will be included.

Finally, members have raised questions of estimates and costs -(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: I am sorry, Madam Minister; I came in late because we had committee work. Mr Speaker, I have gone through this report and what I want to ask- 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, you have gone through the report but the consensus is that the motion is supported. The major objection was about the details of the schools that were listed, and it is the only issue that came up. The Minister’s explanation is that certain schools which would have appeared here are being covered under a different programme. Therefore, we have asked the Minister to give us those details so that we are informed and we do not complain. 

Now, if you turn us back to a debate which we have finished – really, we have other items to consider. Unless you are going to talk about the details because the issue you are explaining is the programmes.

MR MUTULUUZA: It is just one clarification, Mr Speaker. During the 2006 general elections, His Excellency the President promised the people of Mpigi, Katonga, where he had his last struggle in the 1986 NRM war, that they would construct a technical school at Katonga. But when I went through the list of the technical institutes that are going to be constructed, I did not see –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, precisely what you are saying is what was raised earlier before you came in, and this is what he is explaining. We are waiting for a comprehensive list of various programmes and maybe then we shall discuss it.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you. Hon. Mutuluuza is from my district of Mpigi.  I am happy to announce that Ugshs 400 million is already at Mpigi, and I am sure the ground breaking has already taken place. The technical college will be completed in 18 months at Katonga and the money is in Mpigi already.

I would like to say that I have taken note of all the remarks, and in the subsequent submission here with lists and so forth, I will try to answer some of the questions especially those concerning technical schools and other issues which have been raised.

I thank the House for the support they have given this paper.

12.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (MR Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues. My ministry will undertake to ensure that Government will do its part to ensure the success of these 52 million units of account to ensure all the schools that have been listed are effectively rehabilitated and those that are to be newly built, built accordingly and to standards that are appropriate. 

Permit me to comment on what hon. Akena did raise about the capacity of this country to utilise resources that have been coming from Government to address issues of development. 

As you all know, now the government budget accounts for 70 percent of all that we spend and only 30 percent comes from our development partners. A number of projects are already being handled by government. For instance, in the building of Bujagali, we did put up US$ 300 million from the Government of Uganda. We are also working on roads and this financial year, we put up to Ugshs 1.1 trillion and most of this is coming from Government of Uganda. It is not true that the development that is taking place in this country is only from donor funding. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow UA 52 million from the African Development Bank to finance the projects whose details you already know because they were stated when we started. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion, agreed to.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO ENACT A LAW REGULATING THE ACTIVITIES AND PRACTICES OF THE TRADITIONAL HEALERS AND HERBALISTS

MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members.

Subject to Rule 44 in the Rules of Procedure, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge government to enact a law regulating the activities and practices of traditional healers and herbalists. I beg to move.

(Seconded by hon. Henry Banyenzaki)

“WHEREAS the term traditional healer refers to a person involved in one of a broad range of practices, including herbal and spiritualism;

AND WHEREAS in Uganda there are two distinct categories of traditional health practitioners - traditional healers and traditional herbalists. Traditional herbalists mainly use local herbs to treat physical ailments such as fever, cancer, ulcers, syphilis; traditional healers deal with social and psychological problems and use spiritual powers to counsel patients, analyse the source of the problem and administer treatment depending on what the spirit requires, for example, through offering animal sacrifices;

AWARE THAT these practices are not part of the Western biomedical tradition and for the most part are ignored or frowned upon by that segment of our society;

FURTHER AWARE that in Uganda there are both registered and unregistered traditional herbalists/healers. Among the legally existing recognised associations are: Uganda N’eddagala Lyayo, National Council of Traditional Healers and Herbalists Association, Buligwanga N’ebyalyo and Buganda N’ennono Zaayo.

NOTING THAT in Uganda there is no clear legal distinction in definition of who a traditional herbalist/healer is and a witch doctor and a wizard;

FURTHER NOTING THAT despite the fact that all traditional healers/herbalists are recognised under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, there is no institutionalised framework governing and coordinating their errant activities;

GIVEN THAT there is no institutionalised framework to govern the traditional healers/herbalists, there is also no law regulating the activities:

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT in Uganda, the majority of the population has greater access to traditional medicine than modern health care services;

FURTHER COGNIZANT OF THE FACT that in the recent past, there have been so many incidences of both human and child sacrifice under the disguise of traditional healers and herbalists administering medication.

Now therefore, be resolved by this House that:

1.	Government and this Parliament condemns, in the strongest terms, the activities and practices of witch doctors and some errant traditional healers and herbalists; and
2.	A law be enacted by this Parliament to regulate the activities and practices of traditional healers and herbalists, and clearly outlaw the practices of witch doctors."

My justification, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, is found in several newspapers, which I want to ask this House to reflect on. I have The New Vision of Wednesday 18 February 2009 with such a story. The same story also appeared in a local newspaper published in Soroti. It talked about the beheading of a student by a traditional healer. The other time The Red Pepper also published a picture of a leg of a woman who had been sacrificed –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can you also give us the specific dates? 

MR KIBANZANGA: The Red Pepper story appeared in the Tuesday, 10 February 2009 issue. It was about a woman who had been sacrificed by witch doctors in Kawempe Division. 

The other story appeared in Bukeddde of 10 February 2009. It carried a picture of a trunk of a woman with her leg stuck in a pit latrine, all done in the name of traditional medicine. 

The New Vision of 10 February 2009 also carried the same story with a headline “Ten witch doctors arrested over woman sacrifice.”

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I move this motion with a heavy heart, bleeding internally in memory of those who have lost their lives and those who have lost their dear ones at the hands of these so-called witchdoctors hiding behind traditional healers.

As I have said, the import of this motion is to define who a traditional healer is and who a witchdoctor is. 

The motion intends to urge Government to come up with a law to regulate the activities of traditional healers and outlaw their activities as well.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, when you read our national motto, it reads “For God and my Country.” When you look at the three stanzas of out National Anthem, you clearly see a Good-fearing nation, a religious country. You also see the values of our country, which are unity, freedom and liberty as embedded in our national motto and the National Anthem. 

You further see our Godliness, which suggests that we can only enjoy these values when they are sanctioned by God, one of these values being life. Remember, whatever we do should be done for God and our country. It is therefore a contradiction that a God-fearing nation, a nation that is dedicated to God in her National Anthem, lives and exists alongside witchdoctors hiding behind traditional leaders.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, we have lost our children, we have lost our wives, mothers and other family members at the hands of these murderous traditional healers. They have let our people die of immunisable and treatable diseases. They have also helped in the spread of communicable diseases including HIV/AIDS. 

If you do research, you will realise that some of these traditional healers claim to be healing HIV/AIDS and that they can only administer their medicine through their private parts. That is how they help in spreading HIV/AIDS and other diseases. I am disgusted! 

These murderous people have caused psychological terror in the hearts and minds of many parents and children. We cannot concentrate in our offices and even in this House until we receive calls from our homes that our children have safely returned from school. This is because these people waylay our children. We have even started to take to desperate measures of circumcising our children while they are still very young or piercing their ears because rumour has it that a child with a scar cannot be sacrificed. This is very terrible. Why must we go to this length when God is on our side and when we have the power and the means to make a law to stop these murderous practices against our people, children and the future of our country? 

The time is now to reclaim what is right for our country. The time is now for us to conform to our national motto and National Anthem. This is the time to put our country back to the right course of history, and this is also the time to reclaim our values that have been lost to the witchdoctors. 

It is my prayer, wish and hope that this Parliament and the Executive define a traditional healer - those who are using herbs and those who are using spiritualism and magic and play on the psychology of unsuspecting people who are soft minded with tender hearts. I pray that this Parliament outlaws the activities of the latter group and save the genuine African medicine man and woman.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, it is within your powers to save our children and save the future of our country. I thank you for listening to the voice of logic. I thank you for your action, in anticipation that you will take stern action against this. For God and my country.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not, in principle, opposed to the motion by hon. Kibanzanga but the Law Reform Commission under the guidance of Government has already prepared a Bill on traditional and complementary medicine. 

Mr Speaker, we -(Interruption)

MR KASOZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Kibanzanga has tabled a motion. Procedurally, it is prudent to first second the motion before we go into-

THE SPEAKER: No, I had given the Floor to hon. Banyenzaki then the minister came in, I think on a point of procedure or information. I am cautious that the next person to address us on this issue should be the person who has seconded the motion and according to my records it is hon. Banyenzaki. Let us just listen to what he wants to say and then we go on.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to save this House some valuable time. What normally happens before Government comes up with a Bill is that there must be a policy in place. We should have had this Bill here tabled for the First Reading but what we thought was the right procedure was to have a policy in place.

As Ministry of Health, we have now developed a policy on traditional and complementary medicine which is actually ready and we think –(Interjections)- I am not tabling this policy today because there will be an appropriate time for me to do so. I only wanted to inform the House that we always begin with a policy. We now have a policy in place. The principles for the Bill on traditional and complementary medicine have already been formulated by my ministry so the process is actually on.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much for the information. I think this makes our work easier. In a nutshell, what he is saying is that Government is supporting the motion. Now, let us follow the procedure - hear the seconder and then see how we dispose of it. That we are working together with Government is good information.

1.14
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is really a motion that deserves the attention of this House. The Executive needs to hear the voices of the people because this is a pro-people motion. 

Notwithstanding what the minister has said, we have had instances where things happen so abruptly and the minister is at liberty to come with a statutory instrument to cure an ill in society in case there is a lengthy process of enacting a law. There have been a lot of cries from the society, from churches, church leaders and opinion leaders in this country but as Parliament and as Members of Parliament, we do not see anything being done in this area. 

Much as the minister pleads that there is a law which is coming, I also passionately appeal to the Executive that when we pass such motions as these to urge the Executive to come up with a law to be enacted, let these motions be respected. There are so many motions which we have brought before this House but nothing has been done and that includes the motion on the ban on kaveera.

I understand that one of our colleagues is coming up with a private member’s Bill. Why should you task us, Members of Parliament, to come up with these private member’s Bills when actually you-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, the minister’s position is not against the motion; he was just giving you the information. So, you go on with your justification and second the motion.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason I feel that this motion is very important- and I will echo some of the words which my colleague hon. Kibanzanga used- is that many children have died. As I speak today, there is one man being buried in my constituency because of these ritual murderers. 

The country has been waiting for something to be done and that is why we are bringing this motion to urge the Executive to hasten this procedure so that at least we have a law to regulate these people who claim to have spiritual powers; these traditional healers and herbalists, where our children, women and men have died at their hands. 

The methods which they use are crude; for example there are women who go seeking for the ability to give birth. They use such crude methods that they end up even spreading HIV/AIDS. There is a case in point. They use their “whoppers”-(Laughter)- to insert the medicine in the ladies and in so doing they spread HIV/AIDS. (Laughter) It is on record, Mr Speaker. So, we really need a law to regulate this kind of traditional healers who are using these kinds of crude methods. 

Because there is no law to regulate these traditional healers, the public has resorted to mob justice. The record available now is that whenever there is this kind of practice, if somebody is just suspected, there is mob justice. People just get stones and pangas and they kill these people. In most cases, these have been women and that is why you hear about witches. 

In the Bakiga society, it has been happening for a long time and it is still happening. So if we had a law that regulates these traditional healers and they are known and supervised, we would not have this kind of mob justice. It is because the wanainchi know that there is no law that regulates herbalists and traditional healers and that is why they resort to mob justice. We need to cure that so that people can have hope.

I take this opportunity to appeal to the enforcement bodies that when such a thing happens, investigations should be undertaken very fast. The other day I saw the Inspector General of Police in Kiboga with police dogs trying to track these ritual murderers.

However regarding capacity and the way things have gone, if it is a question of lack of facilitation and money especially in the police then we have to enact this law and install a department say for homicide. Such a department exists in the police but if you go there, it is occupied by only two officers. When we have such cases, it may help to facilitate the police to do a better job than they are already doing.

Also, if we are to enact this law, it may help look into the powers that these herbalists claim. Some of them claim to resurrect people. If we are to look into these powers, we may also need to expand and include those people who claim that they heal HIV/AIDS. This is because even our Christian churches have started claiming such powers and they are very misleading. 

As hon. Kibanzanga said, they play on people’s psychology and confuse them. For example there was a clear case where a pastor was arrested with an electrical gadget. What happened? So these kinds of spiritual powers that they claim to possess -(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas I am very convinced with the motion, I am looking at the title of the motion which says, “Seeks the resolution of Parliament to urge government …” and not to authorise my honourable to move a Private Members’ Bill. 

If that was the case, I would agree for the debate to continue and he goes ahead and we support him. However the minister is already saying that they accept this motion and they are already in the process of doing what it asks. 

The question then is when will the minister bring the Bill for the First Reading so that according to Rule 179, all Members can bring their views and we enact a law? I do not understand what we are doing now.

THE SPEAKER: The thing is that this motion is intended to urge Government; it is not for a Private Members’ Bill but urging government to promptly bring a Bill. The good thing is that as we started, the minister also stood to support it. I think that government has no objection and these are the arrangements that are being made. 

As I see, this motion is already carried and therefore what we are going to do is formally pass our motion, forward it to Government and ask them to do the needful. I don’t see any problem.

MR BANYENZAKI: As I wind up -(Information)

MR OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Banyenzaki. I don’t understand the anxiety of the Front Bench on the government side. This motion provides an opportunity. First of all, they have information that those who don’t sit in Cabinet do not have. When you formulate your motion and you don’t have that information, the right thing would be for the ministers to come after the motion has been seconded to say, we thank you very much for the motion but this is the situation. That should have come after the secondment.

Secondly, a motion like this provides an opportunity for Parliament to pronounce itself on key national matters. People have been sacrificed, Parliament’s voice has not been heard on the matter and a motion gives opportunity for us to first of all express our sympathies to those who have fallen victim or lost people and also it gives assurance to the country that we recognise this and we are concerned. 

So I urge our colleagues on the Front Bench of the government side- I know that we are going into the Easter weekend but it is just a matter of 30 minutes or so then we go. Let the country know that we are actually concerned about what is going on.

MR BANYENZAKI: In conclusion, I think the point has been made. Hon. Members and especially ministers, when you are in your slumber and we wake you up to do your job, please take heart and do the needful. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.26
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to speak on this motion. I entirely support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge government to enact a law regulating the activities and practices of traditional healers and herbalists. 

As a mother, I share the bitterness, pain and agony of those mothers outside there whose children have been sacrificed in the hands of traditional healers, spiritual healers and others who fall in that category.

I am happy that the Parliament of Uganda is speaking for the people. I believe that if this law is put in place, it is going to save so many Ugandans. If we are to have free, fair and clean elections, the operations of these people should be minimised. There are so many people who have been deceived that these spiritual healers can help them become ministers, pass elections - they have even gone an extra mile to kill in the name of becoming rich. 

Mr Speaker, I want to say that this country needs to be redeemed and a law be put in place to regulate the activities of these people. 

It is very important that we protect the people we came here to serve. We should hear their cries, like hon. Kibanzanga mentioned, every other day you wake up to read in the papers that people have been sacrificed, private parts have been taken, everybody is in panic.

It is therefore very important that these laws are put in place to regulate the operations of such people and possibly try to put a mechanism that will create confidence amongst our people, so that they can always find solace and cure through hospitals, and that even without these spiritual murderers we can still continue to survive as a country.

As a person who believes in the existence of the living God, I believe it is very pertinent that this Parliament comes up with a motion to heal the wounds, to cure the suffering that is roaming around in this country and I believe it is just the work of the devil. So, whoever tries to tamper with this motion is trying to tamper with the presence of God in this country. 

Recently, we passed a motion that calls for a day of prayer to pray for all the evils in this country and this is a law that is actually going to give more force and more strength to the motion that was passed in this House to pray for this country and to pray for the people of this country.

I believe that this motion has come at an appropriate time and it should therefore be seconded and supported and therefore Government should ably come up with a law to regulate the operations of these traditional murderers. I want to thank you.

1.31
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I would like to start by thanking the mover of this motion. The motion is timely and I do not know why the hon. minister was objecting to it. It is a time for Parliament to express something against what is going on in the country.

Because up to now we have been reading in papers and I do not think any of us had the opportunity to react to what has been going on. I think it is timely.

Mine is not a long discussion, but I would like to maybe modify some of these resolutions, in order to capture the international context of traditional medicine as it is seen all over the world. 

According to World Health Organisation (WHO) the phrase traditional healers is a generic name for subsets of traditional medicine, and according to the research done in 1994, four subsets of traditional healers have been identified, recommended and recognised by WHO.

These are the herbalists, those who use herbs and plant products to promote health and to cure diseases. Another subset are the bone setters. These are our traditional orthopaedic surgeons; they set broken bones, and some of these are very successful. 

Another subset is the spiritualists. These are actually psychosocial counsellors in the communities. They do not heal, they are  psychiatrists and they are useful to stabilise the minds of people. 

Another subset are the traditional midwives. I call them midwives because they do not attend deliveries – they assist and actually participate in deliveries. So, they are not attendants but midwives.

Mr Speaker, with this background I would like if the movers of the motion would allow for amendments with these two motions; which as I said yesterday, witches are not doctors. They have been named so because of the perplexity in their activities. They puzzle people and that is why they are actually criminalized; they are not doctors.

They have nothing to offer, to promote health. They are actually against health. So, I would like if the promoters can allow the first one to stop at traditional healers because these are – they are severally specialised facilitators of traditional medicine.

And then the second- if they allow, is to read this way, “a law be enacted by Parliament to regulate the practice of traditional medicine and the activities of traditional healers and clearly outlaw the practices of witch craft.” - because the so-called witch doctors actually practice witchcraft. They do not practice traditional medicine.

1.37
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion and I would also like to support this motion. However, I would like to inform hon. Members that we have other categories of traditional health practitioners, like traditional surgeons in Uganda. These are the people who cut tribal marks, after cutting they smear herbs into the wound; these are the same people who carry out female and male circumcision. You should also note that. 

Mr Speaker, the second category is traditional medicinal ingredient healers. These are the people who sell medicine and other substances to witch doctors. We also have TBAs, those were mentioned by my colleagues.

We should know that not all witch doctors are traditional healers; not all traditional healers or herbalists are witchdoctors. That is why we need Government to come up with a mechanism to differentiate between the three concepts, witch doctors, herbalists and traditional healers.  

You know very well that witch craft in Uganda is evil and it is an abomination but we have areas in the world where witch craft is very advanced like in Malawi, where a witch doctor can tell you to close your eyes for just two minutes. After the two minutes you find yourself in New York and that is a fact. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, that is why we need a law to regulate the activities and practices of these traditional practitioners. 

Last not least, we need to form a board similar to Non Governmental Organisation board. This board would be tasked to scrutinise, register and monitor all practices and activities of these traditional healers. 

Otherwise, I support this motion and I ask Parliament- last time I was here condemning the practices of child sacrifice and you find that in Uganda many witch doctors and their clients sacrifice these innocent young children and nothing has been to them. So, I think if this law is in place, -(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, where we have received information of actual child or human sacrifice, and we got proper leads, those witch doctors have actually been arrested. As I speak now, at least about six of them are in the hands of police and we are preparing the necessary documents for them to be taken to court. Thank you.

MR OYET: The information I would like to provide is in respect with the way Government is handling the traditional healers who attempt to sacrifice innocent people. In 2006, there was a traditional healer who came to my sub county and told the elders to sacrifice a girl child in order to avert the situations of the fire burning which was destroying the IDP camps.

The matter was brought to my attention; I drove home, and got the very persons we took the matter to the police. The person was arrested and the after one week, he was released. And it was very difficult for me to convince the elders that child sacrifice would not change the situation.

They were convinced beyond reasonable doubt that that thing has to be done. The issue was none of them could offer a girl child because all of them were beyond productive age. 

The second situation was that that same year Prof. Ogenga-Latigo actually intervened in a situation where the traditional healers were fighting with the born-again community in the sub-county headquarters, in the presence of the police. As we talk now two of the born-again Christians are imprisoned because these traditional healers proved to be powerful and they manoeuvred their way and they were able to hire lawyers. Thank you.

MS NAMPIJJA: Finally, Mr Speaker, since we cannot ban witchcraft in Uganda- (Interjections) it is true, we cannot. It is not possible, many people benefit from witchcraft, others go there for their good fortune, others for health reasons, but when it comes to inflicting pain on someone else in society and eliminating other people from society, that is why we need this law to eliminate their activities and practices. Thank you very much.

1.45
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To many of us who have been praying about this, we think that this debate is an answered prayer for us. And actually it is a good coincidence because we are debating banning witch craft in the Holy Week. So we want to thank you hon. Kibanzanga for bringing this motion on a Holy Thursday. I think the debate sends a clear message to those who are listening, to those who are here, that is not right; it is not right for somebody to deceive you that witchcraft will make you win an election. For somebody who doesn’t have shoes to deceive you that he will make you rich, it is not true and we want to thank you hon. Kibanzanga for bringing this motion.

Mr Speaker, the motion is clear that we differentiate between those medicines that are recognised as herbalists and other recognised medicine according to professionals. So we are happy that the motion is very clear. 

But I also wanted to make an amendment to this motion- we know what is happening, we know that people are advertising in our national media for witchcraft, enlargement of bums, to enlarge all sorts of things. So we are aware of these things. 

So I want to suggest to this House that we amend this motion to demand from Government to take immediate measures to stop advertisements for witchcraft in the national media. And that can take immediate effect; that does not need to wait for a law or a Bill to come to this House.

 I hope the mover of this motion and the seconders will adopt that as an amendment to this motion, and I think if it is done, this Parliament will have done a good thing especially during this Holy Week. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.47
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion and my discussion points are based on the things that we can do to stop the underlying causes of some of these practices. 

Mr Speaker, because of the communication age that we are in, we easily see most of these things. But we know that since Government has accepted to bring a motion, in the same vain as hon. Bahati, there are certain laws in this country that can help us stop these things. For example, everyday, when I scroll through the TV charnels in this country, they are all showing movies from Nigeria. The basis of these movies from Nigeria and other African countries is witchcraft. They show witchcraft succeeding in marriage, business and children watch all these things. 

I have even seen the Baganda started performing such movies. Mr Speaker, Government can do something to that effect; we can scrutinize the movies that we watch in this country. We do not need to wait for the other law to do that. 

Mr Speaker, we as NRM are running a system of governance that runs from LC I to LC VII – up to the presidency. We are so many leaders in this country, but there is a lot of complacency in this country. If you look at the ratio of leader – if the leaders became vigilant, I think we would detect these practices and stop them. 

Therefore, as we talk of police being complacent because of the law, we the leaders should also come up and sensitize the LCs to register unscrupulous people. 

Recently, in Western Uganda, we were infiltrated by witchdoctors from Tanzania who are hunting for albinos. They have now come to Uganda; but no body care to report such people. Therefore, we as Ugandans must be vigilante and form networks that can detect these practices to support the police. 

The other issue, Mr Speaker is evil worship. Religion has taken a different direction and it is raiding us beyond our expectations. You look at the Kanungu situation; government has not told us anything about it. These people perished in belief that they were going to heaven. That was evil worship, and there are so many cults that are doing business in this country. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we should scrutinize the religions this country; we should identify the evil worshippers in this country and also have a routine – you cannot tell me to pray throughout the night and I do not go to work and I survive. There are churches where people pray day and night, how do they survive? If they leave such a place and they are hungry, they can be induced into witchcraft. So that is another area that we can be vigilant.

Finally, Mr Speaker, yesterday, we passed a very good law on the formation of the research organisation in medicine; I think we should move scientifically as a country and help to do research on all these drugs and certify them so that people know that these drugs have medicinal properties. But people are just using soil, urine and bushes for us to swallow all that. 

Therefore, Government should move into that direction – we gave them a very good law yesterday – so that all the medicinal plants in this country are tested and patented so that we use appropriate traditional medicine. 

1.52
MR STEPHEN BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion, and I thank the movers of the motion. 

Yesterday afternoon, I attended burial in Mbale, at the home of Mr Maumbe Mukhwana; he lost a son. The presiding bishop, Bishop Gidudu of Mbale Diocese, in his sermon blasted Parliament and challenged the MPs who were present. He asked them what they were doing about the big problem of child sacrifice, and asked whether we were only busy increasing our salaries; and the bishop got a big applause. 

What I realized yesterday and even much earlier is that the public has been waiting for this moment. They have been talking about it on radios and else where, but Parliament has been quite. Maybe a Member has come out to complain here and there, but we have not had a comprehensive discussion on the matter. 

So I think this is a very timely motion; Government has accepted that a Bill is in the offing, but let it be expeditious because the pressure is too much for Parliament to be seen to be working. 

In my village, Mr Speaker, I come from Kikabala Village, in Bukooli North. Just two months ago, we had a problem; there was a thicket near my home where the villager found a body that had been laying there for I think over a month. The tongue had been removed and the private parts. They told me and I went and checked and I informed the police; they told us they were investigating. The suspects are known but nothing is being done. They have not been apprehended; I hear investigations are going on. The pressure has been on for Parliament to be seen doing something about this. 

This is a timely Bill Mr Speaker and I support it. But with the available laws, Government can still do something. For example, these suspects are known in the villages. The people who act suspiciously are known, but when they are reported, nothing much is done. 

Mr Speaker, as we wait for the law to come to this House, let government start doing –

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, about 10 - 15 minutes ago, I stood before this Parliament and made it very clear that Government is doing something. We are definitely doing many things; I have told you that we have arrested and even prosecuted some people. 

May I ask you Mr Speaker and hon. Members that after we come back from the recess, I come with a catalogue of all actions police has taken in order to combat this evil. 

Secondly, Cabinet has addressed itself on this matter; we went and addressed a press conference: Minister of Internal Affairs, Minister of Gender, and I think President’s Office. We told the country what exactly was being done. Maybe we could be accused for not doing enough, but really in matters of this type, Police can only move effectively if we have been informed effectively. 

So, my appeal, hon. Member, is that if you are really suspicious and you know a person suspected of practicing witchcraft, can I request you to go and file a statement at the police and then we will be able to investigate. Police will not be able to move until and unless we have been given a lead. But for cases where we have arrested those individuals, in some cases some of them have admitted to the crime; maybe the only challenge that we still face as police is that even those cases where we have got indisputable evidence, because some people have admitted, the DPP in some cases has not moved. When we did contact him, he said he is also making his own study. 

But I want to confirm to this House and to the nation that Government has done all that is in its power to apprehend and take to court those that we are able to apprehend. We have been on radios trying to sensitise the people so that they do not fall victim. Indeed there is a whole desk now at every police station to handle matters of child sacrifice. 

Mr Speaker, I would pray that colleagues do not say that there is nothing that has been done. If they do not know that is a different matter. But I can tell you that everything that is within our power has been done. And please for anybody who has got information, my prayer is that let us get that information. Thank you.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much hon. Member for allowing me to give you information. Every five years Government together with partners conducts systematic studies. One of the studies conducted was called the Uganda Demographic and Health Survey, 1995. One of the findings of the study was that of the patients who go to our hospitals and health units, 56 percent of them first consult a traditional health care provider. And we thought this was a fundamental and significant finding which the Ministry of Health and government would act upon. 

And in the committee of social services, we have been consistently asking the question which hon. Kibanzanga is asking, “When are you bringing a law to regulate traditional practitioners and also outlaw the negative elements of traditional practice?” Therefore what Parliament is saying is that yes, you are doing a lot as government but you also need to support and back up what you are doing with legislation, and when are you bringing this law? I think that is the point which we are making and the minister should appreciate that we actually wanted this law yesterday rather than tomorrow.

MR BAKKA MUGABI: As I wind up, I do recognise that Government is doing something because even going to a talk show to talk about it is doing something. But what we are saying is that let there be uniformity in responding to disasters. Let there be a bomb blast in town, and you will see how there will be joint anti-terrorism task force, and a combination of other forces responding to a disaster. Just one bomb and yet this is a problem which has hit the country left, right and centre. The response has been there but they will tell you that only six have been arrested and maybe one or two have been prosecuted and yet the cases are numerous. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

1.59
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Central Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As things stand, it appears that there is no opposition to this motion. This motion reminds me what one of my political mentors, Dr Crispus Kiyonga, used to call during the time we were amending the Constitution, the “common good.” He used to refer to the “common good” meaning what is good for all of us. 

Since this is about the common good and since the Minister of Health together with that of Internal Affairs on behalf of Cabinet have demonstrated no opposition to this Bill, I beg to fill two gaps that are clearly visible in this motion. 

I have heard many MPs saying that the issues we are considering require urgency but from what I see in this motion there is no element of timeframe. We are urging the Executive to introduce a Bill in this House but we are leaving this completely open. And Kibanzanga and other Members are aware that for a resolution of this nature it is very difficult for you to follow up or ensure that there is accountability. We are helping the minister by supporting him but when it comes to his work in Cabinet it will be difficult for him to tell Cabinet that he has a deadline to meet. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I believe that it would be helpful if we could introduce an element of timeframe. And judging by the pronouncements made by the minister, I beg to move that the Executive is given 12 months in which to introduce a Bill of this nature. 12 months is a long period of time but at least it is different from waiting up to the time Jesus returns to this Earth. (Interjection) Other friends are saying three months but my argument is that it is important to have an element of timeframe. I am amending my motion to say that instead of 12 months, we say three months. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker that is my first motion and I hope the mover of the motion is listening carefully; I am trying to help you. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, our good Minister of Internal Affairs has mentioned that Government is doing a lot. That Government has tried its best. But from what MPs are saying, there is a voice which is clear that needs more to be done. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would request this august House not to wait for the time when this Bill comes here but to introduce a clause urging government to utilise the existing legal framework to regulate activities and practices of traditional healers and herbalists. 

Mr Speaker, I will repeat my second and last amendments. I request that you include a new - I don’t how you will call it but it would be No. 4 because I already have No.3 and No.4: “We urge Government to utilize the existing framework to regulate activities and practices for traditional heelers and herbalists.” 

I am proposing this when am mindful of the fact that we have some laws in place which can help us although they still have some gaps. I am also mindful of the commitments being made by the Minister of Internal Affairs. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move.

2.04
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and also to pass my appreciation to the government for the effort that is being put in place to bring a Bill regarding this very topic. But I think it is even overdue because we have heard the examples that have been demonstrated by the mover; a lot of incidents of this nature. 

We should also appreciate that these traditional heelers or witchdoctors, whatever the name, have done a great deal in spreading infectious diseases. Like hon. Banyenzaki put it, some of these healers especially men use their whoppers to impregnate those who are barren. 

But you should not forget that there are those who are mixing some dangerous chemicals, for example, the other night as I watched   the news on WBS television when there was a Hajji being arrested by Police in Entebbe who claims to have some kind of spirits; that angels talk to him that he should use his own liquids and other substances from his own body like saliva, faeces and urine to cure people. 

So, I think the actions by the government to handle such people are still so lenient in a way. They are being held with silver gloves but in the process they are really spreading a lot of infectious diseases to the population and yet our budget is over loaded, the medicines are not enough and some of them are not even curable. So, the side of Government has a duty to ensure the implementation of these laws. I think Uganda has got the best laws in East Africa but the implementation part of it is nil. 

What is the purpose of Parliament coming day in, day out and passing good laws and they are not implemented? Yes, this Bill is going to be put here and we shall pass it maybe with good penalties to whoever will be a victim or a culprit of such but where is the implementation mechanism? What should we do?  These laws are good enough but they are not implemented. 

So, I urge the government to ensure that the mechanisms for implementation of these laws, including this particular Bill that is going to come if it passes as a law, to be put in action so that people can be seen that if you do such a thing, you get such a penalty. Other people will never try to do such. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But haven’t we heard enough? The motion is supported, why don’t we vote on it, hon. Members? The motion is so wide now; it is an umbrella where so many things can de done. 

2.08
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and I thank the hon. Members for having overwhelmingly supported this motion. I promised you that in my new responsibility as a Shadow Minister of Information and National Guidance, I will try to bring issues that bring this House and country together really like this motion. 

I thank hon. David Bahati for having reminded me that today is a Holy Thursday; it has really affected me because Jesus Christ is the last human sacrifice for mankind. And we have moved and debated this motion to ensure that for God’s sake, let Jesus Christ be the last human sacrifice. 

On the medicine men, the way hon. Anokbonggo was explaining, I have no problem. 

But Mr Speaker, I understand that we have a Government Chemist, is that right? And I understand that all herbs’ medicinal properties and values can be determined in order for those herbs to qualify to be used to treat human beings. 

Mr Speaker, we are in a world which is so scientific that we do not have to be deceived that someone can touch another one and get heeled. It must be scientifically tested and if it cannot be scientifically tested, let us abandon such things. 

I would like to thank Government in that a law is being prepared and I would like to request this Parliament and the public at large that when finally this law is in place, let us show our patriotism. 

The enforcement of the law; the implementation of the law should not be left to Government. Let all of us get involved in order to enforce; to see the implementation of this law so that we save several lives of our people. I thank you very much for your support. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for allowing me to move this motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much mover. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I hope Government will take prompt action especially as they have started consultations. Now, hon. Members, this brings us to the end of today’s business and I thank you for agreeing to start in the morning up to now; it is past 2.00p.m. We are now going for the Easter holiday, which will include Monday. So, I do not know whether it should be Tuesday when we resume but to be fair to you so that you can enjoy your Monday, we shall reconvene here on Wednesday at 2.00 p.m. to continue with business. I take this opportunity to wish you an enjoyable Easter weekend. God bless you all.

(The House rose at 2.12 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 April 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
