Thursday, 2 April 2009

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. There are two items for communication. The first one is to inform you that the Parliamentary Canteen and the Members Lounge are private areas for Members of Parliament. We do not expect the public to go there unless they are invited. We do not also expect you to take your constituents there unless you have told us that you will take them there. We also do not expect people to do business in the Parliamentary Canteen; it has become like a market. 

So, hon. Members, the canteen and the Members’ Lounge are out of bounds to the public. If you want to take your guests there, we shall give you guidelines to give you the necessary privacy that you need. I do hope that you will observe that. You have got your offices; you can take your constituents to your offices. Visiting delegations should go there only on invitation. 

The second matter is that the Anglican Chaplaincy will hold an Easter communion service on Tuesday, 07 April in the Members’ Lounge at 5.30 p.m. So, the members of the chaplaincy and well-wishers may go and attend that service.

3.04
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Charles Oduman): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There has been an outstanding item that the government side, specifically the Ministry of Finance, had promised to respond to. We are not very patient on this matter because the matter is also not patient with the people of Uganda. That is to do with the effects of the global financial crisis. The earlier we debate this, the quicker government can demonstrate its responsibility and its stewardship to the people of Uganda. 

We raised this issue on the 5th of March. We were promised that a statement would come in two weeks. After three weeks, we were told it would come the following week, which is today. I am getting concerned as to whether the government side is taking the matter seriously. It may be interpreted that government does not care for the people of Uganda with regard to what is happening. As we speak now, another company is closing up in Arua and many people are losing jobs. So, when is the ministry coming with that statement? Are they ready or not?

3.05
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We on the government side share the sentiments of the shadow Minister of Finance, and I want to assure you that the paper is ready. I have discussed this with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Once the minister is given a slot on Tuesday, he will be able to present that. 

3.06
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have risen on a matter of health concern. In the past two weeks, we have had questions about the efficacy of certain syrups, especially for colds and cough. There is now ping-pong on the scientific basis on which the National Drug Authority based its argument clearing a number of syrups which have been seriously challenged. I think it is incumbent upon the Ministry of Health to give us the way forward, because many practitioners still prescribe these syrups whose efficacy has been doubted. In my opinion, the Ministry of Health should come out with a way forward on syrups.

I am also concerned with the recent trend that I have noted in this country about public health - people selling foodstuffs in kaveera. People sell peeled sugarcanes, peeled pineapples and so on in kaveera. You cannot tell with certainty the hygiene standards of the person who packs them and you cannot tell how many hands such packaging materials may have passed through. I think we need also to pronounce ourselves on this in order to protect the public. Sometimes we blame Cholera on KCC or personal hygiene but I think the eating habits of Ugandans also need to be checked. I am calling upon the Ministry of Health to come up with a position on those two issues. 

3.09
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have an issue from Lira District, which I want the government to assist me on. On 31 August 2007, the UPDF took a dead body to Omolo in one of the villages and buried someone that they claimed belonged to that family. I am not going to mention the name, but the UPDF number is RA2364. 

The family members requested to verify if that was indeed their son. After verification, they all said that was not their son. However, the UPDF insisted and buried that person in that compound. Later on, this family discovered that their son was alive and was working in Moroto District, and even the number which was given was wrong. The right number should have been RA1190260 or something like that.  

These people have been looking for someone to remove the body. In our culture, you do not bury a person who is not yours. You know, in Lango we bury in the compound. Nobody has accepted to remove this body. The family is traumatized and the body remains in the same place. That brings me to the question: do we have a database for our UPDF soldiers? How many have died and have been buried in areas that are not their own? How many are not alive that we are told are still alive?  

We buried many people whom we did not know during the LRA war, and culturally that is what we had to do. However, now that we are settled, why doesn’t the government do the right thing? We are demanding to have that body removed and taken to the right place and be given a decent burial. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know who we can pass the information to. Can we pass it to the Chief Whip? He will locate the Minister of Defence. Hon. Otengo, can you lay the information on the Table please?

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table a letter dated 28 September 2007. The reference is: “Forceful Burial of a UPDF Soldier at my Home.” It is signed by Mr Ekweny Martin and the copies are listed down. I thank you. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, we have taken note of the concern raised by the hon. Member of Parliament. I will get in touch with the Minister for Defence so that he can be in a position to take pertinent action. I thank you.

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Epetait. I take note of the concerns he has raised and pledge that next week on Tuesday, I will come with the official position of the Ministry of Health as regards the cough syrup saga.  

In the same vein, I would like to accept that it is our mandate as Ministry of Health to guide the local councils on issues of public health. Certainly, it is not right to have juices and other foodstuffs served the way they are in buveera. We shall therefore give the necessary guidance to KCC and other urban authorities, or the general public for that matter, on how foods should be served. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the public accounts for the year ended 30 June 2005 in accordance with rule 22(2)(m) of our Rules of Procedures.  

We have enough copies for you in your pigeonholes. Madam Speaker, I request that at an appropriate time, you avail us a slot on the Order Paper for presentation, consideration and adoption of the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, yesterday you laid another one but we sort of cannot handle it. Do you think we can handle them both next week?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are very ready. It is you to tell us. If you give us a slot, we are extremely ready and we are ready to even present another one next week on Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for the efficiency. Hon. Members, please have your copies and peruse through them. We shall place it on another Order Paper as quickly as possible. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 92/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.15
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): “i) Would the Minister explain to the House as to why the academic standards of government-aided schools in Kampala Central, which used to be among the best performing schools in the country, is deteriorating at a very fast rate since the introduction of the Universal Primary Education (UPE) programme?
 
ii) What remedial measures are being taken to address the aforesaid appalling situation?
 
iii) Why has government failed to renovate most of the UPE schools in Kampala Central which are extremely dilapidated?
 
iv) Would the Minister explain whether it is true that Government is planning to relocate the Uganda Taxi Operators and Drivers Association (UTODA) business from the Old Taxi Park to Nakivubo Settlement and Nakivubo Blue Primary Schools?”
 
3.16
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I rise to respond to Question No. 92/1/08 asked by hon. Lukwago Erias, MP Kampala Central, DP. As required, I have given a copy of my response to him and I beg to submit as follows:

Question No. 1 - the minister should explain to the House why the academic standards of the government-aided primary schools in Kampala Central, which used to be among the best performing schools in the country, are deteriorating at a very fast rate since the introduction of Universal Primary Education Programme.  

I have given table No. 1 indicating the government aided primary schools in Kampala Central. There are 17 grant aided primary schools in Kampala Central and these are the following:
1. 	Shimoni Demonstration School
2. 	Kitante Primary School
3. 	Buganda Road Primary School
4. 	Nakasero Primary School
5. 	Nakivubo Primary School
6. 	Old Kampala Primary School
7. 	Nakivubo Settlement
8. 	East Kololo Primary School
9. 	Bat Valley Primary School
10. 	Nabagereka Primary School
11. 	Police Children Primary School
12. 	Arya Primary School
13. 	Kyaggwe Road Primary School
14. 	Muslim Girls Primary School
15. 	Summit View Primary School
16. 	Kampala Primary School
17. 	Aga khan Primary School

Madam Speaker, I request to summarise that table. The 17 schools offered for PLE 2,332 candidates. Those who passed in Grade I in 2008 were 251, those in Grade II were 1,413, Grade III were 341, Grade IV 188, and then “U” -  those who were not graded – were 88, and those who were absent were 51. 

Those who passed in Division 1 were 251, and that is 10 percent of the candidates –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am aware that the rules provide that a minister should provide a written answer to the person who asks a question. However, we are going to raise supplementary questions so we need to have copies of her answer. She is not providing an answer for the benefit of only hon. Lukwago, but for the entire House. She is quoting figures; how are we even going to remember those figures without going through the written answer? So I request that the minister provides us with a written answer so that we can follow what she is saying. In fact, some ministers have also done it before. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But our rules require her to give a response to the one who asks. That is what the rule says. I think the other is just complimentary. Hon. Member, you could listen and take notes. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I do not want to contest your ruling, but this is not a class that we should be taking notes. The ministers should be able to provide us with written answers. I am aware of that rule but if she decides to read, let her have the courtesy of providing to the whole House the answers. What is the problem; is it stationery?

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to contest your ruling that by the minister not providing copies, she is following the rules? The rules are very clear and actually in effect, he is wasting the time of this House. Is he in order to contest your ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have been complaining that the ministers are not answering questions. Please listen; if there is a matter that you have interest in, please note it down. This subject is very important. I do not want to delay this work anymore. Hon. Minister, please continue.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was just indicating the percentages of the candidates that passed in the various divisions. Division I there were 10 percent; Division II, 60.5 percent; Division III, 14.6 percent; Division IV, 8.0 percent; un-graded, 3.7 percent; and then those who were absent were 2 percent. The table indicates that there was a slight decline in the numbers of first grades [Mr Katuntu: “Which table?”] Table 1 which I just read above. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I have an extra copy which I could give to hon. Katuntu. Later on I could bring 300 copies for all the members. However, as you ruled, I am following the right procedure. 

I am looking at a comparison between 2006, 2007 and 2008. The point I was making is that there was a slight decline in Division I, but Division II was very comparative from 2006, 2007 and 2008 and so was Division III. In fact those who passed in Division III were more compared to the other two years and so was Division II. The point I am making here is that there was a slight decline in Division I but the first grades and the percentages compare quite well. 

Question No.2 - what remedial measures are being taken to address the appalling situation? The following remedial measures have been taken and will continue to be enforced: 

The policy on customised performance targets for head teachers and deputies that caters for the realisation of increased performance delivery and supervision has been put in place as a guard against ineffective head teachers and deputies. 

Customised performance targets are performance parameters agreed upon between the local government leadership and the school administration to be able to achieve given objectives in a given timeframe. I can explain that every year, every head teacher should be able to say, “This year, I will be able to achieve the following…”, and this is agreed on with the supervisory staff of the local government. 

Intensified inspection: quarterly inspection is being carried out even now as I read this report. Inspection funds for KCC, to the tune of Shs 11.3, were released for the three quarters of this financial year. So the inspection is going on to give support to the management of the schools and the teachers in the classrooms.

We are enforcing regular attendance by teachers and pupils to maximise the teaching and learning time to cover the syllabus and to conduct other educational activities. Many reports in this country have indicated that there is irregular attendance by both teachers and pupils in schools.

We are also enhancing what we know as pedagogical practices. We are encouraging reading, writing, listening, communication and participation in music, dance, drama, debate, games and sports. These are activities which encourage children to participate in academic and other social programmes at school. 

We are discouraging cramming. Many students or pupils have been taking on cramming as learning. We shall continue to discourage cramming and enhance understanding and application of knowledge and skills through experiments and practical exercises in and outside the school. 

Let me inform my colleagues that there is a tendency to cramming and looking at the past papers and once those questions do not come, many students are thrown off board. They call it spotting. You spot the question that will come and then continue cramming answers to those questions. Once there is a variation and that particular question does not come, many students are at a loss. So we are monitoring and discouraging that trend.

We are also improving school management, that is, strengthening of school management committees to enhance their capacities to supervise the school staff and management.

Furthermore, we are implementing the scheme of service for teachers in government schools to boost their morale. What this means is that teachers are now being promoted to higher ranks even where they are not deputies or head teachers. Teachers are being promoted in the classroom by raising their salary scales because we believe many of the teachers would qualify for promotion if only we had many more openings for promotion. That not being the case, we now have started a scheme where teachers are promoted in the classroom. 

We are also enforcing the laws on education through working closely with the local councils in Kampala District. I am sure Members are aware that last year we passed the Education Act where we defined the responsibilities of different stakeholders in the management of education in this country.

Madam Speaker, we are putting up a policy where children take home reference books and text books so that they can read at home under the monitoring of their parents and relatives. This policy enables the children to read the books both at home and at school, thereby increasing their literacy, numeric and academic skills.

A very important measure we have taken is to ban corporal punishments in schools. You will recall, dear colleagues, that there was a lot of assault on children. Children were being beaten and many of them sustained very serious injuries. So we banned corporal punishments in schools. This has created a child friendly and safe environment for the children to love school, respect teachers and build their self esteem. The Ministry of Education and Sports, in conjunction with UNICEF, has published what we know as “The Alternative to Corporal Punishment Manual” to help the teachers and school managers teach discipline instead of administering corporal punishment.

Another measure is close supervision of the teachers by head teachers and school management committees to ensure their attendance and efficiency in the performance of their duties.

Finally, and this is very important, we are enhancing mobilisation of parents to support their schooling children by feeding them, providing them with required stationery and other personal needs. We are encouraging the parents and the teachers to conduct career guidance and personal counselling to the young people in schools.

Those are several measures and many others which we are taking to ensure that there is improvement in the quality of the delivery of education at the basic primary level. I focused on the central region because my colleague raised the question. We believe if all stakeholders work together, we shall achieve the desired goals, that is, improved scores at the exams and improved service in education.

Question No.3 - why has government failed to renovate most of the UPE schools in Kampala Central which are extremely dilapidated? There is inadequate funding for repairs and general maintenance of existing structures. We are continuing to mobilise more resources to ensure that there is money for construction and money for repairs. 

There is also lack of planning on the part of KCC as the council and the local government responsible for planning and setting priorities. Many districts and many schools have set priorities including repairs and maintenance where they get some capital development funds.

Thirdly, I am also informing this House that priority regarding allocation of money is given to rural schools where the pupil to classroom ratio is very high. What I am saying here is that most of the funds are now going to areas and districts where they do not even have classrooms. Therefore, for the repairs, we leave it to the local school management committees and local councils to see how they set their priorities.

Question No.4 - could the minister explain whether it is true that government is planning to relocate the Uganda Taxi Operators and Drivers Association (UTODA) from the Old Taxi Park to Nakivubo Settlement and Nakivubo Blue Primary School? There are intensive consultations between the Ministry of Local Government, KCC and the Ministry of Education and Sports and the final position has not yet been reached. 

I will add that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda has directed that UPE schools in KCC serve the urban population and should not be relocated without suitable alternatives. I have a letter from the President indicating that Nakivubo Settlement should not be removed from where it is because it serves a big population in the town and so do other urban schools. They should remain serving the population in the towns. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, ask supplementary questions and do not make submissions. We have exactly 55 minutes. 

3.32
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much, honourable minister, for offering this response to the questions I raised. I have two or three supplementary questions: 

One, the minister has given statistics indicating that the decline in performance is more-or-less negligible, that it is a small percentage of the decline. This means that actually the performance is still good. I would not wish to challenge the statistics but I would like to ask the honourable minister a supplementary question in regard to this. If the statistics you have given are correct, why is it that a big number of these schools are still being ranked amongst the worst performing schools in the country? They are no longer amongst the best schools. 

There used to be schools like Nakasero, Kitante, Buganda Road, Shimoni, Kyaggwe et cetera. They used to rank among the first, but in the statistics we have, the records here indicate that Nakasero Primary School ranked 55th in Kampala alone. Buganda Road Primary School was 100th and Kitante 91st. I would wish to ask the minister: why is it that they are not ranked amongst the best if their performance is good?

Secondly, on the question of the dilapidated structures, I see here that there is no remedy being offered - there is inadequate funding and priority is being given to rural schools where the pupil to classroom ratio is high. I am asking the honourable minister: are you waiting to see the structures in Kampala crumbling and killing our pupils? If you visited Kyaggwe Road Primary School, the roof is about to collapse on the heads of our children there but you are giving priority to other schools. Are you waiting for these structures to collapse so that you can come in? 

Finally, on the remedial actions being taken, you have given us a very long list. I am wondering why you have not provided for scholastic or instruction materials to children. Is there any proposal or arrangement by government to provide our children with free scholastic materials like exercise books? I used to get materials that had “Government of Uganda. Not for Sale” when I was in primary school. What happened? Are you still going to cater for that? Are you making arrangements to provide free scholastic materials now that there is biting poverty in this country? I thank you.

3.36
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to ask one question. The observation is that the private primary schools are performing better than the government aided primary schools. I want to find out from the minister: has the ministry taken trouble to carry out a study to find out what could be causing this? Maybe that could be used to improve on the performance of the government aided schools. That is my question. 

3.37
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Madam Speaker, I am not very comfortable with the answer to No. 1 because the question was clear. Hon. Lukwago wanted to know - we are also interested parties - why the school performance has deteriorated. When you talk about Buganda Road, Bat Valley and all those schools, some of us who went to school in Kampala actually went through these schools. I went through Bat Valley Primary School and I was very proud of it. Those schools were not just among the best but they were the best. So I would like to know exactly what went wrong. What happened? How come Buganda Road, which used to be very good, is in the 100th position and Kitante is 57th? What exactly went wrong?

3.38
MR PETER EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister, in an attempt to answer question No. 1 which is quite clear, brought in the explanation about discouraging cramming in schools and also stamping out corporal punishment. I am really wondering whether discouraging corporal punishment or discouraging cramming is only in UPE schools and not in private schools, which are really performing well. If that is the trend, it means they are caning in private schools and maybe they are encouraging cramming. 

When is the government taking on private schools so that maybe the results really come down? Because if stamping out cramming and discouraging corporal punishment is the reason for which the standards have dropped from UPE schools, when are you going to introduce it to private schools?

3.39
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In question No. 1, the Member asks why the academic standards of government aided primary schools in Kampala Central, which used to be among the best performing schools, are deteriorating at a very fast rate since the introduction of Universal Primary Education Programme. You need to remove “Kampala Central” and put any constituency - Bugweri, Mpigi, where the minister comes from, or Otuke - and this question will be correct for the entire country. 

Can the minister explain to us why generally the performance of government aided schools has been deteriorating since the introduction of this UPE programme? When you look at the answer given, it does not give the reasons why. Like hon. Najjemba said, it does not give the reasons why. It instead says there was a slight deterioration or decline. Can we have an explanation as to why this deterioration is there? 

3.40
MR MICHAEL NYEKO (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, when I looked at the figures provided for Kampala Central, I got even more worried because out of the 17 schools, about four schools got no first grades. 

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to convince this House; if they cannot monitor and improve the performance of schools in Kampala Central, which is just a stones throw away from the ministry’s headquarters, how can the minister convince us that they are going to improve the performance in schools like Olwal Mucaja Primary School in Amuru District or Olya Primary School near the Sudan border. The performance there has been very bad, and also in the whole district. In Amuru where I come from, there was only one first grade. I was expecting that this year the ministry would help improve performance in the district, but even the schools that are a stones throw away from the ministry performed very badly. How can you convince us that you will help us who are upcountry? 

3.42
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Just like hon. Katuntu observed, this should have been a national question and not localised to Kampala. In Kumi District, 74 pupils passed in Division 1. Of those 44, representing 60 percent, passed from one single private school, that is, Joy Academy, and 26 percent came from another private school. From the 158 UPE schools in Kumi, only 20 pupils passed in Division 1. This marked a very serious decline. I think the minister needs to tell me what is happening in the private schools that is not happening in government-aided schools.

In answering the second question on remedial measures, in the very last intervention the minister says that her ministry is enhancing mobilisation of parents to support their schooling children, for example, in feeding them and providing other scholastic materials. How is this happening? I have not seen it happening in Kumi. Would you like, hon. Minister, to tell this House what specific strategy the ministry is using to ensure that parents are supported in order to help their children. 

Thirdly, in answering question No.3, the minister in (iii) says that there is not enough money and therefore priority is being given to rural schools to try to bring down the pupil to classroom ratio. I come from a rural setting; actually, I live in the village and the pupil to classroom ratio is still high. I remember that a policy of building classrooms was initiated by the Ministry of Education. Has this policy changed? If it has changed, we are not feeling the change in this policy. Would the minister like to respond to that concern of mine? I thank you.

3.45
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In her response, the minister cited irregular attendance of both teachers and pupils as one of the reasons for declining standards. Hon. Minister, don’t you think that the automatic promotion policy that the Ministry of Education came up with is one of the factors promoting irregular attendance of both teachers and pupils? The pupils after all know that even if they do not attend lessons, they will automatically be promoted. The absenteeism in schools is very high. Parents have literally kept their children away from school after all they will be promoted. Do you not think that the automatic promotion policy requires to be reviewed?

Secondly, for one reason or another, some schools may not be able to conduct all the lessons that were meant for that particular term. On the 14th of last month - and I brought it to the attention of the minister - eight schools were de-roofed in Ngora and for some time they could not conduct lessons. I am trying to find out from the minister: can there be special consideration for remedial lessons to be conducted, say during holidays, for such schools which may have had problems in the course of the term that might have made them unable to conduct all the lessons? 

Lastly, I am aware that in a number of private schools, issues of discipline are taken very seriously and no wonder there is good performance in many private schools. The minister has said that they have banned corporal punishment in schools – great - but which other mechanism can the teachers use to instil discipline in some of the pupils and students who may really become unruly at school? I think there is need for us to prescribe better mechanisms of instilling discipline amongst pupils rather than imposing a ban without giving alternatives. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Angiro. But hon. Members, please ask one question each so that we move quickly. 

3.47
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question to the hon. Minister is one: are you aware that the number of pupils in some of these schools has been increasing while the schools have not been expanding? The total number of pupils in some of these schools therefore overshoots the acceptable numbers suitable for their academic performance. Are you aware of this?

Secondly, have you done research on finance - how much parents pay per child, how much the government pays per child and the costs of running the school’s activities? Are you convinced that the amount government puts in and that which the parents put in can run the school to at least a level that can motivate teachers to put more effort in teaching these pupils?

Finally, you told us about promotion of teachers; can you tell us when these teachers who have been promoted will be paid their promotional allowances or salaries. I know of only one district in Uganda, that is, Kabale, which is benefiting from this promotional payment or salary. Can you tell us if that is true or not. You promoted them but you did not give them the salary; is that really promotion? Thank you.

3.50
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for these answers but I would like to ask her some questions. When you were answering the questions, you talked of regular attendance of teachers as one of the strategies to combat the poor performance but have you tried to find out why teachers do not attend regularly? If you have, what have you done or what strategies are in place to address this? Some teachers give the excuse of low pay. What strategies have you put in place, now that we are in the budget cycle, to provide for some little increment on your teachers’ salaries? 

You also said that teachers are promoted in the classroom. Minister, are you aware that there are some teachers who graduate from diploma to degree and even to masters but they are still getting the salary they were getting when they had only a diploma? Don’t you think that is really de-motivating?

Madam Minister, you were talking of discouraging cram work as a strategy to improve performance; how are you going to do this when up to now the emphasis is on passing PLE examinations conducted on maybe two or three days to assess a pupil who has been in school for seven years? There was a school of thought of using continuous assessment and maybe also assessing the pupil in participation in extra-curricular activities, etc. What strategies have you put in place to discourage cram work or what plans do you have to implement this school of thought of continuous assessment other than depending on passing PLE? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.53
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point is a small one. We thank the minister for the answer but I think you can see the barrage of questions that has come out of this. 

There was a programme that was proposed sometime back about providing milk for children in school but I do not know why it died. Now we have a capable company, Sameer Agriculture, which can ably provide milk to those schools. So, I am asking why that programme has not been pushed so that children in private schools are provided with milk.

3.54
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a supplementary question. When you hear Members of Parliament from the urban areas crying that performance is poor in primary schools, for some of us who come from rural areas, it is worse. It is very bad but some of us are trying. 

About 300 results of primary schools from Kasese were confiscated. We have tried to reach the Minister in charge of Primary Education but we are not getting an answer. It is now over three months. While some are performing poorly and others are trying, you are confiscating their results. When are you releasing these results and when are you telling us what happened?

3.55
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I come from Sironko. When the PLE results are released, I check for the results from the bottom; I do not have to check from up. The reasons are normal, as you know. That is what hon. Kibanzanga was saying.

If I look at the minister’s table, I even get more worried. If you look at Grade 1, in East Kololo, for example, it is 01 that passed. If you go to Nabagereka Primary School, there is zero. The biggest number of people who have passed are under Grade U. I do not understand this Grade U but I think the minister will help us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unclassified.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Alright. Those form the majority that have passed. The minister who has been around for many years, including during colonial times, comes to tell us that the performance has improved! I get worried.

They have told us to teach people in Bugisu in Lugisu, my mother tongue, which they are conversant with. I am sure that is what they are also telling people in Teso and everywhere else yet people from town like hon. Lukwago are being told to teach in English. Are they going to set exams for people in Bugisu in Lugisu so that they are able to compete with these ones who are learning in English right from nursery? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.57
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two additional questions from the islands for the minister. 

There are different conditions and facilities for education on the islands. I want to know from the minister whether it is a deliberate attempt by the Ministry of Education to assign only two or three teachers to every primary school in Kyamuswa constituency. There are seven primary schools in Kyamuswa and all of them are government aided UPE schools but none of the students there passed with either first or second grade. Basically, all the schools have got primary one to primary seven but only two or three teachers. They vote for NRM. (Laughter) 

These pupils cannot read or write English and they are subjected to similar exams which are failed even here in Kampala. Madam Speaker, I want to know whether the ministry is doing anything to improve the teacher to student ratio as well as the conditions of education in primary schools in Kalangala.

There is another issue that the minister could help us with. You know, education is one of the basic rights a child should have at whatever cost. There are 71 islands constituting Kyamuswa but I have only seven schools on four islands. There is settlement, reproduction and growth of children in the islands. On those other islands where there are no schools, there is no access to education for these children. Is it a deliberate attempt by the minister or the ministry to deny these children a right to education yet they vote NRM? (Laughter)

4.00
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County Amuria): Madam Speaker, when you read the history of education in Uganda - hon. Bitamazire I think is very well informed - when you look at the trends of events, Kampala used to pass 80 to 90 percent in Division 1 even in village schools. Today it is a very big embarrassment. Even Nabagereka Primary School can get zero in Kampala, in Buganda, and yet the Minister of Education is from Buganda.  

Hon. Bitamazire is a very respectable person. She knows the trend of events and she has had a very good record of her work. For sure, she knows where we are heading to; education is not going to improve at all because of the policies that are being put in place every other day. Isn’t it honorary for the minister to say, “Enough is enough,” and we leave this job for other people to try? (Laughter)

4.02
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just one question to the hon. Minister: are you aware that the performance of the girl children is worse countrywide? I want to give you an example. In my district, we have 217 primary schools but over the last four years, we have not been able to realise even eight first grades from girls. Last year, we had only two girls with first grade. I wonder whether you are really aware that the girl child is performing even worse countrywide. 

Also, what measures are you putting across to ensure this situation changes for the better?  Thank you.

4.03
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the hon. Minister for the answers she has given but I hasten to say the following:

Today while we are crying about poor performance of children in primary schools, the minister has yet again introduced a new curriculum, that is, the so-called thematic syllabus where children in primary schools, from P.1 up to P.4, are to be taught in vernacular and only get command of English from P.5 to P.7. Does the minister appreciate the destructiveness of this thematic syllabus most seriously to our rural children, which it puts in a poor position to effectively compete with children in urban areas who are exposed to English, the language used when sitting exams in P.7? Are you aware? Do you have any plan of revisiting that thematic syllabus?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please answer in not more than 20 minutes. Maybe while you are answering, you could also explain to me something. The pupil to teacher ratio in Kamuli is 1:71. I went to Bunya East on Saturday and I found an extreme case of a ratio of 1:150. Maybe you could explain to me why that is happening.  

4.04
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, my colleagues, for the questions which you have raised.  

Hon. Lukwago, you are still asking why Nakasero, Buganda Road and the others do not rank among the best. I think what I will start by saying generally, is that let us not tag the quality of education to the first grade -(Interjections)- yes. I think any of us who have been to school know what we call a normal curve. A normal curve is a concept which we all know, I believe. I wish I had somewhere to demonstrate.

Normally in assessment everywhere, there is a normal curve. You get a percentage of the best, a percentage in the middle and then it tapers off. A normal curve is a concept we all know. So I am only saying that it applies to scores as well as results.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I did not intend to disrupt the minister’s flow of ideas. This is just to inform her that hon. Lukwago volunteered some information, which is an analysis based on the general performance in the primary leaving examinations and therein the position of the school relative to other schools in Kampala District. The schools are given here and they are 17 schools that are all found in Kampala Central constituency. The best performing among those schools was the 55th. So, he has done his work and I think your argument therefore does not stand. I would like to volunteer this information to the minister so that she may read it and pass it over to her colleagues in the ministry.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much. I appreciate the information from my colleague but I was explaining the normal curve concept in assessment, and I am sure we are all familiar with that concept. You cannot get a curve which goes up. That is not a normal curve and that is not what we know. In results, we normally have the first grades, more in the second and third and then it tapers off. Probably an analysis of other years in the past would still indicate that. That is one general comment I wanted to make.

The second one is a reminder. The Local Government Act puts primary education 100 percent under the key functions of local governments. So, when there is a statement that, “Even the schools near the office of the Minister...”, that statement implies that the local government of Kampala Central has given up its legal responsibility to monitor the schools which, under the law, are supposed to be supervised and monitored by the local district education officer, the local inspector of schools, the local councils and the others -(Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I get perturbed when a minister of the entire nation starts apportioning blame and yet she knows that even when we decentralised, we did not mean that the ministry is disposed of its responsibilities. I just wanted her to clarify on the matter where she is insisting that districts or local governments are 100 percent responsible for education systems in this country. I would then need to be advised whether we actually need a minister at the centre and whether we do not need these structures at the districts if the ministry thinks that it is the responsibility of the districts. I just want that cleared, Madam Speaker. 

We thought that even when these districts are under the decentralised system, they are doing work on behalf of the central government and are supposed to be facilitated entirely by the central government. Is this the kind of facilitation that is making district supervisors unable to reach the schools where they are supposed to go and supervise? Honourable minister, be sincere to Ugandans and tell them that the ministry is not doing enough to reach out to the people. Let us also get it clear whether when you decentralise then you entirely wash your hands.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: I thank you very much for that question. I still think that it is my responsibility to explain. When we decentralised as Ugandans, what did we mean? When we put up secretaries for education and ministers for education at each level up to sub-county level, what were we doing? I want to refer the honourable lawyer who asked the question to sections 96, 97, 98 and 99 in the Local Government Act. Find out what the role of the central government is in a decentralised government structure. 

What I am saying - and I want to be very clear here – is that at each level there is a structure of people with functions and responsibilities to manage the day to day supervision of a school. We start with head teacher, who is the first inspector. Every school has got a head teacher and in the law that we passed last year, the head teacher is supposed to monitor and supervise. The next person at the school level is the school management committee. It is a statutory committee that is supposed to see to the day to day activities. Then we have all the other structures up to the district education officer. 

I am only trying to show the structures to explain that if a school is next to my office, it is not the minister to go and inspect it on a day to day basis. Let us try to look at a decentralised system and how it works. We passed a law last year that defines all these structures. I thought we would explain that point. 

The measures that I have listed are the interventions which the central government, from my office, are putting in place to strengthen the functions and responsibilities at the lower levels. Those are our interventions. So, we are not abandoning but intervening where we think there is a weakness.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the clarifications that she is trying to give this House. However, I just want to inform this House that we appreciate the fact that there is a problem. Despite the fact that there is a legal framework, which gives the mandate to the local governments to look at education issues, I think that we must not also forget that as far as education is concerned, it is a responsibility of all of us. We are all stakeholders. 

Colleagues, I am raising this in good faith because I know that we are all leaders in our districts and if there is a problem, let us work together. The ministry cannot work in isolation. We are here as a government because Parliament is a government, so let us work together. If we want to improve education, we must combine our efforts and work together. Let us point out the problems so that the ministry can now come up. If the problem is that we are weakening somewhere then it can improve. 

I also want to acknowledge that local governments and parents are also failing in their roles. I think we need to come up with better strategies on how we can improve our education because if we hide our heads in the sand, the truth is that there will still be a problem.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to pick a cue from where the honourable MP for Wakiso has stopped. It is true that education is the responsibility of all of us and we must do all that is within our means to assist our nation in terms of education. The problem is that for many years, we have been making a point that Universal Primary Education is a very good programme, and we all support it, but that the country was not ready to undertake a programme of this magnitude. 

All of you are aware that even the President himself has raised questions about the performance of UPE. What is hurting members is that the Minister of Education is refusing to make that important statement. The statement that we expect from the minister is that “yes, ladies and gentlemen, here is a good programme but it is failing; what must we do together?” This is the statement that we except from the minister. 

There are problems and flaws in UPE. Government must take responsibility, accept that there are flaws and that the system has a problem, and we must all sit together to review and move the nation’s education system forward. That is my point, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, if you can, you respond in the next fifteen minutes so that we close.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the comments which are being made as we go along answering these questions. Where we have put statutes and laws, it is my responsibility as a minister to point them out to my colleagues. Where we have got structures, it is my responsibility at this forum and others to point them out, and that is exactly what I am saying.

Building on what my colleague and chairperson of Social Services Committee has said, and that is the point I wanted to conclude with, we need to all work together to improve the programme of UPE. I fully agree that the President himself has also made reference to this but my point here is to answer and articulate on areas and aspects where we need to focus and be able to get the desired achievements. In our manifesto, the NRM manifesto for this term office, we say we shall continue improving the quality of UPE. Therefore, we are working towards that. That is why I thank my colleague, hon. Lukwago, for raising a question which can appeal to all members to look at the system and see how best we can improve. It is not in order, and I do not think we should just say it is bad. There are good things, which I must point out, and there are structures and basics which are in place.

Madam Speaker, there are a number of questions which have been raised and the question that has persistently been raised is: why the decline? That is what I am answering. There are a number of interventions which I have listed that we from the central government are putting in place to address that question. My answer is that there are a number of factors, and that is why we are putting in place a number of interventions. We have listed interventions from (a) to (l) - very many interventions - to make sure through such interventions we shall be able to address the issue of a declining programme. Now, when we apply all this to the entire country as my colleagues have suggested - now we are answering the questions for central Kampala – we shall also address all these issues in other parts of the country. 

There was a question asked as to why we have not done anything effective to address discipline. I said in my response that we have published a manual, which has been distributed to all schools, after banning corporal punishment. We have a manual in place, which indicates how issues of indiscipline are dealt with. With a 6 year old, when that young kid misbehaves, do you put out the biggest stick or do you talk to him? So we have published this booklet and when I get sufficient copies, I will probably make them available to the Members. 

Hon. Katuntu still asked why the decline in all parts of the country and said I should have given reasons why. A multiple number of factors - parental support, regular attendance, lack of stationery. 

I think one Member suggested that we should give free stationery. We are giving free text books. In our intervention, we have even given the books to the children to take home to do their homework and read at home. These text books are supplied by the central government. 

Questions came in concerning private schools. Private schools in most cases have got a very low teacher to pupil ratio. When we called all the children to come and partake and get their right to education, definitely we are now talking about seven million children in schools, but the private schools are selective; they take just a small number. We are saying every Ugandan is entitled to basic primary education and therefore we have got very large numbers that we are trying to address by putting up extra facilities where we can do so.

Referring to hon. Kibanzanga’s results in Kasese, we shall continue canceling examinations where there is evidence that there were malpractices in examinations. Out of this office, I will talk to hon. Kibanzanga about other aspects on that matter.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think I will just advise on a light note that I was not a minister in the colonial times because I believe there was a colonial minister at that time, and the colonial time ended when I was a first year at university. So, I never presided over education during the colonial times. (Laughter) These are statements which mislead people.

For the promotion of teachers who do their diplomas and degrees, the Grade III teachers are the ones posted and recruited to primary schools. In the Public Service, one has to declare vacancies for people with a special qualification. Under the primary sub-sector, we do not have openings for people with masters’ degrees; we have openings for people with Grade III certificates.

Quite a number of questions have been asked but I want to say that if I go one by one - I have 18 questions - we might spend much more time. I want to reply to the question from Pader, where girls are said to be performing poorly. We have done very well in this area and I am sure there is room to improve. We are putting in place many affirmative programmes to assist the girls perform better at primary level.

Hon. Wadri, the thematic curriculum is from P.1 to P.3, not P.4. From P.4 to P.7, the medium of instruction will be English. So far from the results of the survey we have done, this has been a very successful programme and we intend to keep on improving on it.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We thank the minister for accepting the clarification that I wish to seek from her. Even if children are going to be instructed in their native language – be it in Terego, Mubende, Hoima where the prime Minister comes from; or Kakira where hon. Migereko comes from. 

The point I am raising is, don’t you think these upcountry pupils who from P.1 up to P.3 are going to be taught in vernacular are unfairly placed in the face of those children in Kampala, Jinja, Mubende in the urban areas where they go to nursery schools and they are instructed in English? 

Doesn’t this put this other child in the countryside at a disadvantage because he or she will not have had a command of English strong enough to enable him to compete with the other children of the Members of Parliament in Kampala? That is the point. Can you assure me that my children in Terego will not be disadvantaged? 

MR KATUNTU: I want to associate myself fully with the remarks of hon. Wadri. However, for argument’s sake, I would like to ask the minister, have you trained these teachers throughout the country to teach in the native languages? 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you so much, colleagues. It gives me the opportunity to clarify on this matter and one time when I was faced with this question, I answered, “How much English does a child of six in Maddu, the area which I represent in Parliament, know on the first day of school?” 

A child comes to school and does not have even one word of English – at home he or she do not even know mum, but “Maama” and now the teacher comes and says, “Stand up”, “get out”, “don’t do that”. The whole day that child will be traumatised and then when he goes home -(Interjections)- give me chance to clarify. We have found through studies that the children are dropping out of school during the first three years and many of them hate school at that time. We have studies which we can bring here. But the point I am making here –(Interruption)

MR OCULA: Madam Speaker, the genesis of learning a language is always by listening to it. Even a child who has just been born is told to stand up and over time the child picks what it means. Is the minister really in order to mislead this House that when the children go to school in P.1 and you tell them to stand up, they become traumatised? Is that professionally correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I am one of those people who have never agreed with that strategy of yours. I went to school in Shimoni Demonstration School and I was addressed in English from P.1 and I am not deficient and I am not traumatised. I think I am one of those who disagree with that strategy of vernacular from P.1 to p.4.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: I appreciate all those comments but let me add that by P.3 these children will have learnt more English because we have promoted English as a subject. There is English as a medium of instruction and there is English as a subject. What we are doing is to give adequate vocabulary to these young people as they go through the semantic curriculum and by P.3 they will have acquired adequate vocabulary to enable them to pick English as a medium of instruction. 

We have done some studies on this. We are advised by professionals in linguistics and we are looking at examples from other countries where it has worked. Of course as we say, we shall continue reviewing this programme. We have rolled it out throughout the entire country; we have trained the teacher and we have produced the materials and so far the results indicate that the programme is succeeding. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, you raised a question on the staff ceiling of Kamuli. We are looking at the staff ceiling in all districts and we are working with the district service committees to recruit and fill the vacancies in the districts and areas where the ceiling is low. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had another proposal, minister; would you be able to find time with the members of parliament to discuss this subject not here but in a workshop without people giving us lectures and we give you our experiences from the field? I think that is what we need. (Applause)

MRS BITAMAZIRE: I fully agree with you, Madam Speaker. We need probably more discussions and dialogue on education as a subject because there are so many concepts, ideas and issues on a comparative basis which we can learn through such workshops and I will see if we can mobilise resources and get these workshops for our MPs. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can even meet here; we can meet in the conference room.

    BILLS
   COMMITTEE STAGE

   THE PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS BILL, 2009

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I propose amendments to the following definitions under clause 2:
a)	On forced labour, to substitute the word “menaces” with the word “threat.” The justification is that it is for simplicity and consistent with the provisions of other existing laws.
b)	To define public officer and public officer, separately. And that definition for a public officer reads as thus: “A public officer means a person acting in any public office,” and public office means “an office in the public service.” The justification is for it to be consistent with the provisions of the Constitution and other existing laws that define the above concepts.
c)	On sexual exploitation, to substitute the word “lascivious” appearing in the last sentence with the word “lustful.” The justification is that it is done for simplicity.
d)	Redraft the definition of the words “slave trade” to read as follows: “Slave trade” includes all acts involved in the capture, acquisition or disposal of a person with a view of selling or exchanging him/her and the with the intention of reducing him/her to slavery.” I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Arumadri.

MR ARUMADRI: I am of the strong view that in paragraph (c) on sexual exploitation, we retain the word “lustful.” In a set of vocabulary, a word is chosen because of the proximity it has to the intended meaning.

Lustful has two projections: You can be lustful towards somebody. That is the only time it has the connotation of sexuality. Otherwise, you can have lust for something like money; it can be power, revenge and forth. So that is why I am saying the word “lustful” is more comprehensive; it goes to the intended thing; simplicity is not enough.

Madam Chairperson, let me reinforce this argument by using the words that we use in our Rules of Procedure. For example, look at rule 181(d)(iv), which reads thus: “… confining for any specific periods recalcitrant witnesses; and ….” Very difficult word, but why did the framers of these rules insist that it should be there yet there are simpler words like unwilling, uncooperative, uncontrollable? They insisted on this word that I personally find it difficult to pronounce - this word should be maintained. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any objections to that?

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chair, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable mover?

MS WINFRED MASIKO: I have no objections to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Lukwago, are you still contributing to the interpretation clause?

MR LUKWAGO: Yes, Madam Chairperson. I see that there are two concepts: public officer and public office. I would suggest, for clarity purposes, that we split the two. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It has been split in the report.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, but I would suggest that we take the wording, “public office means an office in public service.” I do not know whether that works well, but what I am proposing is that we should look at the definition as laid down in Article 175 of the Constitution on the concept of public office. I notice that the definition in this Bill is different from the one in the Constitution. So I beg that we adopt the definition in the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which is?

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, Article 175(a) states thus: “A public officer means any person holding or acting in an office in the public service.” This Article defines the term “public service” to mean service in civil capacity of the government, the emoluments for which are payable directly from the consolidated fund or directly out of monies provided by Parliament.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the fact that I am not a lawyer, but my colleague, hon. Lukwago seems to be confusing us. The reason I say this is that while he is talking about public service, what we are looking at is the public officer. I think he is confusing us.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, what I was talking about is this concept – when you look at the definition of public office, you realise that the Constitution says that it means an office in the public service. And what I was reading was the definition of public service as defined in Article 175 of the Constitution. I thought it would be wise for us to make it consistent with the Constitution because when you talk about the public, then you are talking about public service. That is what you should understand. And for you to be consistent with the Constitution, you have to bring in the definition of the public service. That is what I thought.   

MRS SENINDE: I rose up for my honourable colleague to realise that in this case we are not defining a public service because the Constitution is defining a public service. But here we are defining a public office. The words that are defining a public office are the words of a public service. So my brother should not confuse the English words with the legal words that may now confuse some of us who are not lawyers. But this is the language that any lay person can understand.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you really of a very strong view that we should make that amendment? 

MR LUKWAGO: I thought that we have the supreme law here which is the Constitution. And surely if we are to be consistent in this legislation, the moment we import in the phrase “public service” here in this motion, we have to define it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay can you say what you want us to amend.

MR LUKWAGO: The amendment I was proposing here is to define “public service” and bring it in this motion. I do not know whether there is an objection.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, since we used the word “public service” while defining public office, I concur that he can bring an amendment to define “public service.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Lift it from the Constitution and put it here. Is that what you are saying?

MR KASAMBA: I agree.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On the same interpretation? 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, I am rising for clarification on interpretation of exploitation in (c). You know it has listed a number of things that includes: sexual exploitation, forced marriage, child labour and child marriage. But when you read downwards, sexual exploitation is also interpreted in its own right as a stand alone; forced labour is also interpreted in its own right as a stand alone under (e); I see slavery is also interpreted in its own right under (l). 

What would we lose if we hand lumped all those up, because what I really wanted to see happen is for us to single out human sacrifice and give an interpretation of it. We get forced marriage and child marriage; give an interpretation of each of them separately for purposes of clarity. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So you want each of them unpacked separately and defined? 

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate what the Member has said but I think we raised sexual exploitation and slavery because this motion really hinges on those issues greatly and we did not want anybody to misinterpret them. But most of these other issues like armed conflict really to define all those details we think they are catered for in different pieces of literature and they are more or less straightforward. 

So I think for an interpretation to go in such details would be cumbersome since it can easily be understood. I am of the opinion that we stick to these ones which are clear and because we shall refer to them most of the time. If we are to define every word in this motion, I have a feeling that we might not be able to reach far. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, during the second reading, the majority of Members expressed fears over the push factors of human sacrifice. Human sacrifice is one of the major factors causing human trafficking and so, really leaving it to hide under exploitation would not be very fair because we said that we should provide for human sacrifice in this motion and prescribe tough punitive measures for the vice.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But the human sacrifice is there; it is here. 

DR EPETAIT: Yeah, what I am saying is that it is included under exploitation, generally with the rest. It would be better if we singled it out and give it a definition of its own the way we did for forced labour, slavery and sexual exploitation.  

MR OCULA: Madam Chairperson, why don’t we really do that since in the main part of the motion as we are going through we may find that we may need to define many other terms? Why don’t we stand over this interpretation clause and we come and deal with it later if there is any confusion ahead so that we can proceed? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You can do it lastly. Okay, hon. Members let us stand over clause 2 for now. 

Clause 3
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to introduce an amendment to clause 3 to first redraft it in tandem with the committee’s amendment to read as follows. I will introduce (b) as a new amendment but I will read as in the motion which is: “A person who recruits, transports, transfers, harbours or receives a person by means of the threat or use of force or other forms coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payment or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person for the purpose of exploitation.” 

My amendment is to introduce (b) to read: “Recruits, hires, maintains, confines, transports, transfers, harbours or receives a person or facilitates the afore mentioned acts through force and other forms of coercion for the purpose of engaging that person in prostitution, pornography, sexual exploitation, forced labour, slavery, involuntary servitude, death bondage, forced or arranged marriage.” And then the penalty which is prescribed by the committee shall now become, “… commits an offence and is liable to imprisonment for 15 years.” 

The justification is that most of the UN Conventions to which Uganda is a signatory recognise that prostitution and sexual exploitation are a major factor for trafficking of women and girls. Actually in most countries the law is a stand alone as prevention in trafficking in women and children majorly on guarding against forced prostitution and sexual exploitation which is a big issue. 

And secondly, you know many tourists organise tourist events and would like to use girls and women - mostly girls - for purposes of expedition and sexual exploitation. The target of trafficking is majorly women and children.

So the reason I have introduced this amendment is to make the offence of forcing or coercing for prostitution, pornography and sexual exploitation stand alone on its own because it is a major issue. Madam Chairperson, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman?

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to the amendment moved by hon. Betty Amongi. However, I have subsequent amendments to clause 3. 

Clause 3(2), substitute the words, “legal person” appearing on the second line with the following words, “…a company or association or body of persons corporate or unincorporated.” 

The justification is that in the Interpretation Act, Cap. 3, a person is defined to include any company or association or body of persons corporate or unincorporated hence there is no need for repetition of the words.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you know the legal personality is the term used in law. So if you are enumerating them and you miss out something, I do not know what will happen. Have you covered all the possible legal persons by that enumeration?

MR ONEK: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As we are formulating this law, we must also be mindful of other cultures in our country. 

The preliminary activities that go on before a girl formally gets accepted as being married or being accepted by parents sometimes involve those things that are now being put in the law as prohibited. For example certain cultures, like the Karimojong culture, will require that reasonable force is applied to cause that relationship to be hooked together in order later on to be married. The girls are physically chased by the boys and then they are raped before the whole thing is accepted. Eventually they settle down and get married. But now, you are putting a law whereby such formal cultural acts as accepted by society are going to be criminalised.

How are we going to differentiate between those formalities of actually initiating those relationships which can easily be made to look as if they are criminal and yet these people are genuine and they want to -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, unfortunately you were not here for the second reading yesterday. You would have understood the context in which this law is being made. If they are part of their culture then there will be no complainant. We are talking about trafficking - (Interruptions)- there will be no complainant. Yes. 

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, I thought I would explain this to the honourable minister who raised this issue, and allay his fears. We are not tampering with culture. The major purpose of trafficking is exploitation and that is clearly raised. So if there is no exploitation in a culture there is no need to get worried.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any other amendments? Honourable chairman, are you still insisting on enumerating the forms of legal persons? I thought this one really covers you.

MR KASAMBA: It covers us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But if you enumerate and leave out some you will have caused a problem.

MR KASAMBA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. I still have another amendment. In clause 3(4), substitute the words “trafficked person” with the words “victim of trafficking” and delete the word “intended” appearing on the second line. The justification is to cater for all stages of trafficking.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you read the full sentence?

MR KASAMBA: “For purposes of this section, the consent of the trafficked person to the intended acts of exploitation or, if a child, the consent of his or her parent or guardian shall be irrelevant.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And you want to amend it to?

MR KASAMBA: To substitute the words “trafficked person” with the words “victim of trafficking” and delete the word “intended” appearing on the second line.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, “For purposes of this section, the victim of trafficking ….”

MR KASAMBA: Yeah; “ … to the acts of exploitation…” because there is a provision that there is consent. One may have a justification that there was consent from the victim and so it should read, “For purposes of this section, the consent of the victim of trafficking to the intended act of exploitation or, if a child, the consent of his or her parent and guardian shall be irrelevant.” We are doing away with any aspect of intent. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Ok. Say the sentence you want us to amend.

MR KASAMBA: “For purposes of this section the consent of the trafficked person -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The one you want to include there -

MR KASAMBA: Ok. “For purposes of this section, the consent of the victim of trafficking to the intended acts…” delete, “to the acts of exploitation.” “For purposes of this section, the consent of the victim of trafficking to the acts of exploitation” without the word “intended.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe you could just say, “…the consent of the victim of trafficking, or if a child, the consent of his or her parents shall be irrelevant.” You don’t say for purposes of this section but I think for the whole law really.

MR KASAMBA: Yes, it should not be -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You could state that the consent of the victim of trafficking or if a child, the consent of his or her parents or guardian shall be irrelevant. So delete “for purposes of this section” and the other words.

MR KASAMBA: Madam, I concur with your phrasing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any further amendments? Hon. Members, I propose that clause 3 be amended as proposed by hon. Amongi and the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 4 I intend to submit the following amendments: amend the preamble which appears immediately after the head note to read as follows, “A person commits the offence of aggravated trafficking where-” Instead of “in case where”, we replace it with “a person commits the offence of aggravated trafficking where”. 

Clause 4(b) is amended by inserting immediately after the word “fostering” the following words, “other orders in relation to children.” The justification is to cater for other orders as well. This is to broaden adoption and include guardianship, fostering and other orders in relation to children. This provision will also widen the provision in relation to children. 

In (c), insert a new clause immediately after clause 4(d) to read as follows: “The offender is an organisation engaged in the activities of organising, directing or protecting the vulnerable persons in society.” 

The justification is to cater for the organisations, which are allegedly set up for purposes of providing and protecting the victims of trafficking but end up violating the rights of these victims or even exploiting them either sexually or for their own financial gains. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you deleting 4(d)?

MR KASAMBA: No, just inserting a new clause immediately after clause 4(d) to read as above. That is an additional clause. There will be subsequent realignment of other sections after 4(d).

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to introduce, with the realignment to a new sub-clause (i) to read, “where the person organises, facilitates or makes preparations for the kidnapping, abducting, buying, selling, vending, bringing from or sending to, receiving, detaining or confining of a person for purposes of harmful rituals or practices, human sacrifice, removal of any body part or parts or organ(s) or any act related to witchcraft.” 

The justification is to cater for offenders in light of the emergence of human sacrifices. This provision will deal with those who organise human sacrifice, those who are involved in facilitating the process of getting people for sacrifice and those who make the preparations so that this provision can apply to all those involved in the processes of human sacrifice. I beg to move.

MR NYOMBI: Madam Chairperson, on clause 4, I propose that paragraph (b) be deleted, the reason being that clause 3 defines trafficking to include an element of recruiting, transporting, transferring, harbouring and so forth. 

Adoption is regulated by the Children’s Act and the Act provides a laborious procedure by which one can adopt a child and at the end of the process, a court order is granted. The same is true for legal guardianship and fostering. 

First of all, it is not recruitment, transporting, harbouring or receiving. An adopted child goes through a process that is managed by the court of law. Now if it is included here, it would mean that the people that are involved in the process of adoption or legal guardianship or fostering would be party to trafficking and that is the judge or the magistrate. 

Most importantly, adoption doesn’t include the elements in the definition and, therefore, I propose that paragraph (b) of clause 4 be deleted. In fact I could disclose that as the Legal Affairs committee, we did propose that the Children’s Act be amended to refine the process of adoption to deal with any loopholes that may have been left out in that Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nyombi, supposing I had a project where I go to Rwanda, adopt children officially and traffic them to a country that I will not name then I go to Tanzania with my same project, adopt children, go through the court and traffic them. I think this is what they are trying to address here not the genuine adoption. If I use adoption as a project to get children into my control by law then I traffic them, I think that is what they were trying to address, isn’t it?

MR NYOMBI: Would that mean that if somebody commits an offence, the judge, magistrate and probation officer is a party to that offence? This problem had better be handled under the Children’s Act, not here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, let us read it. It states, “Adoption, guardian, fostering … is undertaken for the purpose of exploitation.” You have not read the last part. When they do it deliberately for that purpose, that is, I put the law on my side then I traffic the children. I think that is what they were trying to guard against.  

MR NYOMBI: Madam Chairperson, I have read the whole section, in fact I am reading it as a package: adoption, guardianship and fostering - these three processes do not include the elements of trafficking as defined by clause 2 that interprets trafficking in persons. Paragraph (n) of clause 2 says trafficking in persons means recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring and so forth. I can understand the problem but the problem had better be dealt with under the Children’s Act, which regulates adoption, legal guardianships and fostering.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not know if my other colleagues can help because for me I understand what the movers want.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, we appreciate all the good intentions under adoption, guardianship, fostering and all other related measures to take care of vulnerable children. However, for purposes of this section, it is basically to guard against the abuse of adoption and guardianship where children are found to be exploited under the guise of these very good methods and measures under the Children’s Act which are meant to ensure that children are given normal livelihoods. This is the negative aspect that we are trying to guard against because this is a preventive law to guard against those who have negative intentions. 

Much as you may have had the good intention of adopting, if the child himself or herself comes out and says, I am a victim of circumstances, I did not know then the law would catch up with such elements. That is the purpose of this provision.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, I would like to invite my colleague hon. Nyombi to appreciate this. Even the definition in clause 2(n) that he has read about trafficking in persons still ends with a phrase ‘for purposes of exploitation’. This 4(b) is really to avoid exploitation. Actually 2(n) and 4(b) are all talking about exploitation and I think they are really well placed, I invite you to admit.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Madam Chairperson, I want to inform this House that as the committee is amending these provisions regarding exploitation, there are some Ugandans who adopt children and sometimes these are children of their relatives. These people stay abroad and go with these children because they know that in developed countries, there is a children’s allowance and their aim is to get that allowance. 

Secondly, they know that if you have a child with a disability, your allowance is increased so they give these children substances to make them disabled in an attempt to get more allowances. This is the exploitation that we are talking about and want to address here, Madam Chairperson. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nyombi, I do not know - are you still not satisfied?

MS ALISEMERA: Madam Chairperson, we know very well that the racket of child trafficking is so long and that at every stage, you will find somebody with a piece of paper. Yesterday members were talking of local councils who forge papers. To prevent all this, we need this in our Bill.  Thank you.

MR OCULA: Madam Chairperson, I just wanted him to try and clarify to us. By putting this sub-section (b), shall we be stepping on the toes of the other law? Is there any contradiction or even if we put it that way, it will just be a matter of emphasis and it would be put in this law. Is there any contradiction at all?

MR NYOMBI: I think we intend to pass a good law. The situations that have been sighted can be covered under paragraph (a). Paragraph (b) is qualified with “exploitation”. In fact we need not reiterate it because in the definition of child trafficking, exploitation is one of the ingredients. But by somebody going to court and getting a court order, adoption order, legal guardianship order or fostering order, he has got this child legally. If somebody goes and exploits this child, that should be covered under paragraph (a). We do not have to reiterate it here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nyombi, people have pretended to be married and trafficked these wives from continent to continent and they bring them into the country with certificates. Someone can make a project to adopt children for trafficking, go through the court - I do not know who can convince hon. Nyombi.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I want the movers to make a distinction. When they say aggravated trafficking in persons - a person commits aggravated trafficking where adoption, guardianship, fostering - the distinction between the normal way we do things here when you call for a girl from the village to come and do housework for you - won’t this law be used by some people? You send for somebody in the village to come and do some housework and then somebody turns up later to say you are trafficking because you called me to come to your home to help with house work and then somebody takes you to police and uses this law that you are committing an offence. I want the movers to make a comment on that -(Interjection)- because that is common practice in Uganda.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the observations that have been raised, but I would also like to – before I go to this one - to assure hon. Nyombi that we are not against adoption. The law is not against guardianship and fostering. It is against the purpose for which you are doing it. So that is what we want to protect, and it does no harm to reflect it here even when it might be captured in other laws.

The issue of exploitation is an issue of human rights. If you are exploiting human beings, then you have fallen short of respecting human rights. So as Ugandans we should also desist from exploitation. We do not mean that you cannot employ somebody but the extent to which the exploitation is brought in is an issue that helps us to know that it is high time we realised that modern day slavery is not taking human beings and paying cash, but also seducing people in the name of workers and when they get in our homes they are exploited. So, I think that is the way we are going and we need to realise that it is no longer appreciated on the continent.

MR SABILA: Is it not the one hon. Nyombi has been suggesting? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you also on clause 4.

MR SABILA: I think he has conceded. I hope so –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe we should finish with clause 4 first.

MR SABILA: In clause 4 just after paragraph (e), it indicates that “the offence is committed by close relatives, a person having the parental care, authority or control over the victim.” I want us to suggest another paragraph reading, “Whether the offence is committed by a friend – you see above a close relative, a person having parental care, authority or control over the victim” does not exactly indicate a friend. Because much of this trafficking is done also by close friends or peers as if they are just making small visits and end up trafficking. I thought that paragraph could also be inserted if it is agreeable with the –(Interruption)

MR OBUA: Madam Chairperson, I just wanted to modify the proposal brought in by hon. Sabila by inserting that word in clause 4(e). The entire clause would read, “The offence is committed by a friend, relative or a person having a parental care, authority or control over the victim.” The justification is that most of these traffickers are also friends to the victims. And the question of being a relative, once you are a relative, you are a relative whether a distant relative or a close relative. 
 
MR OCULA: Madam Chairperson, while literary it sounds nice, I wonder how a friend is defined in law because a friend is such a relative thing. You can say so and so is a very good friend. I do not know really how you are going to enforce it because somebody can deny that, “I am not your friend”. What are you going to say about it? So I find difficulty - how do we practically put it into the legal system?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But they are captured under “any person”. I think the key phrase is “any person”. They can capture whether a friend or relative or whatever. I think there is no harm in including this. I propose that clause 4 be amended as proposed by the chairperson and other members.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS ALUPO: Madam Chairperson, in light of massive child trafficking, massive sacrifice and massive influx of children on the streets, I would like to propose an amendment by inserting an independent clause at this point which deals specifically with the children, to read: “Trafficking in children: A person commits the offence of trafficking in children who:
(a)	Does any act referred to under section 3 in relation to a child;
(b)	Uses a child in any armed conflicts;
(c)	Removes any part, organ or tissue from the body of a child taken alive;
(d)	Uses a child in the commission of a crime;
(e)	abandons a child outside the country;
(f)	Uses a child or part of a child in witchcraft rituals or related practices;
(g)	The offender commits the offence of aggravated trafficking in children and shall be liable to imprisonment for life.”

Madam Chairperson, the justification is that Uganda is a signatory to the Convention on the Rights of a Child and there is provision in that convention which protects children specifically from being trafficked. 

I would like you to allow me to read that specific Article in the Convention and that is Article 35: “The State shall take all appropriate national, bilateral and multilateral measures to prevent the abduction of, the sale of or trafficking in children for any purpose or in any form.” 

Madam Chairperson, you realise that in most cases women and children are predominantly victims of child trafficking and it was also highlighted in the chairperson’s report yesterday that globally out of the two million persons who are trafficked, 1.2 million fall under the category of children. I beg to amend. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any objection to the new clause?

MR KASAMBA: I have no objection, Madam Chair.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want a clarification on the penalty because the minister in the amendment under (a) – acts referred to under section 3 in relation to children, the penalty we have passed already is 15 years. Here she is introducing penalties in generality. I wonder whether it would be possible for her to exclude (a) so that its penalty is in tandem with clause 3 and then the rest remains aggravated. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not think I have understood what you want.

MS BETTY AMONGI: The minister is introducing 5, which is trafficking in children. “A person commits the offence of trafficking in children who does any acts refereed to under section 3 in relation to a child.” Now, 3(a) which we have passed says “…recruits, transports, transfers, harbours…” and (b) is the one I introduced on prostitution whose penalty is 15 years. I think this other one of removing body parts, abandoning a child, witchcraft is also what we passed which is under aggravated trafficking and whose penalty is life imprisonment. 

I am wondering whether the minister to be consistent with clause 3, would exclude (a) and say in the case of (a) the penalty prescribed under clause 3 shall apply and then the rest becomes life imprisonment. That is the clarification I want.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Chair, in clause 4 of the proposed Bill, we had a blanket one saying the victim of trafficking is a child. So we said it would be aggravated trafficking in persons if the victim of trafficking is a child and the person is liable for life imprisonment. I think since we have already covered it, it does not contradict the punishment that has been stipulated by the amendment.
	
MS BETTY AMONGI: If people strongly believe that when you commit crimes related to that in section 3 to children, it is aggravated, I have no problem, but I wanted clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is there in No. 4.

MR ALINTUMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think the punishment is too small for someone who goes and decides to kill children like what we are seeing today. In fact, life imprisonment is wrong; we still have the death penalty. As far as some of us are concerned, those people deserve a death penalty. 

I would like to make an amendment in the case of child trafficking under section 5(g) that we add “…or death penalty provided for under the constitution”, because we still accept the death penalty and I think this is the biggest punishment that we can ever use to stop such a terrible and horrible crime. I propose that we make an amendment and add death penalty. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have an objection?

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Chair, the reason we did not put the death penalty – we do appreciate that there should be a very big penalty for this – is that there was already debate in this country that the death penalty is outlawed. We were taking a position that we know is consistent so that we do not have to come and repeal the law because the debate that is taking place now is towards abolition of the death penalty. 

I would like to beg the honourable minister that we take it as it is and when the debate is completed, we can amend this law and reaffirm the death penalty. I do not have any objection with having the biggest punishment you can ever have to any person who deals in trafficking in persons. 

MR PETER NYOMBI: The Supreme Court recently passed a judgement confirming that the death penalty is legal in this country. Even if it had not done so, still the section would be worded in such a way that one would be liable to a maximum sentence of death so that the judges would have judicial discretion of what sort of punishment to mete out.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe we say “may be liable to suffer death” so that they can either give life imprisonment or death penalty.

MR OCULA: Madam Chair, I understand the gravity of some of these actions, but I would say that in this law we are making, let us make life imprisonment a maximum sentence where child trafficking results into death, it will automatically mean that other laws will come in –(Interjections)- if someone trafficks a child and that child has been sacrificed, that becomes murder which is covered by other laws. I think for the purpose of this law, let us make the maximum sentence to be life imprisonment.

HON. MEMBERS: No.

MR OCULA: Okay, if you do agree with me on that – (Laughter)

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I support the honourable minister’s amendment because usually when people suspect the occurrence of a case of child sacrifice or trafficking – if you do not put this law of the death penalty, they will not be encouraged to take that person to the police; they will resort to mob justice. 

So to accord the man who has committed such a crime justice, make him face either death penalty or life imprisonment as the judge may so wish. It is upon us to send a signal to the public that when you engage in such crimes, there are two options. That is why I support the amendment as moved by the honourable minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose that a new clause 5 be inserted as proposed by the minister and that we amend the sentence to say, “Such a person may be liable to suffer death”, so that the courts can determine the gravity. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question – 

MR KIYINGI: Madam Chair, I do not know which amendment we have just voted on. There was an amendment by hon. Alupo and another by hon. Alintuma.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I said that instead of saying “shall be liable to suffer imprisonment” we should say “may suffer death” so that it opens the door for the judge to decide the gravity.

MR KIYINGI: So, we voted on both?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, we did.

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose that clause 6 do stand part of the Bill – yes, hon. Ocula.

MR OCULA: Madam Chair, I have a very small amendment to move on clause 6, particularly clause 6(6), which says that any person who produces, prints, issues or distributes any document or information of any Government agency, which relates to emigration without authority. I would like to –(Interruption)

MR KASAMBA: Excuse me, Madam Chair. When we inserted clause 5 as moved by hon. Jessica Alupo – there was the original clause 5, which we have not pronounced ourselves on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think there is a new clause 5.

MR KASAMBA: That now becomes clause 6. So we need to pronounce ourselves before the honourable comes in on clause 6. As indicated – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but we pronounced ourselves on both. They will now be numbered sequentially.

MR OCULA: Madam Chair, I would like to move an amendment to clause 6(b) that we delete that last words “without authority” and replace it with the words “for purposes of trafficking.” So it should now read: “Any person who produces, prints, issues or distributes any document or information of any Government agency which relates to emigration for purposes of trafficking….” 

The justification is that in many cases we usually pick material from the internet for research purpose, but such print out should not constitute an offence for that purpose. However, if somebody goes ahead to make use these prints for trafficking that should constitute a crime. I beg to move.

MR KASAMBA: I have no objection to what my colleague is saying although I also have another amendment on clause 6 to redraft the penalty provision to read as follows: “Commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or to imprisonment of five years or both imprisonment and fine, and on subsequent conviction for the same offence, to imprisonment of seven years without the option of a fine.” 

The justification is that this is being put for purposes of drafting; for consistency with the provisions of the other existing laws and to comply with the provisions of law revisions of fines and other financial amounts in the Criminal Matters Act, 2008. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed by hon. Ocula and the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chair, I propose an amendment to clause 7(d) to delete the rest of the words appearing immediately after the word “employment” and maintain the provision that reads: “recruits a person below 16 years into any form of employment for purposes of exploitation.” 

The justification is make this provision consistent with Article 34(4) and (5) of the Constitution and also to remove the unjustifiable exceptions. This is owed to the fact that consent of a parent does not make good of an act of trafficking; it should not be used as aground to exonerate the offenders of child trafficking. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Masiko.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Chair, I have got no objections.

DR EPATAIT: Madam Chair, I am rising on clause 7(e), which reads: “Any person who introduces or matches any person to the foreign national for marriage in consideration for material or economic gain.” 

My view is that this clause should not be limited to foreign nationals; it should be open. Therefore, I would like to propose an amendment, which should read in parts as follows: “Introduces or matches any person to another person for purposes of sexual exploitation.” 

I do not know whether I am being clear but the thing is that the way marriage stands now, if a foreign national picked interest in a Ugandan lady and he decides to marry her, but in the course of doing that he gives something to the family in appreciation, if we leave it as it is now, that would constitute human trafficking. That is why I wanted to replace it and put it as: “For purposes of sexual exploitation.” I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any other amendments to clause 7? Yes.

MR KASAMBA: I missed out the redrafting of the penalty provisions to read as follows: “Commits an offence and is liable on conviction for imprisonment of five years or a fine of 120,000 currency points, or both imprisonment and fine, and on subsequent conviction on the same offence is liable for imprisonment of seven years without the option of a fine.” 

The justification is to be consistent with the redrafting techniques of other existing laws and for consistency with the provisions of the law revisions of fines and financial amounts in the criminal matters. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, did I hear properly, is it 120 currency points or 120,000 currency points; I thought I heard 120,000. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, can you restate your proposal on the penalty clause? 

MR KASAMBA: It is 120,000 currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That comes to how much? You know a currency point is Ugshs 20,000

MS NAKAWUKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When I look at clause 7(c) and (f) which involve removal of body tissue of a child and then using the parts of a child in witchcraft I feel we need to put a more deterrent penalty because this is really rampant. So I feel five years is nothing; it is non-deterrent and 120,000 currency points is a bit unreasonable. So I propose that you increase the penalty in terms of imprisonment and then put another reasonable penalty in order to deter people from getting involved in such because it is rampant and we need to have the children protected. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would you step up the sentence to beyond five years? What was the rationale for five years? 

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, 120,000 currency units translates into Ugshs 240 million, which is really outrageous. So I would like to propose that if the mover of the motion and the chairperson are not ready to propose a new figure -(Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Madam Chairperson, I still stand to support whether the 120,000 currency points were a mistake, an oversight or for whatever reasons. At this point I stand to ask, what is the cost or the price of a human being especially when you know that the body parts are being mutilated and at the end of the day will lead to the death of this child and a sacrifice; a sacrifice to what? So what is the cost of a human being? We are saying this so that we completely put a strong stop to this. Those who are perpetuating and involved in it should know that that is a no go area. Otherwise, it is just becoming a nuisance. So I stand by the first proposal of 120,000 currency points because it is something that has never taken place. 

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think honourable members should understand that some of these body parts are actually being sold outside the country for amounts beyond even Ugshs 500,000 or even more than that. So this penalty is very lenient. These body parts we are talking about are a very sophisticated process of international trade. So we should not actually just gloss over it. Thank you very much.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Madam Chairperson, these people who are dealing in human sacrifice, who are selling, who are mutilating people; we do not know how much they get from these parts and from sacrifice. From what we have heard those who are sacrificing people are people who want to get rich and there are others who are already rich. So what we are saying is nothing to them. We should, therefore, maintain what is there.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Chairperson, I have looked at the figures here, if we put the punishment at 120,000 currency points that would translate into 2.4 billion. So, I don’t know whether that is what we want. If that is what we want, let us say so. But I thought that this may be in the situation of Uganda a little bit unrealistic. Yes I share with my colleague that these offences are really very grievous; they are heinous and we should really prescribe the heaviest punishment possible. But I am looking at an ordinary Ugandan peasant who is involved in this asking him or her to pay 2.4 billion; you might as well send him or her to the gallows. 

MR OCULA: Madam Chairperson, I think while making laws, we should put aside emotions and the laws we make should be seen to be consistent. There is no way you can say that the term of imprisonment is five years and then when you go to the alternative, you put it at that rate. It is outrageous completely. Instead I would say that we can just have only the term of imprisonment without even putting the currency points and so forth and still the law will work without any problem.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, I think maybe we need to look at this more carefully. The first part was promoting trafficking in persons, now we are trying to create a penalty for related offences. So I was of the opinion that we uphold the offence that we actually created in promoting trafficking, which reads in parts as “…commits an offence is liable to conviction and a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or for imprisonment of five years.” For the sake of consistence, I would request the chairperson that we have the same penalty as we had for promoting; I think it is also deterrent enough.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we return to the old proposal?

MS NAKAWUKI: Madam Chairperson, when I look at the offences created under intended Section 7(c) and (f), the magnitude of these offences is bigger compared to (a), (b), (d) and (e). I propose that we remove (c) and (f) and put them in a different section their magnitude being big. I do not know whether you get what I mean. Anyway it is because Section 7 says, “a person commits the offence of trafficking in children who:
(a)	Does any act referred to under Section 4 in relation to a child;
(b)	Uses a child in any armed conflicts;
(c)	Removes any part, organ or tissue from the body of a child taken alive;
(d)	Uses a child in the commission of a crime;
(e)	Abandons the child outside the country; and
(f)	Uses a child or part of a child in witchcraft rituals or related practices.”  

I was proposing that (c), which talks about the removal any part, organ or tissue from a body of a child taken alive and (f) -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, let us really move. I put the question –

MR OCULA: Madam Chairperson, I was expecting hon. Kasule to get up on 7(c). That is exactly the point he raised about bringing a domestic servant and so forth and which can be turned round. But let me help him. Section 7(c) says thus: “Any person who recruits, transports … a person for domestic or oversees employment or training or…without any clear prior arrangement for the same, also commits the same offence.”  

This is very broad and can be subject to abuse. I am saying this because one could have brought somebody in good faith for domestic work. Or a person could have sent somebody abroad, in good faith, to study; to get training. But one can also easily turn around and say that that person was taken there for a bad motive. I will talk about this phrase “without any clear prior arrangement for the same.” Where are the arrangements supposed to be made?  

I think this sub-clause (c) is very highly prone to abuse. I request that it should be deleted. And even if it is deleted, it is not going to hurt any part of the Bill, anyway. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does it not go to the evidence? You know if the trafficker is arrested and the victim says, “This person said let us meet in Nairobi and when I arrived in Nairobi, I found myself in Arabia or something like.” Does that not go back to the evidence?

MR KASAMBA: I think, Madam Chairperson, there are even several occasions where many people have gone for different purposes and end up, either being detained there or delayed there; it is usually basically due to the wrong motives. This law is to prevent any wrong motive. A victim may come and report - yesterday we had revelations that some two girls were found in a given country by somebody. The grounds on which those children or those girls left this country maybe the evidence used in court against the trafficker. That is the purpose of this provision.   

We believe they are all good intentions out there to cater for the children, girls and other vulnerable people, but in case a victim comes out and says that he/she was taken overseas on pretext that they were going for a conference, which conference never materialised but that they ended up somewhere else, that is the ground. If a victim comes out and reveals that, that is already good evidence to ensure that there was no prior arrangement for such a victim to be employed in those situations.

MR OCULA: Madam Chairperson, while I agree such circumstances exist, that means there is need to redraft this. The redrafting should clearly show that that person was taken out and ended up being exploited. I do not know how it could be put, but I think that way it will be understandable. But if you give it a blanket cover, it may become vague. So they can redraft it to partially read, “… the person ended up in that situation of exploitation which he did not understand”.  

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Chairperson, in this legislation, the word that is running through is exploitation, and I beg your indulgency, if I have got it wrong. Therefore, whichever clause we are looking at, we should not be repeating the word exploitation because all you are doing is that these offences are being committed with the aim of exploiting the victims.  

Secondly, I would like also to go back to the part with the words “without clear prior arrangement.” I will give an example. I have been a refugee. You take out somebody, with no prior arrangement. You arrive in a country and that individual happens - you find him or her job or training or something, but eventually something may go wrong in what he or she is doing. Would that also be trafficking? I would like to seek a clarification.  

MR OCULA: Madam Chairperson, I think we are almost talking the same or very similar language with the honourable minister. We are not in any way doubting that such circumstances can arise. But I brought in this so that we also safeguard against people who can turn around and say that they were taken out, but ended up being trafficked, when you could have done it as a Member of Parliament. For example, you send somebody out – I have done it several times; I have helped people to go out several times. If somebody meets a problem there, they can turn round and say that, “No, I was aided by Ocula to get out”, so I will end up suffering at the hands of this law. I am saying that if it can be proved in the court of law that the initial motive of sending that person abroad was for the purpose of exploitation then I have no problem with that. That is why I say that without any clear arrangement, it is a bit vague. Can it be better qualified by the people who draft to ensure that the principle is taken along that line?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think there is no harm in that even for purposes of emphasis.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think we can close this clause here and end with “trafficking for the purposes of trafficking” such that we deter people from misusing this law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think we should remove the words “without any clear, prior arrangements” for the same reason and replace them with “with the intention of trafficking.” That will provide for what we want.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So what is the amendment now? How do you want it to read, hon. Nandala? Can you read the full sentence?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, “recruits, transports, transfers, harbours, provides or receives a person for domestic or overseas employment or training or apprenticeship with the intention of trafficking.” What we are trying to target is the intention of trafficking.

MR ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. This serves for overseas situations but domestic problems are not included. There are some people who go to some districts, recruit, transport and then go and abandon some people somewhere else and these people become helpless. What do you do against those people?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But it is here under domestic.

MR ANOKOBONGGO: If they are traffickers; they may not have the intention of exploitation but transfer people to places foreign to them and abandon them there. What do you do to those people? Thank you.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, I think this clause, which has been amended, clearly stipulates for domestic or overseas employment. So I think your worry is catered for under domestic and overseas.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have dealt with (c) but not (d). Madam Chairperson, it states, “recruits a person below 18 years or 16.” However, when somebody comes for employment, he does not move with a birth certificate. If these people have been well fed, they may look huge and over 16 years. Also sometimes when they are coming, they may declare to you that they have no parents. There are such circumstances. Even if they have parents, they can go and ask somebody to write on their parent’s behalf. This is going to complicate employment. I have examples of that nature where somebody comes and says, “I am coming from Kapchorwa and I need a job in Sironko” and you willingly give them a job then tomorrow I am behind bars because I gave a job to a child who is below 16 years. Madam Chairperson, I suggest that we delete this.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I strongly object to the deletion of this provision. Just today we have been complaining about education yet at times we become abettors in one way or another. I think it is upon us who are offering employment to get evidence of the age of the child or the employee you intend to employ. If we are serious in implementing this law, we should become conscious of the type of people we are employing. Also if we are to support children to stay in schools under UPE and USE, we must ensure that these provisions are there to avoid people drop out of schools and homes to seek employment. We should not abet the wrong side, which we are trying to prevent. It is upon us to get the evidence and become consciously aware that we must fight this vice. That is why I say we should maintain this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe if we could just add the word “knowingly” recruits that would give some protection so that if you have come across a fat person – can we add “knowingly” there?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, now we have to improve it because I have certain scenarios. Yesterday in the papers a child went and denied that she is above 18 years in a defilement case. When they arrested the man, she came and said, “I am above age; I am 18 years.” So there are complicated things here. Somebody will write a CV and say I am 18 years yet the CV is correct. So as you have said, we should insert the word “knowingly” recruits a person. That will be the best but when you do not know, you can – (Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Chairperson, I object to this. It is said that ignorance of the law is no defence. This “knowingly” can be a blanket cover for culprits. People will deny because of the insertion of the word “knowingly.” Let us do without the word.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Uganda is a member of the International Labour Convention and when it comes to years - hon. Nandala-Mafabi has been telling us a true story where you employ somebody from Nalugugu but the point is; we should actually go by the age that the clause is stipulating. And even if we did not put the word “knowingly” because the moment you say that somebody can easily lie about the age, and you should not put a lower age than that because Uganda is a member of the International Labour Organisation Convention, so we cannot go beyond that because somebody has overfed and all that. So I beg that we leave the clause as it stands.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Mine is on clause 7(e): “Introduces or matches any person, a foreign national for marriage in consideration for material or economic gain.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it was amended. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, a fine of 1,000 currency points you are talking about is Shs 20 million. This is very little money! To make everybody fear this offence we should increase the currency points. I will suggest that this should be 5,000 currency points for purposes of deterring an individual who engages in this act because Shs 20 million, a kid you have sold may have been more than that.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Chairperson, I support hon. Nandala for the first time -(Laughter)- and I would like to amend further that we make it 10,000 currency points which is equivalent of roughly Shs 100 million, from Shs 50 million.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: 5,000?

MR KUBEKETERYA: He said 5,000 but I am saying 10,000 such that it is an equivalent of Shs 100 million from the other Shs 20 million. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, 5,000 is the one which is equal to Shs 100 million. Get 5 times 20, which is equal to Shs 100 million otherwise, I could take you for -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed by the Members. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment to clause 8 to substitute the words “25 currency points” with “72 currency points.” The justification is to be consistent with the provisions of the law. And I think it increases on the deterrent on whoever would have failed to disclose any conviction. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if we are talking of three years of imprisonment and up there we have said five years, or 5,000 it must move in the same line. So this should be 3,000 currency points to match up and down.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed by the chairperson and amended by hon. Nandala.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, clause 9(2) states that, “Any person who knowing that a person has committed or intends to commit an offence and does not report to police or other authority commits an offence and is liable to a fine of 10 currency points or imprisonment.” I am finding difficulties with this provision because how would you prove that that any person knew that somebody was going to commit or intends to commit a crime?

The best option would have been to leave that one as it is and then bring the offence. But to think you can prove in court that a person knew that a person was going to commit a crime or intended to commit a crime - I do not know what mechanism that you would use to prove it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, supposing I run a hotel and then somebody rents a room there and once a week children arrive there, and they disappear and the following week, the same thing happens -  is that one of the circumstances?

MS AMONGI: In that circumstance, this provision of “has committed a crime” would work, but intending to commit a crime, if somebody comes to a hotel with children and I house them in my hotel, they leave, they are trafficked somewhere else, how would I have known if I go and reject it in court? How would you prove that I knew that person intended to commit that crime?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Suppose it is a pattern, suppose I use that hotel every week and every week I bring in, the other day I bring Madi children, the another day I bring Basoga children and I am a regular customer there -

MS BETTY AMONGI: Then the issue of any person who, knowing that a person has committed or is committing would work, but the question of intends – I do not know the proof.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with hon. Amongi on this point because when we say that “A person does not report to police or authority …” because there are sometimes when you can be suspicious of a person and I have a true story on this matter where some people, sometimes these staff managing receptions may not have the competence to actually know that this person intends to commit a crime. But they may be suspicious of that person. Like in this case they were suspicious of a man who was pulling a child then they were discussing it the next day. So the next day they were saying “Why didn’t you report this matter to police?”

It remained hanging there. Such kind of people may end up being trapped by this kind of law when they actually innocently did not know or they did not intend it. And besides, sometimes when you report this to police, they may not even act. We should even put this into consideration. I think we should even hold it liable. Sometimes you call 999, you call police and they do not even appear. We need to cure that also, somewhere within this law.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would also like to express my fear as far as this is concerned. However good it is, don’t we think it may stop people from going to testify in court? Because the example you have given where you see your boss bringing children, well you may not know the intention but later on something may happen to one of those children and then you are supposed to go to court to testify that, “One day, I saw my boss bringing those children.”

If there is this kind of thing, I am afraid the people may fear, “If I go there to testify that one day I saw something, police will catch me”. Why didn’t you report to police? I think we need to see how best we can sort this.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Madam Chairperson, in a case where a couple is staying together and one of them is a middle person in trafficking, and the other spouse knows what the other one is doing and he keeps quiet, in such a case what do we do? For example, somebody in my sub-county, just a neighbour of another family, kidnapped a child and in his house he had dug a hole and he had bought about eight mattresses and placed them in that hole. He had two wives. People were picking these children. I think his work was to collect these children. So he picked this girl and he was known to the girl because he was a neighbour. He took this girl, threw her in the pit and covered with those mattresses. But the women knew. 

People started looking for this girl for three days but because some people were suspecting they said, “Let us go in that house.” They went in the house, they saw those mattresses where there was no bed, they decided to remove the mattresses and in the hole they found this girl. And when the people were going to search the house, the wives ran away. So in such a case where somebody knows that this one is doing it, what can we do if we do not maintain this? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this law as it is, is very good. They are saying somebody “knowingly” – if you see somebody murdering a person and you do not report it to police, you are part of the murder. And that is exactly what this law is saying. So it will be the onus of the person who is alleging that you know – for example, the frequency you have seen the kids coming into your hotel everyday, going, you see a truck coming, taking them, you see them another day. How many kids does someone have, who are different coming in everyday? That will be already suspicious.

Madam Chairperson, what we have to do here is what hon. Banyenzaki suggested. Secondly, we need to change 10,000 the currency points of 5,000 then the third one is for police. If you have reported and police have not acted, they should be held responsible. This one will tie all ends. You know you call police, there is somebody killing a person, they ask, “Has he finished him?” That is police delaying. Hon. Kasaija will talk about this.

It is not bad because if you delete this, there are similar laws in other - even in the Penal Code it is there, “with intent” is also there. So I do not think it is for us, but the only thing here is if we have reported and the police have not acted, then police are the ones who have also committed a crime.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I would really want to urge Members to retain this clause.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Chairperson, under our police law, we can arrest even on mere suspicion; even you, any person, anybody you can arrest on mere suspicion. It is up to the police to make investigations, the law allows us; and then if you are found innocent, you are cleared.

So I agree, 100 percent that we keep this. If you fail to report when you have suspected that there was something wrong, then you should be held responsible and also I agree if the police do not act, when they have been told, the police should take responsibility for that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question –

MR SABILA: What is the timeframe in which the police should respond; immediately?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

MR OCULA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move a motion of adjournment. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are about to finish.

Clause 10

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment to clause 10(2): substitute “a fine of 10 currency points” with “a fine of 12 currency points.” The justification is to be in line with the provision of the law commission. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, since we have put 500 here, 500 also moves here. What we are trying to do for one year -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR KASAMBA: I beg to amend clause 11(3) by replacing the word “assisted” with the word “heard”. “The victim of trafficking shall be heard to enable his or her views and concerns to be presented and considered at the appropriate stages of the proceedings.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why?

MR KASAMBA: To be consistent with the provisions of other existing laws.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the reason I think it is “assisted” is for one to even seek lawyers to assist because victims of this nature in most cases would have a problem with legal representation. That is why they are saying “assisted” to enable his or her views. The assistance could be financial, legal representation or whichever form. The assistance will now be derived from the state if we leave it like this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It can even be the language. You may find an Indian who doesn’t speak Lusoga in a court in Jinja and you may have to get an interpreter.

MR DENIS OBUA: I beg to propose that this clause remains as it is because when you say “a victim of trafficking shall be heard” – a fair hearing is a fundamental right and in such cases the victim is the principal state witness and without the victim, definitely the case will collapse. Let us have the word “assisted” as it is. 

MR KASAMBA: Clause 11(9) is amended by replacing the expression “prescribed” in 6 to 8 mentioned in this section, substituting the word “may” with the word “shall” and by deleting the word “or” and inserting the word “government” immediately after “by” and redraft the provision to read as follows: “The protection, assistance and support mentioned in this section shall be provided by government in cooperation with NGOs, and other civil society organisations.” The justification is to make it an obligation upon government and other bodies to provide for the services listed.

Sub-clause (c), insert the word “government” immediately before “non-governmental organisations”. The justification is that government is the biggest service provider and should be at the forefront of combating acts of trafficking in persons. I beg to move.

MR OCULA: I support the amendment but limiting it to non-governmental organisations and other civil society organisations will be narrowing down the whole scope of assistance. I think we put “any other agencies” instead of NGOs and civil society organisations so that government can look for assistance anywhere. That is clause 11(9). 

Secondly, when it comes to clause 11(11), we request that we put a full stop at the word “support” to read that “A victim of trafficking shall be entitled to information on the nature of protection, assistance and support he or she is entitled to and the possibilities of assistance and support.” We delete the other part of “by non-governmental organisations….” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So who will be in charge of doing the actual support?

DR EPETAIT: I think hon. Ocula’s proposal on clause 11(11) is proper because we would just be repetitive since 11(9) has already mentioned the entities that would give the support. I think if we put a full stop immediately after “support”, we will still be consistent.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have some small problem. The responsibility of providing assistance is for the government primarily. When you say “or”, government can say the NGOs should do it because it says either this one or the other one. We should make it that government provides the assistance and any assistance from other agencies will be supplementing government efforts so government does not deny its own responsibility. 
   
MS WINFRED MASIKO: I do appreciate that we make a law for the government but we should be aware that these issues of trafficking are handled by United Nations bodies that have been earmarked to do this work and there are some non-governmental organisations that have been earmarked by the UN to do this. I think it was their interest because they can easily be left out if we do not capture them here and recognise that they can do this work. It is very easy for government to say “it is our work” and then these UN agencies and NGOs are left aside. That is why we brought this in.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: UN agencies are part of government. Every member state has a share it contributes to that agency and so when the agency is contributing, it is picking part of the government contribution. You should not say that the UN agency is separate from government – no, they run alongside us. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, should we say, “Government and non-governmental organisations” so that they are tied together? Will that be okay?

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Chairperson, I want assistance on clause 11(5). A person who is reinstituting proceedings will not pay filing fees. When investigations have ended and it is found that there were actually no grounds for this suit, is there a way of reinstituting this. How will government recover money from people who practice out of excitement? Won’t they want to institute proceedings without proper grounds?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the heading is about protection, assistance and support for victims of trafficking; it is not just anybody; it is the victims. I think to assist them, usually they are poor, for example, children. How will children get money for filing fees? Maybe the chairperson can explain.

MS WINFRED MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, you are absolutely right. We are trying to protect the victims. But clause 14 talks about reinstitution. It is a whole clause detailing that reinstitution procedure and how it should be done. So, when we come to clause 14, the issues of reinstitution will be clearly stipulated. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Oh, you want to guard against frivolous actions?

MR ARUMADRI: Yes. What will prevent anybody from saying this is my relative who was trafficked yet no such a thing ever happened actually. After the state has gone to the root of the matter and found that this is a frivolous adventure, is there no process of reinstitution? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, it is for frivolous actions, but you know that if you put it here, you would even frighten the victim. If you say that it might be frivolous, they will be frightened and not even start any proceedings.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, by the time you reach 11, which is protection, assistance and support, you will have established, through different processes, that that is a victim. For example, if maybe the case is about a person who has been trafficked outside, the state will have already established and isolated that person as a victim. Even in domestic instances - somebody will have established that that is a victim. So, I do not think this fear could be –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am trying to beg your indulgence. As hon. Ocula had come up, it looks the systems are not working well; we could make errors.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, there are only two pages left and I think there are no more amendments. We only have one amendment. Hon. Nandala, you have been so nice, please stay a bit more. I put the question that clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Nandala.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Bill talks of physical injury, emotional or whatever. Who will be responsible for this compensation? Why I am bringing this is that the person who was held responsible will have been fined under the law. Now the other person has an injury –

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, under clause 14 there is what we call restitution which says thus: “Where a person is convicted of trafficking person under this Act, the court shall, in addition to any other punishment, order that person to pay restitution to the victim or other persons or organisation, which has incurred core expenses on the victim on behalf….” These are some of the costs which, under restitution, the trafficker may be forced to compensate the victim or the organisation which has lost.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, in addition to the same clause 15, it is clear to whom the burden of compensation would then follow. The law says that where a person is convicted of trafficking in persons under this Act, the court may in addition to any other punishment – so it is quite clear on who will be responsible.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question – okay, hon. Kasamba.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we move an amendment to clause 20 by inserting new sub-clause (3) to read as follows: “The minister shall constitute a national task force composed of all the relevant ministries and agencies and other stakeholders.” 

The justification is to involve all the relevant ministries and agencies, and stakeholders in the fight against trafficking in persons. 

We should them insert sub-clause (4) which should read as:  “The designated office and a national task force created under sub-section (1) and sub-section (3), shall take effect six months after the commencement of this Act.” 

The justification is to compel the ministry responsible to treat the matter of trafficking in persons with the urgency it deserves. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

DR EPETAIT: The proposed amendment seems good, but I have two areas of clarification. One, what is the size of that national task force? Is it open-ended? Can a minister go ahead and have a national task force of 200 people, to 30 people? What is the number?

Secondly, we should be clear on how the national task force will be handled. Are they part time? Are they full time? We should have a picture of the financial implication of the national task force.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, honourable colleague. Actually Article 20: “The minister shall designate an office to be responsible for coordination, monitoring and overseeing the implementation of the Act. The designated office shall have the following functions: To formulate a comprehensive and integrated programme; to prevent and suppress trafficking in persons; to draft an annual  national plan of action for prohibition of trafficking in persons taking into account activities on prevention, prosecution and protection.” 

When you talk of prevention, Police have to be there; when you talk of prosecution, the Ministry of Justice has to be involved; when you talk of protection, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has to be involved. So there are a number of line ministries. By a mere creation of a department within the single ministry under which it falls limits the ministry to have operational linkages with other relevant ministries. That is why we propose the minister to constitute a national task force given the gravity of the problem of trafficking and the human sacrifice which is currently taking place. This needs that urgency so that we can have an operational task force which would engage all the departments to come on board in order for a national annual work plan to be designed so that there is faster implementation and awareness nationally. 

Even awakening structures in government like the LCs, need to be more vigilant and conscious of the loss of so many children and women who are being trafficked. So this is one of the areas that we are considering that a national task force is necessary to bring on board other ministries so that we are able to curb the phenomenon.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My concern is in amendment 23 which reads: “The minister shall constitute a national task force composed of all the relevant ministries.” While I appreciate the formation of this national task force, the words “relevant ministries” are ambiguous. It is an assumption that every one knows what the relevant ministries are. Is there anywhere where the relevant ministries are specified? 

Two, amendment 24 which reads: “The designated office and a national task force created under sub-section (1) and sub-section (3) shall take effect six months after the commencement of this Act.” “Shall take effect within six months,” is mandatory and I do not think it is realistic and achievable. I propose that we put “within a year,” because it is more realistic considering the financial inadequacies in this country. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But I thought that the movers were hoping to take advantage of the existing resources that we have; the Police are already there; the Ministry of Justice is already there and they are not creating a new authority. I think they want to pick up resources which are available. I do not know if that is what the movers wanted. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with the national task force or whatever you called it but the only problem is that it is unfortunate that we would have left it under interpretation to interpret it. So just here as hon. Rwakimari has said, we need to categorically state who those that constitute are. When you talk of protection as Police, even IGG is protection, even Parliament. So, we must categorically state here what they are in person.

The task force is not calling on new people outside government; these are people who are already working and the resources will come from within the budgets. My other concern on that section is that you cannot say “draft” under the same clause (b) it must be “prepare,” because the moment you say “draft,” then at what time does it become “final?” So then we should amend and say, “Prepare annual national plan for action,” and two we define the national task force.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe the other thing I would want the movers to do is to define “the minister” because you say the, “The minister will issue an instrument,” I do not know whether it is the Minister for Internal Affairs or the Minister for Youth, so we need to be specific about the minister who will be coordinating all the others. I think you will have to put that into the interpretation [HON. MEMBERS: “It is there.”] Am I reading a wrong Bill? Oh, Internal Affairs okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Chairperson, the minister is not in the interpretation, I have checked. (Interjection)- Eh! This one? (Laughter)

MR OCULA: Madam Chairperson, about the formation of a national task force, I was of a different opinion that we cannot in our law we are making say that the minister must put a national task force. But since we have given powers to the minister to make regulations of how best to implement the Act, we could allow that latitude to go to the minister so that in the regulations, the minister will be making, they can say that we are constituting a task force like this; the funding and other details can be there as an administrative way of handling thing in the ministry other than putting it in the law that we must put a task force. There is a provision for the minister to make resolutions ahead there. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the minister give us his views.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Chairperson, I would not advise that we tie the hands of the minister because the country is dynamic. What we would say, for example, now as we speak we have constituted a committee within the Police which is handling this very matter. In fact, if it were not for this very motion, we were meant to be having a meeting this afternoon to consider the question of human sacrifice. So, I would suggest that it can be fitted somewhere where the minister would be obliged to form a task force of relevant - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification. If this was a serious issue for government, why did you wait for a Private Members’ Bill? I do not think you are telling us the truth. I am not taking the minister seriously now when he comes here and says that this is very serious. (Laughter)

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I need clarification on the term “national task force”. To me a taskforce seems to be a short term kind of arrangement. So, is this going to be a short term kind of arrangement and if not, why not use another term like a team or a committee? I need further guidance on this term.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In the proposal -

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate the concerns that are coming up because they have a genesis. 

Ideally in other laws, and what we had thought of, and even in the protocol, it provides that we get an agency. This one is stipulated and talked about quite easily and clearly in the law.

But when it came to moving a Private Members’ Bill, as honourable members you are all aware that according to the Constitution, for a Private Members’ Bill you have to have a certificate of financial implication. We discussed this at length. If we had an agency, we would have to maybe not have this law in place. So, we decided to have an office to begin with. 

But the information I would like to put across is that we have worked with the Ministry of Internal Affairs quite well and we discussed this issue. They are interested in an agency but they have to budget for it. The commitment that we got from the Ministry of Internal Affairs is that, it is going to be budgeted for and when it is budgeted for, then there will be an amendment to this law because in all other laws, the agency is very clear. 

However, it was not easy for us to bring the agency and no wonder the national taskforce was introduced by the committee. We had thought about it but we think that we could have started the prevention of trafficking in person’s office first and then later on the ministry brings in the agency which is clearly laid out in other jurisdiction. 

So I am not surprised that the national taskforce is not very clear. I am actually begging the chair of the committee that if we could just stay with the office until a time comes when the Ministry of Internal Affairs introduces a full agency - because as you read other laws from other countries, you will find that the agency is clearly put. 

But I beg Members to understand the situation under which we make Private Members’ Bills in this country and appreciate that this is something that we like reflected. I am of the opinion that the chairperson withdraws the national taskforce because it is amorphous and difficult to define, and we go by the office since we have given the authority to the minister to make sure that he coordinates and monitors the issues of trafficking in persons.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, chair?

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the concern of the chairperson but when we were formulating this law and trying to look at other players who have given urgency or even attention as far as trafficking in persons is concerned, we consulted the US anti-trafficking law and they have a national taskforce, which I think I laid on the Table sometime back. 

We also consulted the Asian law and actually if I could read for you the one of the Philippines - as you know, in Asia trafficking in persons is very high. The law establishes an inter-agency council against trafficking and it is composed of government agencies, NGOs and other civic education for the effective formulation of a comprehensive and integrated programme to prevent and suppress the trafficking in persons. It goes ahead even to mention some of the NGOs and civil society organisations which are involved. 

If we are saying that human sacrifice is on the increase and we are saying that we do not have the statistics for trafficking in persons, we do not have the necessary data to ensure that we can track how people are trafficked from the countryside, how they are transported, how they are harboured and how they are delivered to the various destinations. 

It is very necessary that this law considers having a taskforce which will monitor and put in place a comprehensive plan to ensure that at least the government departments concerned - and I think the minister is already aware and the ministry has already kick-started the process of putting in place a committee under a police department. But how are they matching with justice and how are we preparing the restitution and the protection of those who have been victims? Those are the concerns the national taskforce would address at the earliest time possible.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to give the chairman of the committee information. A taskforce is specific. It has a specific time and it expires. This law is going to stay. So, for you to bring your taskforce here is not necessary. Therefore, I concur with hon. Masiko, the owner of the Bill who saw the need for it and who assisted the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The only amendment which I see here is to remove the word, “draft” and we “prepare” and we go to the next stage.

MS AMONGI: I was hoping that the chairman was getting up to concede because, Madam Chairperson, the contention is on the concept of agency versus taskforce. Now, your proposal, according to hon. Masiko, is interim and we envisage a budget allocation for an agency and then there will be an amendment. Is that right?

Instead of having a taskforce, why don’t we say, “…at an appropriate time, the minister or the ministry shall establish an agency …” as an amendment so that we would have guarded the aspect of financial implication since there is a dedication or a pledge by the ministry that the budget for an agency will be provided in the next financial year? Then we can put that “… at an appropriate time an agency shall be established for the following …” because the national taskforce is an administrative matter. You do not even need it here. You can administratively after this establish a task force, but we want an agency.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you do not need to bother with what honourable –(Interjection)- Mr Minister, I am helping you. Under (g) if you read, “Propose rules and regulation to the minister as may be necessary for effective implementation of this Act.” The minister when he will see it necessary that he wants to implement this using an agency, he will do it using this role. Madam Chairperson, it is well covered.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear hon. Mawiya and then we move.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Surely, if we put it like hon. Amongi is saying that there shall be an agency probably in due course, it is again bringing a legal effect which will actually bar us as we move forward. So, my proposal, like hon. Nandala is bringing it up, if the minister actually sees that there is need for an agency to bring an amendment to the law in due course. Otherwise, let us leave it as it is so that we do not put ourselves in again to be caught up by the law. Thank you.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification especially from hon. Betty there. What are we envisaging? Are we envisaging putting up a body that would be full time on this or we are looking for a body that would ensure the provisions of the law and put into effect - if you talk of an agency, you are talking of say Uganda Revenue Authority, like Uganda Coffee Development Authority, which would even seek a vote we have thrown. Me I thought the concept was to get a group of people within government. A combination of people from various stakeholders who are relevant to the matter, who would come, sit without even necessary looking for extra funding. You could say, it could be ministers; it could be people whom we may define who would help the minister to ensure that actually the provision of this law are effectively implemented. I thought that was really the concept. I am seeking clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But do you need the energy of a national task force in order to do your work.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Yes, I agree because this matter of human trafficking has got very many aspects. There is monetary, there is local government, there is police, we need technical and legal advice. We need various stakeholders. People with different disciplines that you need to put together in order for you to effectively follow this –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you want it to be in the law? 

MS AMONGI: That is administrative.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Well, the law may not necessarily say so, but it could say the ministry or the minister will put a body in place to effectively implement the clauses of this law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Oh, we can say the minister may carry out any other acts which are necessary for the implementation of this Act - I do not know how to put it.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. It is already there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it there? Oh, it is already there then it is not necessary to put –

DR EPETAIT: Everything is there. Actually what the minister was seeking clarification for from hon. Betty. In my opinion, we do not want to start creating parallel bodies which will demand for votes of their own. You have the authority to set up an administrative mechanism to make sure that the Act is implemented. So, the only amendment here really in clause 20 is on 2(b) as was proposed by hon. Nandala.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Actually minister I think you already have the powers to do anything. You can even go beyond a national task force under (h).

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I concur, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that Clause 20 be amended as proposed to – yes, there is only one amendment.

MR MAWIYA: An amendment so that it can flow better. The minister shall propose rules and regulation as may be necessary instead of –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are dealing with the deletion only of the word “draft.” I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, clause 21(1), in addition to any penalty you caused for the violation of this Act, the court shall order the confiscation of all the established proceeds and properties derived from the commission of the crime. My fear is that it might be very difficult to identify the exact properties. Do we not envisage a situation where the offender may actually have everything including properties that he or she may have acquired from other sources in a clean manner, only to commit this crime he has been penalized for the offence and then he has to pay the compensation for – I do not know, it might be difficult –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you have to prove that this property is ten years ago before he started doing these things. Is it not? It is up to him to really prove that ten years ago I was just a civil servant, this is what I had.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You see, if they get you with anything, they will assume you have been doing it earlier on. And to compensate, you could have a house worth 10 million, when the crime you have committed is worth about 30 million. So, it will extend even to the properties you had got earlier on. So the purpose of this is to warn a person in advance that if you go there, even what you got earlier might go. So, I think it is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 21 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with clause 22. There are two instruments here of implementing this and the one about the currency point. The Minister of Internal Affairs in this case has no authority over the currency point. Yes, it is the Minister of Finance who has the authority on the currency point. So we must distinguish this thing, Madam Chairperson. And he said to amend the schedule of the Act, meaning schedule of currency point. The Ministry of Internal Affairs has no authority to amend this schedule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that why he goes to the Cabinet?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is redundant here. It is the Ministry of Finance. Amending the currency points automatically amends this.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I would also say that for the first time I think I will agree with brother Nandala-Mafabi. This is because the currency point is set by the Minister of Finance. What the minister can do is amend to say twenty, thirty, forty, fifty currency points but the value of a currency point is fixed by the Minister of Finance at Shs 20,000 as we speak. So this is redundant as far as I am concerned.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, to avoid wasting time, I propose that 22(2) be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, I beg to provide a definition for human sacrifices. It could still stay under “exploitation” in (c) but to specifically provide a definition for human sacrifice and my draft reads as follows: “Human sacrifice means, the killing, mutilation, removal of organs or body parts of any person for sale or for purposes of witchcraft, rituals or any harmful practices.”

The justification is for purposes of clarity and if we left it as it is mentioned under exploitation without further clarification the way it has been done for other parts of exploitation like sexual exploitation, forced labour and slavery, I think it would remain quiet and ambiguous. If we provided a definition as I have proposed, I think that whoever would venture into this vice would stand warned that there is no way they can hide under this law.

MR KASAMBA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about the ones about the public service? Are you still pursuing them? You agree? 

MRS SENINDE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I was only wondering whether we don’t need to define relevant ministries just for clarity because I remember when we were talking about it we were wondering which ministries. Don’t we need to identify them? I am just seeking your guidance, Madam.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If we identified them - there may be agencies that we don’t know about now, which may come on board. So let us leave it with the minister because they might grow. I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to
.
The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that we insert the words “prevention of” on the title to read as “The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act, 2009.” That is on page 3. There is somewhere where it was missed out. It is part of the title.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title be amended as proposed -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection from the Chair but since my colleague hon. Epetait brought in something, which he said human sacrifice - I wanted to propose that prevention, trafficking in persons and human sacrifice so that it is prominent to answer all the issues we are talking about.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I do appreciate that we shall capture that but we gazetted this as “The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But we are amending - (Interruption)

MRS MASIKO: Yes, we might be amending but that would really put us in another area. I would prefer that we leave it as it is, since we have captured the human sacrifice and tomorrow there will be other issues, not only human sacrifice, you will find other calamities that can come out of this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.21
MRS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.22
MRS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2009” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.22
MRS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS BILL, 2009 

7.23
MRS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS ACT, 2009

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause)

MRS MASIKO: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to express my appreciation for the overwhelming support this Bill has received from this House. It is a clear indication that all Members support the women and the children and are against all the evil that society would like to bring to our people. So, I do thank you very much for that.

I beg your indulgence to thank the following:
1. 	The committee on Defence and Internal Affairs especially the Chairperson, hon. Mathias Kasamba;
2. 	Civil society;
3. 	The Law and Advocacy for Women in Uganda and the American Bar Society;
4. 	The drafters of this bill:
·	Hon. Dora Byamukama
·	Ms Damalie Lwanga of the DPP’s office
·	Hon. Ben Wacha
·	Justice Othembi Nigel
·	Ms Jill Thompson.
5. 	The International Labour Organisation;
6. 	The Uganda Women Parliamentary Association especially the round table on the Trafficking in Persons (TIP);
7. 	UWOPA secretariat under the leadership of Jill Kyatuheire;
8. 	The Planning Development and Coordination Office in Parliament under the leadership of Mr Dison Okumu who facilitated the many meetings;
9. 	The Parliamentary Legislative Service Counsel in this Parliament with Ms Florence Aceng;
10. 	The Parliament of Uganda as an institution assisted us to do a lot of work, both the ruling party and the Opposition;
11. 	The Office of the Speaker of Parliament allowed us to travel to different parts of this country and outside to look at the other pieces of legislation.
12.	The Rt hon. Deputy Speaker, we appreciate your support personally for even making us come on this Order Paper at this point in time;
13. 	The Ministry of Internal Affairs, they were very cooperative, under the leadership of hon. Ruhakana Rugunda and the PS- we sat many times to discuss;
14. 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 
15.	The Ministry of Gender especially the ministers who were there, they were always meeting with us and discussing these issues.
16. 	The International Organisation of Migration under Ms Allia Hirji who supported our meetings;
17. 	The American Embassy, especially Katheleen FitzGibbon;
18.	The Uganda Youth Development Link under Mr Kasirye. He took us out to see the brothels and also to give us the researched information;
19.	UNICEF played a big role by giving us the literature.
20. 	UNFRI- United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders in this country;
21. 	AWEPA which also facilitated many meetings, and so many others whom I could not talk to and especially people from my constituency who allowed me to be away most of the time for the last two and a half years. It has been a lot of work! 

There are many others but my constituents managed to understand the nature of work I was doing and to all of you Members who have sat up to this time so late. Thank you very much all of you in your respective capacities! This shows the interest that you have had in this Bill and we shall live to remember you and to appreciate all that you have done. (Applause) I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members. Let me also congratulate UWOPA and this Parliament for fulfilling one of the six areas that were identified when we came in the Eighth Parliament and I would want to urge you to complete the programme and thank you for your staying here, hon. Members. The House is adjourned to Tuesday.

(The House rose at 7.29 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 April 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)



