Wednesday, 3 April 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, George Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA NURSES AND MIDWIVES BILL, 1995

(Debate Continued.)

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for giving me the opportunity to make a few comments on this Bill. Nurses and Midwives do enjoy very intimate bound of relationship with patients; and they a play a basic role in the health care delivery service.  It is, therefore, my view that this Bill will fully recognize and enhance this professional obligation and ability of the Nurses and Midwives. However, I want to call up on the Minister of health first of all to seriously look at the problems which many of these Nurses are facing. Mainly, the appointments.  In Arua there are cases of Nurses who have worked for some 20 years and retired without being confirmed in service.  I also know of some cases where after doing several courses up grading cases, in the end they are not given the due promotions and these are not reflected really; and has as hon. 

Dr Yyeko pointed out yesterday, there are a lot of problems to the payments of salaries and other emoluments. As a result, most nurses and Midwives have now abandoned government hospitals.  Most of them have now gone to the district administration under the office of the district health officer due to decentralisation policy, it is easier to make claims and be paid. So I would like the Minister to look at this situation and correct it.

MR ONGORA ATWAI: The point that hon. Drani is raising is very important.  Because some of the Nurses up-country especially in Lira those that were retrenched after having worked for some 15 20 years, were retrenched as those who were still on probation, and it has been very difficult for them to get their proper packages.  This is as I can see in other professions, a person works on probation for 2 years there after he or she is confirmed.  I do not know why this has not been the case with the Ministry of Health. Thank you.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: I thank the hon. Member.  This is very useful information. Mr Chairman, there are a number of Clauses which I want to talk about, these are very important Clauses.  The first one obviously is Clause 4 which talks about the functions of the council; and in my view function No (a) and (b) as the most crucial. No. (a) talks about regulating the standards of nursing and mid wifely in the country.  This is very important because it asks us to maintain a pool of professional nurses and mid wives who as much as possible, must prove that they have professional ability; and function No. (b) to regulate the conduct of nurses and mid -wives and to exercise disciplinary control over this. This is another very crucial area. Nurses and Midwives work very closely with the Medical Doctors, and it is important that there is a machinery set for guiding them or supervising them and for controlling their activities.  Clause 19 is another very important Clause which talks about conducting courses by the council.  

I would like to commend government for introducing a degree course in nursing. It has been very absurd where you find nurses go for several courses and in the end they were not even being awarded diplomas.  I understand now there is what is called comprehensive nursing.  I think this is going to go a long way in training nurses who can be a bit self-reliant as much as possible.  I would not like us to have the situation where in one neighbouring country, I am told in Zaire when the Belgians were forced to grant Independence, all those people who were trained were awarded diplomas instead of degrees. So the end of it, there was only one Doctor for the whole country in Zaire. 

So it is important to award degrees, higher diplomas and these ordinary diplomas. Although we have already passed the other Bill, we should have actually emphasized more especially on the Medical Assistants, we should actually have a programme where Medical Assistants can be capable of doing more than what they are doing at the moment.  I would like the Minister to look at this in future so that Medical assistants can be up graded to a level where they can even perform minor operations like it is in some countries like South Africa. 

Profession liability is a crucial area.  Nurses and Midwives just like Medical doctors being so close to patients have to subscribe to professional liability - I mean the hemocratical** which imposes up on them professional liability. Unlike these allied health workers who may not be supervised closely and sometimes it is even difficult to sue them in case of mistakes they make in handling patients.

There is need for very strong monitoring system.  The machinery must be set up in the council for monitoring.  For instance, if nurses and Mid-wives in a rural area are not attended to, it could cause a lot of problems in health care delivery system, especially in the rural areas.  

Clause 31 up to 33 talks about private practice. I think in Uganda we have to encourage nurses and midwives to open maternity homes, we should encourage them to have visits - to visit homes. They should open up maternity homes so that they do not leave it just to these traditionalists who carry out maternity cases in the villages, thereby endangering the lives of patients.  We should encourage them to visit homes; we should have -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the traditional people he is talking about, are playing a very important role in dealing with cases where these nurses trained in modern medicine cannot reach. Therefore instead of writing them off, or almost condemning them as people who are endangering the lives of patients, we should ask the hon. Minister to encourage traditional medicine so that, it can improve and along side the modern medicine. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Further information.  I would like to inform the Mover and the House that one; traditional birth attendants organisation is in the country working, and doing a good job.  Uganda Ne Dagala Lyayo is working and, therefore, I do not think it is right and greater to say that the traditional medicine people are being sidelined. Because they are already being incorporated and as we talk, even if you go to the government chemists, even if you go to Mulago, they are recognized and I think what we should only do is to improve on their performance to ensure that the Medicine they give are dosages that are actually not detrimental to health. 

MR OGWANGA: Further information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to further inform the hon. Member on the Floor that our traditional birth attendants  are the most respected in our society today; and these are the people who are very close to their patients they monitor them very well, they apply their traditional remedies, and on the contrary, our modern trained mid-wives sometimes are accused of even boxing women who are in labour. Many women have testified to this that the modern trained midwives sometimes are very rough in handling patients. I would to agree with hon. Tiberondwa that traditional birth attendants should be looked after and their association should be respected. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR DRANI DRIDRADRIGA: I thank the hon. Members for the information. I have not stated anything which can undermine the role of traditional birth attendants.  In fact what I am saying is that the Minister should work out a scheme whereby the traditional birth attendants and nurse and mid-wives can have a complimentary role to play so that by visiting homes, they will be able to assist the traditional birth attendants in performing better. I think that is the most important thing so that when they visit homes they can be able to work together and assist the traditional birth attendants.

 Mr Chairman, I was saying that we should encourage what is called the hospital care, the type of auspices services which we have in Uganda.  This is very common in other countries.  

Finally, I would like the Minister when we are debating this Bill, to consider looking into the overall situation in the Ministry of Healthy. I am talking about the overall health care delivery system.  There are problems we have right now upcountry. Drugs are in short supply, and I would like the Minister himself to see to it that, a policy comes out on cost sharing.  Cost sharing is a very crucial area whenever   we are in the villages people think it is government that has imposed cost sharing on the people.  I think it is important for us now to come up with a policy on cost sharing so that we can guide the people.

There is also the issue of some common diseases which the Ministry should pay more attention to. Such as malaria, malaria is a very serious issue now. All the Ministry’s attention is being given to AIDS forgetting about malaria. There is also meningitis, there is TB and, therefore, I would like the Minister to look very seriously at some of these serious cases.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.      


MRS NTABGOBA:I stand to support the Bill with a few remarks.  Mr Chairman, I am one of the Members who have been discussing issues to with health in a sectoral committee; and so many problems have been pointed out to the Minister regarding the situation and conditions of work under which nurses and mid-wives work.  For several years, it seems many problems are being solved very slowly.  But I hope this Bill will create a situation where our nurses and midwives will be earning   their due recognition.  Because they play a very important role in the delivery of health services in the country. Majority of servants who serve the people in health are nurses and midwives. Recently some of us visited nurses at Mulago hospital to acquaint ourselves with certain issues; and it was pathetic to note that, although many problems have been pointed out, the steps to rectify and improve conditions of services are very slow. This is why I feel may be I am still tempted to say that this Bill has come at the wrong time.  Because I would have wished to see proper remuneration for our nurses and midwives.  Mr Chairman, some nurses and midwives have opted to work perpetually on night duty only. So that during the day, they can work at a local market to meet the cost of living, to be able to sustain their families.  I know the Minister has always been promising a reasonable living wage.  But the question is, when will this come to reality?  Promises every year.

MRS IKOTE: Point of information.  I would like to inform the House that , nurses-enrolled nurses get UShs 40,000  a month after two year training, registered ones get UShs 50,000 after three year training, and this is the complete package, and yet a messenger in UCB in 1994 was getting UShs 14,859 per month. 

MRS NTABGOBA: So, Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for that information, you can see the discrepancy in remuneration of people who are rendering public services.  

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Further information.  Mr Chairman, I think what the hon. Member is on, is so crucial especially for the upcountry hospitals. In that, because these nurses are under paid, and because there are no public transport in towns up -country and other villages, the nurses tend to stay further away from their places of work in order to get cheap accommodation.  As a result they become very inefficient and therefore, the hospitals actually luck the trained manpower.  It should be important that, if at least they cannot be given reasonable salaries, they should be given accommodation near the hospitals to be able to survive with the little and meagre salaries they get.

MRS NTABGOBA: Mr Chairman, I hope the Minister is noting these problems It is not the first time they are being voiced here, and I really feel I want to appeal to the Ministry and Government to look into the plight of our nurses and mid-wives. In fact these problems may not be affection only nurses and midwives, even Doctors, Medical Assistants and other Medical workers usually suffer the same problems Mr Chairman, you find a Lady who has a family of 5 children earning UShs 40,000 as hon. Member has said.  This Lady is subjected to working perpetually at night because she must work during the day as I have said, and year after year, we hear the Minister say, struggling to improve delivery of health services.  

Now, when are our hopes going to be fulfilled?  We want to see a change.  It did not have to take people who save lives to go on strike to refuse to nurse people.  Those strikes we have experienced, I hope will not be repeated because I know and I think the Minister will do something about it. People who sign and swear to save people’s lives going on strike is a very serious issue, Mr Chairman.  It should have been enough.  I hope the Minister will give us hope for the future starting today.

Mr Chairman, now, with decentralisation, in fact some nurses are almost lost as what they should do.  Some of their payment does arrive on time.  I wish we closed all loopholes where these nurses and midwives were not tempted to take bribe, sell drugs, illegally or to abandon duty.  Where this Bill seeks to streamline the practice and also to discipline the health workers. How will these workers be disciplined when their conditions are not properly improved? How will you discipline someone whose children have no fees for school? I am happy that the nurses and midwives are also going to be allowed to do private practice and I hope the drug authority will afford them a chance; they list a few drugs they can handle, so that the majority Ugandans can have health services reaching them. We have many nurses in this House, a number; I do not know why they have been keeping quiet.  But I understand those who are devoted to duty, usually tend to be over worked.  So I would like emphasize the need to train more and more nurses and mid-wives so that they work less hours and also have time to attend to other issues concerning their families and social rights.

Mr Chairman, as far as recognising nurses and mid-wives, and their important role they play in our society in delivery of health services, I want to make one plea that, these private institutions, private hospitals, should also be given a chance to give examinations which tarry with our government examinations so that those who qualify from there, are fully qualified nurses and mid-wives. With those few words, Mr Chairman, I support. (Applause)

MRS OKER: Mr Chairman, thank you.  I rise to support this Bill. This is now long over due.  However, I wish to congratulate the Minister for Health for having indeed considered establishing the nursing degree at the University level of science and technology - Faculty of Science and Technology.  However, I have very many remarks to make as far as this Bill is concerned.  Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, you are all very much aware that, it is the nurses who have been sustaining the health services throughout the country of Uganda despite their very poor remuneration which is non at all.  I wish to point out that, the nurses are the only cadres of Medical staff who have adhered to their Medical profession and ethics by sustaining the health services throughout the country from the main hospital right to the rural health services, you find nobody except nurses working and fulfilling their hours even passing their hours.  

Two; the nurses have been doing the work of a Doctor, and most of the time they have been covering the Doctors.  A Doctor may never even appear in the hospital, but you will find a nurse, will say, he is about to come do not worry, and the Doctor may take three to four days without coming; and this is a true fact because a Doctor may put that, okay he is coming to do - he has a line of patients he is coming to attend to their dental problems, gynae problem, but you will never see that Doctor coming up but the nurse will say, or the mid-wife will say the Doctor is about to come.  Any one of the Doctor can come up and challenge me but that is the truth of the matter, I have been in the service, and I have remained in the service up to now. 

Three; the nurses as they have said, they have been under going several trainings, you will find a nurse holding up to 4 certificates of various trainings horizontal or vertical training but, that nurse will remain a nursing officer grade 111.  There is never any promotion outlet in the ministry of Health for nurses; and I can testify on myself. The testimony is on me.  If anyone would like to challenge me, I am holding 4 certificates, I am a nurse, I am midwife health nurse, and I am a registered psychiatric nurse. But I remained at the back my salary was has never been raised, and I never got promotion after working for 26 years; and at the end of it all, I was only left with - according to my own wisdom I wanted my daughter now to come out and work as a doctor or something.  I was now asking myself to be left with two years to retire.  However, I joined politics because of the situation of our district, but not because that I wanted politics; no, I wanted to remain a nurse, and Mr Chairman, I would like to tell you and inform the whole entire House -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The point the hon. Member is raising is very, very important.  To me it appears when a nurse trains in four professions, she does not carry out all these at ago.  Now, it appears it is a waste of time to train a midwife, a nurse, and psychiatry public health.  Now, why do you train a nurse giving four professions, and giving one part of this profession to work in one sector.  So, to me it would have been better that if you train a nurse as a nurse, that is all; if a midwife, that is all; yes, because according to my understanding when you train a nurse and employ her as a nurse she will not perform the duty of a midwife -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, if somebody is giving information he actually gives information.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to argue a point against the point which the hon. Member is making, and contribute instead of giving information to the hon. Member on the Floor.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  That is the character of the hon. Member.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I rose on a point of clarification and before I ask clarification I have to give my views, because this is the way I understand it.  I am trained as an accountant -(Interruption)

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to misunderstand your ruling and assume that it has given him a ticket to continue, when in fact, you have ruled him out of order in effect?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  As I told you, the hon. Member has always the tendency not to understand; could you please take your seat.

MRS OKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  It seems that if you do now know a profession, you should not claim to know, because in nursing or medicine there are different things, and these courses that the nurses do have different departments and different qualifications.  So, the hon. Member might not understand the difference between a midwife and a nurse.  So, while I say you may be holding four certificates and there is never any outlet for promotion, recognition and appointment in any upgrade promotion; you just remain with that qualification and then without any appointment to a senior level.  

Mr Chairman, the other thing I want to say is the comprehensive nursing which they have already now introduced, which now embrace all the other four departments I have been talking about.  I do hope that the Ministry has put in place to award these people either a higher Diploma or a Degree, because you have been doing four years training and it is very important that in other country these nurses are awarded Degree after having been in comprehensive four years of training, they would have covered all the field of various medical departments.  

When I talk of poor service and remuneration, I wish to say that it is sad.  As I said that it is the nurses which are sustaining the health services and they are the only ones who remain in the hospital doing either their eight or ten hours and handing over the report systematically to the person who is coming to take over from her or him.  This is what the nurses are doing in Uganda, but not any other medical staff; you will find a nurse cannot leave the place unless she has handed over the report on the patient, on the drugs and other things; and yet people just look at them with accusing fingers, accusing eyes and now they have been told that they must wear a name on their uniforms to identify that they are the only ones who make mistakes.  Mr Chairman, if a name or label has to be worn by every medical worker, starting from doctors down to even sweepers so that we know who is who; because we cannot have a name label put on the nurses and other staff like doctors and other paramedics are not being labeled why nurses and midwives only.  So, me I am saying names must be worn by all medical staff starting from doctors or consultants downwards; so that we know who is working and who is performing.

My other point, Mr Chairman, is that unless one goes to the hospital and lies in bed and looks at the ceiling, the only person you will see is a nurse and not any other person, and that is a person who gives you the comfort and the drugs.  So, here I would like to say that if the ministry want to sustain the health services, let them put proper houses near the hospitals, because of the nurses who have been falling victims of either being rapped, being robbed on the way because they are leaving evening duty at 9 p.m. and they other nurse also coming at duty at 10 p.m.  You can see their duty shift is very, very dangerous. So, it requires really accommodation within the hospital so that they can keep their work and maintain them.  

Another thing is on practitioners; I would like to say that - clause 13 there says that nurses should work for ten years before they are allowed to go for further practice.  I would say that let every person be agreed on five years which has been passed in the Bill, and not ten years for nurses and five years for the doctors, because everybody is being paid tax payers’ money and not only the nurses, why should the nurses be prolonged to ten years. 

Another thing, Mr Chairman, which I wanted to bring to the attention of the House, through you, is that let nurses be availed a proper training and equipment for work in the hospital so that they perform well, because our concern is that the equipment in the hospital is so poor, that you see a patient and you cannot do anything.  So, we are appealing that to have medical services effectively rendered, we should have proper equipment in hospitals plus drugs.  As we speak right now there are no drugs and no ambulances, you would like to transfer a patient -(Interruption)

MR MUGARURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. House through you, Mr Chairman, that when we visited Mulago hospital we found that the washing machine which is capable of washing so many sheets per ton, washes only one bed sheet per rout.  The capacity of the machine is to wash so many bed sheets at ago; but you will find that they are using the same soap and machine to wash and iron one bed sheet per tone.  So, apart from having that old equipment for medical use, even the manual section of the hospital depicts a lot of extravagance and waste of materials.

MRS OKER:  Mr Chairman, another issue I wanted to raise, is confirmation, promotion and appointment, and also there are some nurses who have since qualified in 1993, in the hospital of Gulu, I think even the Minister will agree with me that the British High Commission, Mr Clay has even written a letter to him and to the DMO that these nurses be paid; there are ten nurses who have worked for three years without payment, and I can even call their names, because I have seen the letter.

The last thing as I wind up is about the issue raised by the hon. Member that -(Interruption)

MR ETIANG: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Could the Member holding the Floor clarify to the House how an accredited diplomat came to instruct a minister of government to attend to a particular issue of role concern.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you please kindly repeat?

MR ETIANG:  Could the Member holding the Floor clarify to this House how an accredited diplomat came to write to the Minister of government on a matter that sounds internal?

MRS OKER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman; I would like to substantiate what I have said so that the hon. Minister of Information is informed and thereafter he can then inform the country since he is the Minister of Information, that the British High Commissioner has been assisting the district with a grant to rehabilitate some of the infrastructure which have been destroyed during the war, and when he was handing over these health unit, he would talk to the staff, and the staff could tell them that they have never been paid!  So, this is the clarification he should know.

MR ONGOM:  Mr Chairman, what I understood the British High Commissioner did was not to instruct, but to just draw the Minister of Health’s attention to the problem he found, that was given to him during the course of his tour of the place;  and they did not only help us rehabilitate some health unites but they, actually, helped us to put up new dispensaries, and I think such people should be thanked rather than condemned in this House, Mr Chairman.

MR OLUM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me opportunity to inform he Minister of Information who has raised this very important issue.  Mr Chairman, the programme which is being carried out in Gulf District, through the assistance of the High Commissioner’s fund is now being done in isolation.  The Ministry of Health is fully aware of this programme and the rehabilitation and construction of new units are being done jointly with the Ministry of Health and the local communities.  When these projects were being handed over, one of the key issues which has been raise, that Uganda government must provide the drugs and also pay the staff, and naturally the local communities and the staff have raised this issue of the government not being able to carry out its own obligations; and I think, this is the spirit in which the British High Commissioner has raised this matter.  It has nothing to do with interfering with our internal affairs, but I think they are just advising us as good friends that we should also carry out burden, the lubengo; thank you very much.

MR ASIKU:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to take this opportunity to inform the whole House and particularly the government ministers to help the situation; the question which has been raised for nurses for being unable to be paid on time is not limited to nurses alone.  I think there is total confusion with the Public Service Commission and with our planning unit.  I had talked of it previously, it seems we are training people with no definite plans.  Why I say this is while the nurses are employed for years and they are not paid, equally is true with many teachers.  We were told here by the minister responsible for Public Service Commission that we are going to reach a living wage this year in July, on condition that we do not add any single civil servant on the list.  

Now, we wonder whether we are not opening a new school; we wonder whether we are not opening new hospitals and dispensaries where we shall need nurses.  How do you limit and you do not have a proper employment charter.  What used to happen before is this; before graduates come out of the colleges, they are interviewed by Public Service Commission and those who are taken by Public Service Commission once they are absorbed their salaries are processed.  But now it appears that it is the unit masters; the medical officer in the village, the doctor in the hospital, the school headmaster in the bush who looks for the teachers and employ them, after employing the person seeking employment, the list comes upwards; when the application comes upward it is not processed!  So, there is a total confusion with the employment system, and I would appeal to this government to streamline the employment system.  Thank your very much.

MRS OKER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  As regards to public health services, I would like to say that the traditional birth attendants and community health services which is in a rural area, we would like to strengthen this but I am calling upon the Ministry of Health that they should assist the various respective districts because these are the very people who are, actually, trying to eradicate diseases before people get the disease.  Prevention is better than cure; so, these people are working very hard and we would like to strengthen the public health services in the rural area.  As regards to what my hon. Colleague here raised, about the midwives probably beating the patients or kicking the mothers when they are in labour; I think if one does not know one’s role, duty or profession, you should just take it for granted; because when I slap your wife, I am trying to save the life of your unborn child, and it is my duty to do that because when a woman is in labour she is between death and life, and the child inside is also between death and life.  It is my duty to exert maximum pressure on the mother to push that child alive, because I do not like to see a child born dead, but it is my duty and I am trained to apply just a little pressure so that the mother pushes up the baby, and I will very offended as a midwife to deliver a fresh still birth.  I would rather beat that woman or slap that woman and let the woman push a live baby and he who comes to see his child will be very grateful, and I will be very proud -(Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I rise to be clarified by the hon. Member that a woman must be slapped so that she can deliver properly.  But I am sure I have been seeing a lot of people deliver and I have never seen a woman being slapped except -(Laughter)- no, this is wrong, because the danger is that we will find one time that all the nurses of midwives will go on slapping our women.  So, I want to be clarified whether slapping is a procedure medically.  I have never seen it.

MR NEKYON:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform you and the hon. Member on the Floor, that it is in our tradition to force a cowardly woman to deliver when she fails to push the child out.  All over the country a woman who fails and does not want to follow instructions of the midwife, must be pinched, boxed, slapped. So, I do not know where hon. Elyau has got his idea.

MRS OKER:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member has already clarified the point that I was trying to labour; he has made the statement very clear, and I would like to say that even we are now training traditional birth attendants in what they did not know, because traditional birth attendants were just waiting or strangling a woman or wait until when the child is dead and push.  So, we are trying to train them, giving them the skills so that they know when to refer the mother to the hospital and so forth; so, what we are doing is actually - what the ministry is doing is just to train so that they know what they are doing.  

So, with those few words, thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I was very much interrupted and I would like to thank you and to support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Minister to reply.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr J. Makumbi):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, through you I wish to thank this august House for having debated this Bill seriously and put forward some proposals which have considered to a certain level by the ministry as I would elaborate.  First of all, I wish to thank yon. Dr Yyeko, my Colleague in the profession, for having come out with his comments about the Bill.  First of all, the issue of delay in salaries is an issue which is no longer in my ministry per se.  As we all know we have decentralisation and salary packages go directly to the district.  Therefore, if there is delay in salaries one has to look at the whole chain of the action, starting from Ministry of Finance right down to the District Executive Secretary.  

I wish to point out that in some districts proper returns indicating who is in employment have not been submitted in time, causing considerable delay if not omission of payment of salaries.  Lack of uniformity in the ranks, in the profession is being addressed by the recent Public Service Commission exercise and restructuring in the ministry, and I wish to mention that now we have a different structure in place which I will not bother to elaborate, it is available as a public document in the Ministry of Public Service.  So, this issue has been looked at seriously.  

Mr Chairman, hon. Members, I tend to be skeptical about males being trained to become midwives.  If I have had problems even at the level of medical officers in proper examination of women or ladies for that matter, I do not know how I can open the venue for all men of all ranks to come and start conducting training to deliver women.  Not until -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Could the minister, through you, clarify as to whether females are more competent at delivering women than males?

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, I am glad this issue is raised by a Colleague of mine and a Colleague who even happens to be in this speciality of obstetrics and gynaecology, I wish to point out that there is a case in court where wrong instruments were being used to examine a woman, and not until such malpractice is out, am I going to open the venue for all men to examine these women. I wish to point out that even with any other medical examination of a woman, not only in connection with pregnancy, we have the tradition of having a chaperon in attendance; every woman who is being examined by a male must have a chaperon as a witness to make sure that she is not abused, that her privacy is maintained. Therefore, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Hon. Members, whenever a minister is winding up, I do expect so many points of clarification any more.  These matters are normally handled during the general debate!  Hon. Minister continue please.

DR MAKUMBI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Consequently as we progress and probably as our moral fibre picks on we will be able to open this venue of training males as midwives.  But at the moment I wish to please to this august House that we withhold this specialised system of examination.  Mr Chairman, there is a very wide scope of training of a general nurse as compared to a midwife.  Midwifery is one speciality of medicine; a general nurse trains in surgery, in diseases of the skin, in paediatrics, child illness and all these.  So, without being seen to be despising the midwife, the general nurse trains in a very wider scope; this is why we have been insisting that the general nurse to be allowed to handle all these wider spectrum of diseases and specialties should be exposed to a longer period of training before we allow her to go in private practice.  Consequently, the difference between five years and ten years.  

Supervision is crucial; I know that medical practitioners are not as plentiful in all district, but I wish to mention that in all districts there is a District Medical Officer; therefore, this District Medical Officer assumes the duty of supervision of those private units which are within that district.  I also wish to mention that we in our profession know the limitation of every specialty; we need not to spell them out in a Statute, this would be tantamount to writing the full treaties of Hippocratic oath and this is as big as a Bible; consequently, we should be given the lee way to control limits of various professional specialties rather than spelling them out in a Statute.  

I wish to apologise to hon. Dr Yyeko who I assume had attended our sectoral committee meetings. When it came to indicating the various conditions which a nurse’s private unit would be able to handle, it was seen by a certain section of a sectoral committee that we were going to sit on the nurses in private practice unless we spelt out what they were capable of doing.  We on the professional side we are of the same opinion as Dr Yyeko.  So, I am glad that this has been emphasised and as we come to mention the Amendment I would be mentioning that I do not have any problem in reverting to what we the professionals had originally proposed.  

Hon. Drani raised the issue of appointments, confirmations and promotions; hon. Members this has been a general problem in all our Public Service.  I wish to inform the august House that the exercise to look into the Ministry of Health workers has just been completed by Public Service, and if it was not for being in a consonance with the wage bill, one would have come out with a statement, because all workers who should be promoted have been identified and those who should be confirmed have been identified, and those who should not, actually, be on the pay role have also been identified.  

Mr Chairman, again some issues which are being raised here should be seen in the light of decentralisation.  Different districts have come out with initiatives to make sure that they encourage their workers with supplementation of their pay package to ensure that they keep them in their districts; it is only those districts which have not paid attention to this, who are suffering from complaints of their health workers.  I need not go over details of those districts in particular, but I am quite sure people know themselves; even the issue of shortage of drugs, the issue of staff not being housed, we have already put in place management committees in every health unit in this country.  The Chairman of each of these health units is one of us, the community leaders, consequently whatever happens in the health unit should be identified by the management committee and presented to the ministry.  Time has come for us not to be seen wandering all over the country running these health units, these health units belong to the districts, they belong to the people who are, actually, being served by them; and unless we inculcate this culture in our people we are going to see a lot of problems in making our people taking up their responsibilities.

Mr Chairman, there is already a strategy in my ministry of training, indeed there is a commissioner who is in charge of the training programme.  When we come to mention about upgrading of categories, I wish to warn the hon. Members that people happen to be where they are before they are upgraded because of their previous performance.  Now, unless something has happened in a way of experience or someone becoming a little bit wiser, one should be very cautious of automatically elevating such people to higher ranks.  

In fact, with some knowledge of education there is this problem of lack of the capacity to shift to adopt new strategies, because as we all grow we tend to become so stiff and we do not adjust to some of these events which require agility.  So, before we consider people who should be upgraded we have to make sure that they really justify to be upgraded.  Mr Chairman, I stand to support private practice; private practice is part and parcel of health care delivery, indeed the World Health Organisation strategy is health care delivery in partnership.  Now who are these partners?  The partners are Public Service with the government, the non-governmental organisations, planning hospitals, the missionaries who are running these hospitals as well as the private practitioners.  We shall all be working in consonance to make sure that we deliver health care to the people.  Unless we do so, we cannot cope with a very big coverage with very big expense of running these services.  

Traditional birth attendants have got a very high priority on our programme, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members.  Indeed we have a special programme spearheaded by the World Health Organisation to make sure that these traditional birth attendants are actually guided to deliver health within the environment of proper sanitation and avoiding complications.  Consequently, we are continuing to training them as well as availing them some facilities which they did not have such as the delivery equipment. 

Mr Chairman, hon. Tiberondwa raised a very important point of traditional medicine; we should not be seen to be playing down traditional medicine, because we have recognised it through our Wandegeya chemotherapeutic laboratory; work is being done to make sure that these herbs are identified by their botanical names and scientific names and they are also scrutinised to see the active ingredients.  We have also promoted some of the traditional healers to make sure that their concoctions which they are treating are not coming in full jerricans, that they are concentrated in more acceptable amounts so that you do not have to drink a whole jerrican to realise that you have taken a full dose, and also to make sure that their preparations are following a proper sanitation.  So, we are trying to promote these people even in the field of research.  

The issue of hospital care was raised; we started off with improvement of infrastructure, and as you can see with these Bills we are trying to look at the actual employees and working conditions to make sure that we render proper health care.  Unless this is done in stages, there is now way you can correct damage which has been done over the last 20 years in just a handful of years. 

Mr Chairman, the Ministry of Health is coming out with a comprehensive statement on health financing.  I wish the hon. Members appreciate that what we call cost sharing is a broad spectrum embodied by the word ‘health financing’ including health insurance policies.  So, this is being addressed, but in the meantime each health unit and district have the priority of seeing ways and means of supplementing their funds in the health sector.  I wish also to inform the august House that there is already a national malaria control programme.  Consequently, we have not ignored malaria, we know that it is probably the highest killer of our people in this country, and there is a strategy to control it.  We no longer talk about eradication because this has failed even in the developed world.  

Meningitis, I thought that we had already come to full control of this; I wish to say that we will never be able to eradicate meningitis in this country, just like malaria.  This is why there is a meningitis belt which starts off from North Africa and comes through the Sudan and West Nile, and goes through Uganda to Tanzania and way down to Sough Africa.  This is because of power environment which favours the carrier of this organism and the weather so that we do expect this to take place whenever we have a dry spell in our seasons, and we should just be prepared for that.  I am glad to report that each district is now very well equipped to cope with any outbreak of meningitis.  Indeed we have not had to send any teams anywhere where an outbreak was reported.  I also appreciate the comments made by hon. Nkwasibwe about conditions of service.  I wish to emphasise that all health workers; let us not just talk about doctors or nurses or midwives, let us talks about all health workers.  I wish to assure her that I am one of those most deeply affected, because this is my profession and I have been a manager there for a long time -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman; thank you, Mr Minister for giving way.  I just thought that I should take this opportunity, through you, Mr Chairman, to that the Minister for the way he personally controlled and participated in the eradication of meningitis in my constituency when there was an outbreak and he had to personally go there with another Dr Kagimba, and actually helped to assist stop people who had been affected by meningitis, and I think that it was a very rare show of commitment from a person at his level, and I would like to put this on record and thank him for his personal participation.  Thank you.

DR MAKUMBI:  I thank the hon. Member for those very kind comments;  in this difficult world it is rare to find people appreciating good work done, I am very appreciative to the hon. Member.  I wish to appeal to the House that the budgetary allocation to every ministry is passed in this very House.  We operate within our budgetary limitations.  So, it is not very fair at the end of the day to level accusations to one specific area when we do this exercise as a whole group.  Consequently, let me hope that when come to consider another Budget people who are very mindful about not rendering proper services do come out and support allocation of a bigger budget to health care, which is one of the most expensive social services to render to any society.  The Public Service has already undertaken the exercise of regularising salary packages as was mentioned by the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service in this very House, so that we only have to look for the next financial year and we will be assured that health workers and workers are going to get a fair share for the amount of work they are actually getting.

Mr Chairman, finally, I wish to thank hon. Mary Oker for her comments, although I must say that she was one of the key people in the sectoral committee who made sure that this Bill comes as it is now, so that we should actually share responsibility of the current form in which it is appearing now.  The issue of promotions and regularisation of appointments is being addressed by the Public Service as I have already mentioned.  I wish here to spell it out that it is no only medical doctors who are going to have tags, but all health workers must have these tags; there is no reason why this very important factory of human life should not behave like other factories where whenever you come to enter, you have to be identified even as a visitor, and every worker has got to be identified.  Indeed this will assist us to see those culprits who are not rendering proper health care delivery, and I wish to report that the exercise is being embarked upon and soon we will have all health workers not only in uniform, but having proper tags to indicate who they are, their specialty and the department where they are, actually, working.  

Mr Chairman, I cannot go over all the points which have been raised by the hon. Members, because a good number of them will be taken when we consider the committee stage.  Mr Chairman, at this juncture, I beg to move that the Bill be read for the Second Time. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)


(Bill read a Second Time.)


BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA NURSES AND MIDWIVES BILL, 1995

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

MR ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  On clause 2 in the definition, on page 6, there is a definition of a committee, which says that committee means the nurses and midwives council established under section 3.  I wonder whether really they mean the committee of council, Mr Chairman.

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, I wonder if the hon. Member has got the new version of the Bill; that is in the old version, Mr Chairman.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeing from section 5(b) the Minister has said these are ex-officials; can he tell us whether they will have voting powers as ex-officials, Mr Chairman.  That is the only I wanted to know, because it will affect the quorum for the council to transact the business.

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, these will have the voting right.

DR YYEKO:  Mr Chairman, on clause 5.1(a) I propose that after the midwife, you add the word ‘or both’ so that the sentence reads; “A Chairperson who shall be a senior registered nurse or midwife or both appointed by the Minister”.  Recently there are people who are double trained who may not be catered for.

DR MAKUMBI:  I have no objection to that, Mr Chairman. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR YYEKO:  Mr Chairman, further Amendment on 5(c) I propose that we add a new subclause 10 so that we have one representative representing the Private Nurses Association, for reasons that further in the Bill we are going to allow nurses also to join private practice, and in this section we are only talking about private midwives.

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, at the moment there is no Private Nurses Association; these private nurses are covered by a wider body called the Uganda Nurses Association, consequently they are duly represented through that body.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 5 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6 agreed to.

Clause 7 agreed to.

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 9 agreed to.

Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11

DR YYEKO:  On clause 11, I think it is advisable to add subclause (d) that in the event of death the office of the -(Interruption)- also shall become vacant.

Clause 11 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12 agreed to.

Clause 13 agreed to.

Clause 14 agreed to.

Clause 15 agreed to.

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20

DR YYEKO: Yes, clause 20(a) I propose that after the word ‘nursing’ so that what says a degree of Bachelor  of Science in Nursing;  then delete the rest of the words and replace it with ‘with a degree recognised by the council’ so that the sentence reads as:  “A degree of Bachelor of Science in Nursing which is recognised by the Council” the legality of the institution does not necessarily mean the qualifications acceptable by the council.

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, I wish to hon. Member saw this in a wider context, because at the moment he is worried about legality of the institution only; other institutions and qualifications are recognised by the Council in section 20(c) and 21.1, and therefore, I wish not to accept the Amendment.

MR ASIKU:  Point of clarification.  I still want further clarification from the Minister on this issue; because the question is validity recondition of the Degree; thought we are not the only people who grant degree to nurses.  Maybe, there are other countries like America and Britain that also grant degrees, and if we have a nurse originating from Uganda and she get a high degree in Britain or in America, do we not recognise it?  If we keep it like this, we shall not recognise; but I thought by accepting the Amendment as long as the Degree is recognised that nurse should also be accepted.

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, the decision to recognise in another country cannot be taken because of our legislation here.  I wish to inform the hon. Member that it is the country in which an individual goes which accepts to recognise that qualification, and not the legislation back home where the individual got the qualification.  Secondly, I wish to draw the hon. Member’s attention to clause 21.1 which clearly caters for this problem.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I think if we are not careful this 20(a) can become a problem, and the way the hon. Member has amended it would be suitable - or we delete the whole of (a) and just retain (d) because if a private university comes up, which is not established under Uganda law, or set up by Parliament, those people will have problems of recognition; while in (d) it seems to be recognising anybody who comes in with a qualification.  So, we seem to be having a duplication, one is limiting and one is not, and the one which is broad is (d).  So, I do not know why we do not keep (d) why do we have to duplicate it, why do we not just keep (d)?

MR NTIMBA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to make a small clarification for my hon. Member here, from Nyabushozi that all universities established in this country, whether they are private or government will have to be recognised by an Act of Parliament.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the Minister that the lawyers, for instance, were qualified in the United Kingdom, Ugandan Lawyers; but they were refused permission to practice in Kenya, and yet those who were practicing in Kenya were also qualified in the United Kingdom.  So, the recognition by a country could be political, but if it is inserted in the law, it makes worthwhile considering it rather than just saying it depends on the country; suppose it becomes political.  

Mr Chairman, not only that, but I look here we are about 50 and the whole Uganda is watching us; we are doing the wrong things whereby we do not even have the majority of Members here; the quorum is not here.  So, are we going to continue like this, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.  How many times have I warned you for absenteeism?  With or without other Members Uganda must continue.

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, if it is the extreme concern of the hon. Members that (a) must go and (b) looked after by (d) I have no objection to that.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Mr Chairman, while I do appreciate what the Minister is saying, I request that the word ‘Degree’ be mentioned somewhere; because we are now awarding Degrees in Makerere and if we do not, it may bring a bit of confusion.  It is should be included in (d) if he is canceling (a).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kalule Ssengo, I hope you got the Amendment as proposed correctly; the Amendment is put such that clause 20(a) reads that, a Degree of Bachelor of Science, recognised by the Council.  That is how it should read.  I now put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed by hon. Dr Yyeko.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR MWONDHA:  There is a slight mistake in clause 21.2, because it reads;  “The training institution recognised under subsection 1, shall be published in the gazette as soon as the Council recognises them, and the registrar shall after the 1st day of January and not later than 31st day of March, each year cause to be published all qualifications.”  I do not know whether they do not mean all the qualified persons rather than publishing the qualification.  So, I wonder whether the Minister can clarify this.

MR BWANIKA BBAALE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Hon. Members, here what we want to say is that the registrar will publish the institutions recognised, not the qualifications; only the people who have qualified.  Because those who will have qualified will have applied to the Council to be recognised, but as soon as - is recognised the Council will be publishing it in the gazette not the qualification, but institution.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, the word ‘qualification’ should be substituted by the word ‘institution’ if what the hon. Member is saying is correct.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr Chairman, what I understand from this, is that institutions which are recognised shall be gazetted.  In addition to gazetting those institutions they will also specifically gazette the qualifications which are offered and have been recognised.  so, I do not see the problem myself.

DR MAKUMBI: I thank hon. Rwakakooko for putting it very clearly that is indeed what we meant.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22 put and agreed to.

Clause 23 put and agreed to.

Clause 24 put and agreed to.

Clause 25 put and agreed to.

Clause 26 put and agreed to.

Clause 27 put and agreed to.

Clause 28 put and agreed to.

Clause 29 put and agreed to.

Clause 30 put and agreed to.


Clause 31


DR YYEKO:  I propose that clause 31.2; after the word ‘registered nurse’ we put ‘stroke (/) enrolled nurse’ and also second line you cancel the word ‘ten years’ and replace it with ‘five’ so that we should conform it with 31.1; where registered and enrolled midwives have to serve for not less than five years I do not see why the other one doubles the number of years before they can join private practice.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, allowing an enrolled nurse to go in private practice would be exposing the community to some dangers, we insist that it is only the registered nurse who is allowed to go out and practice so as to protect our community.

Secondly, the difference in years of exposure before private practice was deliberate for the simple reason that midwifery is just one specialty of medicine.  In medicine we have specialty in obstetrician and gynaecology in surgery, extra and even in medicine we have specialties in skin diseases and venereal diseases, consequently a general nurse has to be exposes for a very much longer period before being allowed to go and practice individually.  So, we want to insist that we stick to the ten years for the general nurse and five years for midwife.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister there are two amendments there; what is your comment on the first amendments, registered nursed/enrolled nurse.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr chairman, I insist that it is only registered nurse we leave out the enrolled nurse.


AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I would like to support the Minister, we are venturing in a new area and as we do we have to trade very carefully because we are bringing these different aspects of health in our community and as we incorporate them we should really be very careful, because five years is a very short time for people who go in a single training, I would suggest that we give them ten years as the Minister is suggesting so that, gradually bye and bye if our environment continues, may be, in future these years could come down, but if we begin low and then we have a problem these people after five years they jump into private practice I think we shall have a problem.  So, I would suggest that we maintain the ten years and then we allow only the registered nurses to practice for the time being, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 31 put and agreed to.

Clause 32


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Dr Yyeko I do not see any amendment here.


DR YYEKO: Mr Chairman, I am just asking for clarification.  There has been -(Interruption)- that we have been making some amendments on the Floor even if they have not been circulated -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order if one wrong thing was done in the past we should not repeat it here.  

DR YYEKO: But, we have even just done it a few minutes ago. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order. Hon. Opio; you were supposed to circulate your amendments if you never did do not waste our time.

DR YYEKO: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to clarify on this point when he says the person who is licensed under this part of the statute before the 31st day of January in each year makes and submits to the supervisory authority a report of his or her transaction.  Now what does the Minister intend to tell us will be reported as a transaction?  I can understand when it comes to all cases he or she attended to, but when he is suggesting reporting a summary of transactions, what does the Minister - for reporting.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, as I was pleading for if I come out now to spell out the transactions of each speciality in this profession we are going to be there for a long time, I think the hon. Member should leave the responsibility to us as a professional body to judge what the transactions are.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)




Clause 33

DR YYEKO: Clause 33.3; in the second line after the word ‘registered nurse’ should be ‘stroke midwife’ for reasons that,I think it is an omission by the printers, because maternity home are actually run by midwives and not by nurses.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is correct I wish only to add that, it should be stroke registered midwife.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you accept the improvement on your –(Interruption)

DR YYEKO: Well I accept on that one, but now what are you going to do with the enrolled midwife who is registered to qualify for private practice under 31.1.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, there some printing mistakes, that one should be reading registered midwife.

DR YYEKO: But, Mr Chairman, 31.1; talks of a registered midwife and an enrolled midwife who are free to join private practice.  So, I think if we have passed that one as it is, 33.3; should just be  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Yyeko, 31.1; we passed it as it is there was no amendment that is to say, registered and enrolled midwife is already there.  But the hon. Minister is saying it should be, registered midwife.

DR YYEKO: Then it is in conflict with 31.1.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: remove the conflict and we move together.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, under this statute there two types of registration referred to, there is a registration by training and there is registration by reporting to the body.  So we should distinguish the two.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, I think I can help you here.  Hon. Members, 31.1 as parts registered enrolled midwife, let us carry it forward to the amendment to the amendment in 33.3 to read, “the Registrar shall not register a nurse and so on and so on, a registered nursed nurse/registered midwife”, that will turn it.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, the Member is saying we are looking at a registered midwife, but in 33.1 we have already licensed enrolled nurses to midwife.  So, now the moment you stick to only registered midwife we are only eliminating what we have already passed which would be inconsistent with what we have agreed to.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, it should read, ‘registered enrolled midwife’.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, let us proceed please.  Hon. Jame Mwandha let us proceed we have removed the ambiguity, we are no 33.3; now there is an amendment which has been improved upon by the Minister and it is acceptable to Dr Yyeko the proposer and there is no ambiguity.

DR YYEKO: You still -(Interruption)- leave it to this midwife then you will cater for the registered and the enrolled.

MRS OKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman, I think what Dr Yyeko is saying, it should be a registered midwife and then enrolled midwife, because the two have separate policies, the registered midwife is higher than the enrolled midwife, but they have all been allowed to practice.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, we can leave it as an enrolled midwife because we have another passage where we will be able to control what we are wanting to control, so we can leave it as such.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister you are insisting that the amendment should read, ‘enrolled midwife’ instead of your amendment of ‘midwife’ only, it should be ‘enrolled midwife’.

DR YYEKO: You see, Mr Chairman, we have two categories of midwife, we have the pink who are called enrolled midwife -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is catered for in 31.1.

DR YYEKO: So, if you are going to run a maternity home the enrolled midwife will run a maternity home, a registered midwife will run a maternity home, so it is better just tell the midwife then we cater for the enrolled and the registered.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, we are raising a lot of dust about an issue which we all know in the profession is well understood.  If the hon. Member who is my Colleague in the profession wants to have the word ‘midwife’ let it be midwife so that we save on time, we will have a system of controlling that when we read the whole Bill in full.

MR SEMPERA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  (Interruption)- because even traditional birth attendant is called midwife.  So, if we do not specify give it I think it will be to general and we shall run a risk of allowing quite a number of people.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Members let me repeat the amendment now then I put the question.  Amendment in 33.3; is to insert after the word ‘registered nurse/and include midwife’.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34 put and agreed to.

Clause 35


DR YYEKO: In clause 35.2; after the word problems in third line, we delete all that says, we shall include and also delete all the medical conditions set and continuing saying, and shall refer all cases beyond his or her ability to a medical practitioner. 


MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I remember that yesterday we urged the Minister to support this line I hope he will support this amendment.  Only that I want to ask for a general clarification from the Minister and from Dr Yyeko in particular.  Are men also called midwives or their mid husbands? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, as I had originally indicated in my winding up that during the sectoral committee stage there was a shift of opinion, professionally we were not in favour of enumerating these diseases, but then one area came out and indicated that we may be, cheating these people and we may not be allowing them to do what they should do we should come out and mention what they should do.  Since the hon. Member is taking us back to our original position I have no objection to this amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)


DR YYEKO: Clause 35.2; again on the second line, which says, after the word ‘nurse’ should also be stroke (/) midwife.

MR MAKUMBI: I have no objection to that as I mentioned some of these are typographical errors which are going to be rectified when the final touches comes.

Clause 35 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36 put and agreed to.

MR ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like the Minister to clarify why in this clause under disciplinary provision he did not provide like we did for the Bill that we passed last week, for the person who is subject of inquiry to have a legal representation when he is being inquired upon by the disciplinary committee in the other Bill we did provide that and I thought it would be necessary to do the same thing here to giving legal representation.  If that is allowed then perhaps we could at this moment move an amendment included.

AN HON. MEMBER: The professional bodies have their code of conduct, they do not abide by the legal representation.  So, I think it would be wrong in this profession to allow a legal representation on the Code of conduct on this legal body.

MR ONGOM: Mr Chairman, whereas that may be, true, you know some of these inquiries could involve things which are grave for instance somebody’s conduct is being inquired upon which will involve death of a person this could be serious and surely it would only be necessary that it is one’s right that somebody should have a right of legal representation particularly as you allow for an appeal to a court, because who would advise him to have an appeal. 

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, I would like to call upon the Members to look at the new version of the Bill because if you look at clause 38.4; the problem is look for is very well.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ongom are you satisfied?

MR ONGOM: Yes, the only thing is, you see, the saw the same Bill and they got concerned. (Laughter)

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38 put and agreed to.

Clause 39 put and agreed to.

Clause 40 put and agreed to.

Clause 41 put and agreed to.

Clause 42 put and agreed to.

Clause 43 put and agreed to.

Clause 44 put and agreed to.

Clause 45 put and agreed to.

Clause 46 put and agreed to.

Clause 47 put and agreed to.

Clause 48 put and agreed to.

Clause 49 put and agreed to.

Clause 50 put and agreed to.

Clause 51 put and agreed to.

Clause 52 put and agreed to.

Clause 53 put and agreed to.

Clause 54 put and agreed to.


Clause 55


MR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, I wish to amend that - to be in line with the other statute we have to indicate the fine to be in line with what we had agreed before with the Medical and Dental Practitioners Bill, and this is, 300,000 being the minimum and 3 million being the maximum and a period of three months and a maximum of one year.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55 as amended, agreed to

Clause 56 put and agreed to.

Clause 57 put and agreed to.

The Schedule put and agreed to.

The Title as amended agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Mr Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Mr Makumbi): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Nurses and Midwife Bill 1996 and passed it with a few amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Mr Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA NURSES AND MIDWIVES BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Mr Makumbi):- Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Nurses and Midwife Bill,1996 be Read the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Title settled the Bill, therefore, passes -(Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE AUTHORITY BILL, 1996

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Moses Ali):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Uganda Wildlife Authority Bill, 1996 be read the Second Time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that seconded?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The right hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister.

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF WILDLIFE AND ETIQUITIES (Brig. Moses Ali):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Uganda Wildlife Authority Bill, 1996 be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is that seconded? (Laughter) Proceed, Rt. hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Members will recall that government undertook an exercise of Ministerial Restructuring in order to remove overlaps and improve efficiency and effectiveness in providing services to our people.  Consistent with one of my Ministry’s keen concerns of ensuring effective and efficient protection.  

Conservation and Management of Wildlife Resources

The functions of the game department and Uganda National Park have been merged under a parastatal to be known as the Uganda Wildlife Authority.  The decision to establish a new Wildlife Authority has dictated the need for the consolidation of Wildlife Laws currently in force; namely the National Park Act and the Game Act.  

In the drafting process, my Ministry carried out very extensive consultation at both local and international level.  By so doing, possible contradiction with national and international laws to govern conservation and natural resources; management have been avoided.  The Bill is intended to modernise the Wildlife Legislation by removing all the colonial clauses which are eliminating the people from wildlife.  The management of wildlife and protected areas was concentrated in the hands of government and no suitable provisions were made to enable the people and the local communities to meaningfully contribute to the management or benefit from wildlife resources.  

Important new clauses have been re-introduced in the Uganda Wildlife Bill to facilitate the implementation of major shifts in the Wildlife Policy.  For example; the intention to involve the people of Uganda as widely as possible in conservation of wildlife; it is Clause (7) of this Bill.  

The Bill further ends at consolidating wildlife protected area categories.  The phrase wildlife conservation area is introduced to refer the different types of protected areas and wildlife management areas.  It is a generic phrase for all categories of protected and wildlife management areas.  Wildlife protected areas are national parks and wildlife reserves, formerly known as game reserves.  Animal sanctuaries and controlled hunting areas which are referred to in this Bill as wildlife sanctuaries and community wildlife areas respectively were gazetted for the purpose of controlling the use of wildlife.  Other activities such as agriculture and livestock management were permitted.  This has resulted in decimation and displacement of wildlife in most areas.  Between September and December, 1995; my Ministry undertook an aerial survey to:

(a) Review the boundary status of all protected areas in order to determine the level of human encroachment so that appropriate management actions are taken to solve them.

(b) To make a rapid accessment of wildlife population in wildlife protected areas and on communal areas such as controlled hunting areas and public land believed to contain some wildlife.  The survey results indicate some level of encroachment on protected wildlife areas; e.g. Queen Elizabeth National Park, Lake Mburo, Kibale National Parks and so on.  Matheniko and Bokora Corridor Wildlife Reserves are overrun by herdsmen.  But this is no surprise as it has been normal to accommodate grazing in those reserves during the fix of the dry season.  

My Ministry intends to carry out survey to find out if displaced wildlife do return to those areas when herdsmen move away.  After that accusation on the most suitable wildlife management option for those areas will be met in consultation with Local Government Councils as stipulated in Clause 18(1)(4), of the Bill.  On the positive side, the survey revealed that Pian-Upe Game Reserve has retained almost in two schemes form the diversity of Wildlife Heritage of Karamoja Region.  In accordance with provisions of this Bill, my Ministry intends to upgrade the reserves to national park status with the modifications from the boundaries to exclude resettled areas and annex important habitat crucial for wildlife conservation.  

As for the wildlife areas for example, control the hunting areas and wildlife sanctuaries the survey indicated that, only a few of them have potential for developing Wildlife Management as an economic form of land use.  It is intended to delegate the management of such areas to districts or local communities under regulated land use plan which is compatible with wildlife management.  Those areas which have no significant conservation value will be degazetted.  Transitional provisions clause 91 one to two, are necessary to give my ministry time to evaluate and consult concerned authorities and the public on occasions required to be taken to solve problems highlighted and surveyed.  

The Uganda Wildlife Bill, 1996 has been very carefully reviewed by the Sectoral Committee on Natural Resources.  A reprinted version now before the House has taken into account suggested amendments by the Committee.  It provides for the conservation and sustainable utilisation of wildlife and wildlife resources and promotion of public participation in Wildlife Management.  The ownership of wildlife remains vested in the government of Uganda, Clause 1, subsection 1.  But provisions have been made to accommodate people’s right to wildlife resources e.g. the ownership of lawfully taken wildlife plant or animal is vested in that person, Clause 4, subsection 2.  Clause 4, subsection two to six, explains conditions under which ownership of wildlife maybe vested in any person.  The Bill is divided into 15 parts.

Part one, is Preliminary.  Gives a short title and commencement.  Part two, Institutional arrangement; part three, General Management Measures; Part four, Wildlife Conservation Areas; Part five, Protected Species; Part six, Wildlife Use Right; Part seven to eight, Professional Hunters and Trapper, Methods of hunting and responsibility of hunters; part nine, Management of Animals; Part Ten, this part is specifically introduced to ensure proper enforcement of the international convention on the conservation of endangered species of wild fauna and flora.  Clause 68 provides for the co-ordinating mechanism by authorising the Minister responsible for Trade in consultation with the Minister for Tourism and Wildlife to make regulations to control Trade in wildlife.  Uncontrolled trade in wildlife is one of the major causes of poaching and elimination of species.  Part nine to fifteen.  These parts are standard species of legislation which require no further explanation.  

I will, however, conclude by making some remarks on part eleven of twelve; which are Penalties for future and other legal proceedings.  The penalties provided in the previous legislation; the Game Act and the Uganda National Park, have not been deterrent enough to curb the estimation of wildlife through illegal trade.  The Uganda Wildlife Bill, 1996 introduces penalties which measure up to the kind of offence committed.  Clause 77, is introducing a fine system which measures up to the value of the specimen involved in the commission of the offence.  Uganda is not alone in considering this kind of fining system.  This kind of fining system is already practised in Lesotho with good results.  In the Game Act, a maximum fine of shillings 10,000/- maybe awarded for an offence involving tonnes of ivory valued in hundreds of millions of shillings.  Such fines tend to encourage the commission of offence.  This Bill is intended to stop this.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I wish to conclude by assuring you and the general public the rights of people legally residing in protected areas is guaranteed by Clause 94, subsection 6.  I once again beg to move that Uganda Wildlife Authority Bill, 1996 be read for the Second Time. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Report from the Chairman of the Committee if any.  

MR ONGOM: Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, earlier on this afternoon you reminded us that, we do not have to continue making the same mistake because we made it earlier on.  Mr Chairman, even in the absence of a quorum we went ahead and passed the previous Bill.  Is it in order, Mr Chairman, for us to continue making the same mistake when in fact there is obviously no quorum?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is out of order.  With that we come to the end of today’s session and we adjourn until tomorrow starting at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 April 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)



