Tuesday, 3 April 2007 

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to the sitting this afternoon. I would like, first, to remind the Anglican Members of Parliament that there will be an Easter celebration service today at 5.00 p.m. in the Members’ Lounge. The guest celebrant and preacher is Rt. Rev. Dr Edward Muhima, Bishop of North Kigezi Diocese. 

Secondly, honourable members, we have a big number of guests today. On my left are 25 American students on attachment at the Uganda Christian University, Mukono. They are here to acquaint themselves with the Ugandan political system. You are welcome.

In the Gallery, we also have students from Bugema University in Luweero District. They have also come here to attend the proceedings of the House and familiarise themselves with how we work. They have also come with students from Lowel Girls Secondary School from Mawokota North, Mpigi. Please stand up. You are welcome. (Applause)

The third issue, honourable members, concerns a headline in today’s newspaper, the Monitor. We would like to respond as follows: 

We have noted with concern the headline and contents of the Daily Monitor, and the story entitled “MPs Directory Withdrawn Over Fake Qualifications”, which appeared in today’s paper. The story as published contains a number of errors and is misleading, especially regarding the reasons the directory was withdrawn from circulation. 

We wish to clarify as follows: the Office of the Clerk, after considering the concerns raised by members about the cover which depicted the Seventh Parliament rather than the Eighth Parliament in session, decided to change the cover. After this, distribution will resume. Members raised this objection and we decided that it should be rectified, so that members of the Eighth Parliament are put on the cover to depict that it is indeed a directory of the Eighth Parliament. 

On further perusal, there were some mistakes, which needed rectification. Some pictures were put against names to which they did not belong. This also needed to be rectified. Members have pointed out other small errors, which we thought were necessary to correct before we come back to you. 

We were very shocked to hear that the Parliamentary Commission instructed that the directory be withdrawn. Honourable members, the Commission did not hold a meeting to discuss this matter. Therefore, the Commission could not have directed the withdrawal of the directory due to fake academic qualifications. 

The determination of genuine academic qualifications lies with the Electoral Commission, the Uganda National Examinations Board and the National Council for Higher Education. It is only where the courts of law notify the Parliament that action can be taken in this regard. Therefore, on the basis of a mere directory, the Parliamentary Commission cannot determine the veracity of qualifications. Anybody who is not satisfied with qualifications submitted is free to petition the courts of law for redress.

As soon as we have completed making the corrections, the directory of the Eighth Parliament will be distributed. In the meantime, the issue of this article is also being followed up with the Daily Monitor. That is what we wanted to clarify concerning the directory. Thank you.

2.56
MR NATHAN IGEME NABETA (NRM, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on an issue of concern. I am wondering why the government of Uganda is giving away money. I am concerned that in the last month, Uganda has licensed two telephone companies. The practice all over the world now is that most of these companies pay money to governments. In Kenya alone, for example, a licence is given at 169 million dollars. Etsalat paid 600 million dollars to the government of Egypt. Telefonica paid two billion dollars to the government of Morocco. Here we are trying to build Bujagali and looking for money when we can actually sell our natural resources. 

I would like to ask the Minister or the Prime Minister why the government of Uganda is not charging companies, so that we can make sure that we use those resources to actually build Bujagali or on any other important issues. Why are we giving away these licences without money? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we have all been wondering about this because it is provided for in the law. These registered companies pay premium to this effect, but we were surprised that the two companies, which have just been registered, were exempted from paying this premium to Uganda Communications Commission. 

We even raised this matter with the Executive Director of Uganda Communications Commission. The chairman of the board of Uganda Communications Commission said this was above them, that they only got instructions. Can we get clarification from the minister concerned as to why these two were exempted? These two new companies have not paid the premium yet Celtel, UTL, MTN did pay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know which minister is responsible. Is it the Minister of Finance who decides? 

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, we shall investigate and report to this House. (Laughter)

MR IGEME: Madam Speaker, what I would recommend is that we ask the minister concerned to either report to Parliament or to the committee maybe in a week. At least in one week, he should give us the details of why they are giving away money. It is a very serious issue because we could use this money. They could table all these contents as to why they are giving away money.  

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you. I would like to request the honourable colleague to help the House, if he has got some documents which can help the committee. When we say that Government did not license and we do not have any evidence, it becomes difficult. He could lay some documents on table and then we start from there. However, saying that “we have heard, we have read this” might complicate the issue for the committee.

MR IGEME NABETA: Madam Speaker, since we are in a dot-com age, everything is available on the UCC website. If you want, I can just print out everything for you so that you can read. However, everything is on the UCC website. If you want, I can print out the copy for you, honourable. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nabeta, this is not just to satisfy hon. Kakooza. You have raised a very grave issue that this country is losing money. I think it is incumbent upon you to really help the House and help the country. If the things are there, bring them and lay them on table. We shall then ask the minister responsible to tell us why he is donating money when we do not have it.

MR IGEME NABETA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I will bring everything tomorrow. 

3.01
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Exactly two weeks back, this Parliament debated on the issue of the closure of one television station, NTV, and it was exhaustively handled and investigated by the Committee on Presidential and Foreign affairs. They brought a report to this House and the Minister made an undertaking. 

Whereas we held a strong opinion that NTV should be opened immediately, the Minister and his colleagues pleaded with us that we give them two weeks to sort out that matter, which he called a small administrative matter. Yesterday, it was exactly two weeks and one of the junior officers in that sector was quoted as saying that Parliament cannot order him. This means the authority of Parliament was being undermined under the jurisdiction of the Minister in charge of Information. 

Madam Speaker, until now, the government has made an undertaking, which it has not respected. Honourable members, are we going to work like this? We make resolutions and the Executive does not respect them. The signals I am reading from the Front Bench are that you do not want to cooperate with us, Members of Parliament in the Back Bench. I read this as an attempt to weaken the authority of Parliament. Madam Speaker, I request the Minister -(Interruption) 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, hon. Banyenzaki, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am just seeking clarification from hon. Banyenzaki about the gadget he is using to get the signal that members of the Front Bench are not cooperating. After getting that information, I will know whether he is using the right gadget or not.

MR BANYENZAKI: Honourable minister, I am using my conscience and my brains. We made a resolution here, you agreed with us that within two weeks NTV will have been opened, that the issues surrounding the closure of NTV will be sorted out by the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Information and National Guidance. The fact that up to today they have not re-opened NTV, they have ignored the decisions of Parliament, is enough to show that the Executive is not ready to respect the decisions made by Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I seek an explanation from the Minister and from the Leader of Government Business on matters regarding the minister in charge, who is defying Parliament. I appeal to Parliament that we apply 118 because he has demonstrated that he is incompetent. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from my honourable colleague. He talked about one state minister and then he is talking about a certain Prime Minister. Can he be specific, so that when we are applying 118, we know exactly where to focus? We will we know the actual name of the person betraying the cause of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know about the re-opening, but I have received a letter from hon. Kivejinja that he lost somebody. That is why he is not in the House. However, maybe the Prime Minister can tell us how they are going to proceed.

3.05
THE PRIME MINISTER, (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to make it clear that we are not frightened of being censured under Article 118. We are not frightened because it will not be the end of the world. (Laughter) We can do other jobs. I can look after my dairy farm, for example. 

As you have rightly said, the Third Deputy Prime Minister lost a nephew. Death has occurred to many of us and it will continue to do so. When death occurs and someone cannot perform a pledged function, and you interpret this to mean that he does not respect Parliament, it is a very sad interpretation. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I respect Prof. Apolo Nsibambi for the mark he has set in Makerere University as far as delegation of powers is concerned. However, I am wondering today how a whole government institution can hold Parliament helpless just because one person has lost a relative. Can’t an institution of Government delegate its powers? 

President Museveni returned to the country yesterday and I do not think Government was not functioning. Bukenya was in charge of the country. (Laughter) So, can the Prime Minister tell us that it is not a deliberate effort just to keep the Minister of Information away from Parliament because he would face the guillotine today, if he were here? Can we be informed whether it is not just a commission and not an omission, hon. Prime Minister? 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: First of all, I think it is very unfortunate for my brother, hon. Otto, to think that the Third Deputy Prime Minister is just avoiding Parliament. I repeat, death is death and it is very painful. 
I now answer the second question. Let me clarify that there are issues where you can delegate because a person may have the capacity to handle a delegated function. However, when the Minister comes to me as he did today, around 1.00 p.m., my perception is that others did not have sufficient information to handle the matter. When delegating to anybody, you must know whether the person to whom you are delegating has adequate notice to handle the matter, and the professional and political capacity to answer that question. Hence, I did not delegate that matter to any other minister because of those considerations. So, the Third Deputy Premier will make a statement on Tuesday. He has lost a nephew. Death is death. 
MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter that needs the attention of Parliament. Today, at around 11.00 a.m. as I was coming to your office to alert you that I want to raise this matter, and to consult you on this issue, this minister was in the precincts of this House and –(Interruption)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, when you came to my office and raised the matter, I showed you the letter. I told you the minister had just been here to inform me that he has lost somebody. He was in this building to see the Speaker and inform him and me. Really, do not include me in that funny arrangement. (Laughter) I showed you the letter.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, the issue here is not condolences to the Minister. The issue is Government not respecting the decision made by Parliament, and some officials under his jurisdiction saying that they cannot take directives from Parliament. It is on record -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: The honourable member on the Floor is crying out loudly for the respect of this Parliament, but the respect of this Parliament is actually spearheaded by the Speaker. Madam Speaker, you have indicated to this House that the honourable minister wrote to you explaining the circumstances why he cannot be here. Is the honourable member in order to disrespect the guidance you have given, and try to imagine that humanity can be ignored by this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: About the absence of the Minister, I have told you that he came to me to deliver the letter and to say he cannot be here this afternoon. He also said that he had been to the Speaker to inform him about the same.  

The issue concerning utterances by the other fellows and NTV can be raised. However, for this one of death, I think it is really unfair to say that he should be here despite that. You can deal with the other matter of the utterances by the officials.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, let us have an assurance. When are we going to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The letter says, Tuesday, 10 April. So, it should be on record that the Minister will come here on 10th April to report on the issues of NTV.

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister is talking about giving us a report next week. I want to find out from the office of the Speaker if we will have plenary next week on Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be after Easter Monday. The holiday ends on Easter Monday. 

3.13 
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am extremely sympathetic for the loss that has happened to the Third Deputy Prime Minister. However, I must stress that it is the Third Deputy Prime Minister who lost a relative and who, therefore, has a problem. It is not the government, it is not this House. In the meantime, the investor who put money into an institution called NTV continues to lose money. 

It would be fair, as we wait for the Minister, to instruct those authorities to reopen Nation Television so that when the Minister comes and explains, then we shall go by that -(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to tell us to reopen, when we know that this station was closed because of technical issues, issues of security, safety, procedure and of the law? Is the member in order to tell us to open NTV before those are cleared?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we were debating this matter, one of the members proposed that we direct, and we agreed that we have no capacity to direct but we can recommend. I do not want us to get engaged in the exercise of directing when we cannot execute the order. Why don’t we wait until this minister comes, gives us a statement and tells us how far they have gone? We cannot direct. We cannot effect the order.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, the worry is protecting the Minister or the ministry and withdrawing this protection from the investors. We are here to represent the people in all sectors. We must look a serious parliament. Something must be done so that when there are cases in the courts of law, we are not seen as people who are neither present nor aware of what was supposed to happen. That is why I am calling for action to help this investor do business.

3.16 
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira):  Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter to me. This is the national Parliament of Uganda, and there are three arms of Government, the Executive, Parliament and the Judiciary. Our role as Parliament is to perform oversight functions. We passed a resolution in this Parliament requesting the Minister that within two weeks something must be done. The two weeks have already passed, but the Minister has not done it and he has not written. He has not even written to Parliament to explain or to the Speaker to say, “I have not taken action”. 

For us to pass a resolution and it is ignored, to me, amounts to contempt of Parliament. If we let it continue, this Parliament is going to be a malwa parliament -(Laughter)

MRS KAROORO OKURUT: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to stand up and despise this national drink and Parliament? He is implying that when you sit at a malwa pot, you are useless. Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately I do not drink malwa, so I do not know what transpires at the malwa pot. However, I think he is under the impression that it is a leisure activity and does not want this House to be leisurely in its conduct.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, my point was actually very clear. We are here to take very important decisions. Once we have debated a matter, it must be taken seriously. I want to inform the Cabinet that we are not here to play around. We are here to deliver a service to the people of Uganda. At every stage, at every moment, our people deserve services that are required in this country.

The other time we debated this matter there was very extensive debate on the Floor of this Parliament. The Minister actually agreed that two weeks was a compromise position. We wanted it done immediately, but when we consulted, it was agreed that we give them two weeks. Now the time has expired and the Minister has done nothing, and it is not good for Parliament to keep quiet because the Minister has gone away. Yes, we know that he has gone for burial, but he has not gone with his office. (Applause) He should have delegated this matter to his assistant or to the Prime Minister or the Minister of General Duties. I think we must be serious. We have been very patient. 

We have been very kind. We have been very lenient and gentlemanly to him. However, the Minister has not taken any action. We are not going to request, we want to direct the Minister to take action because we have tried our best for him. I would like to inform members that this Parliament must deliver services. The country must know that the Eighth Parliament of Uganda is ready to deliver services to this country and make Government work. For us to make Government work for our people, we must be urging them to work. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I beg this House that I move a motion that the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Information and National Guidance, through his office must open NTV midnight, tonight. (Laughter)

3.21
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the sentiment that has just been voiced by my brother, the honourable Member for Dokolo. I, therefore, will speak to this motion and support it. When the Prime Minister stood up, I thought he was going to do only one thing, and that was to reassure this House that Government takes this House very seriously. Unfortunately, he did not. I do not know what we are supposed to read out of that silence. Madam Speaker, there are tendencies which are coming from the Front Bench, which are not good for this Parliament. There is a tendency for members of the Front Bench to think that they are outside this institution and therefore they can belittle this institution as and when they want. 

I was shocked this morning when I read a story in a newspaper about a Cabinet Minister belittling this Parliament in words that are almost unmentionable, words which almost tantamount to contempt of this Parliament. I was thoroughly shocked. Permit me to read - (Interjections) - Do not worry, I am a senior parliamentarian, I will tell you the source and everything. Let me read: “I am one of the 25 people who rule this country. All the major decisions are made by us (Cabinet), not Parliament where they just make noise.” This is Daily Monitor of Tuesday April 3, 2007. The Cabinet Minister is hon. Onek. The paper is here. 

Now, if this is the attitude that our colleagues on the Front Bench have about this Parliament, then I cry for this Parliament. I am, therefore, not surprised that we will sit here and make resolutions, very serious resolutions, but they will be ignored. I am not surprised. I am not even surprised that tomorrow you will come out with a resolution on Mabira and it will be routinely ignored. In other words, if this House does not assert itself, it is going to be a talking shop and nobody will take it seriously. (Applause) Therefore, for once -(Interruption)

MRS MARY MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, you made a decision and informed the House that the Minister wrote to you and informed you the reasons why - (Interjections). With due respect to the institution of Parliament, and the fact that the decisions we make here should be taken seriously, is it in order for us to continue debating this matter when you have already made a ruling on it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter of NTV will be handled on the 12 of April. This is a different matter, of disparaging Parliament. This is what they are talking about. They are saying that members of the Cabinet have come out openly to harass and disparage the Parliament. That is what they are talking about.

MR WACHA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Mugyenyi for showing that enthusiasm to protect the unprotectable. (Laughter) As I was saying, for once, we should indicate that we want this Parliament to be taken seriously. For once, we should send a very clear message to Government that this country belongs to all of us, all of us not 25 individuals who have decided to talk for us. 

We should send a message to Government that whatever we do here is serious. We do not come here to waste time. I, therefore, support hon. Okot Ogong that a time limit be given to Government to implement what has already been decided by this Parliament, that is, to open NTV by midnight tonight, and we see what they will do.

3.27 
MR SSEKIKUBO THEODORE (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to humbly support the motion raised by hon. Okot Ogong. The gist of the motion is not a matter of life and death. However, with the message we are sending, one would get afraid that this institution is being bashed as an institution where one is rendered irrelevant and someone cheers such a move. I am surprised that one can afford to cheer when the integrity and relevance of the third arm of Government is being belittled. Why else are we here in the first place? I think the onus is upon us, first of all, to guarantee the sanctity of this House and to make ourselves relevant in governance. Short of that, sooner or later, we could as well sit or not sit here. 

Why should Government take parliamentary resolutions in such a cheap manner? We all commiserate with the death that has occurred in the family of our colleague, the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Information	and National Guidance. However, this does not mean that the entire institution has gone for burial. Government does not work like that. For the short time that I was a civil servant, Government did not work like that. The office does not go for burial, weddings, bride wealth and all that. There must be a Government in place. 

I want to appeal to the Prime Minister, who I would have expected to give us assurance as the Leader of Government Business. For him to indulge in hide and seek games really surprises me. This is not part of him. He has not been doing that for long. (Laughter)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, I was very clear. I mentioned that the Third Deputy Prime Minister has lost his nephew. I also made it clear that he is going to clarify the issues on Tuesday. Is it in order for the honourable member to say that I am indulging in hide and seek games? Can he be in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister was explicit in the strategy for dealing with this matter, so he is not really playing hide and seek. He told us that he has taken the decision on who would come and report here.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. However, the point I wanted to make is that we should be on our guard as Members of Parliament. We should always assist the Speaker to perform his or her tasks. We should not put a strain on them. I really beseech Government; by coming out in such an arrogant manner, it puts a strain on the Speaker and on the members in this chamber. Why are we doing that?  

I suggest and recommend that Government goes ahead to open NTV and correct their mistakes, and not seem to be going on a collision course with Parliament. They should not be seen to be minimising, undermining and trampling on Parliament. I really think that once we have institutions in place, it is incumbent on Government to respect those institutions, to nurture them and make them relevant to our daily governance. On that note, I am on record. I cannot tolerate the institution to which I belong to be trampled upon, to be rendered irrelevant, and to be despised in the House and outside the House.  

I beg to support the motion. Government must open up. I do not really expect the Minister for National Guidance to be here, but Government is still in place. Government, under the Leader of Government Business, should not hide or shy away from its responsibility. Let it open NTV by midnight.

3.31
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising up to support hon. Okot Ogong’s motion.  Following what hon. Ben Wacha read in the House, I am really worried that the good Government of His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, has been set ablaze by some Cabinet Ministers. Our struggle now is to put the fire out. It will be unfortunate if this motion is not honoured again. We decided to become democrats, and we are now democrats. It is only through this House that we can build this democracy.  

Madam Speaker, you are aware that Uganda belongs to all of us. Maybe I should request the honourable member who said that NTV could not be opened because of some security reasons to tell us if it is an agenda of the PRA or the other agents such as the LRA or ADF. If the government fears competition through these other organs, then it should be made clear to the people of Uganda that “We fear competition with NTV”. Why do we invite the investors to come here and invest? This is sabotaging your own investors, and that we cannot accept.

Madam Speaker, may I also know which one is more important than the other? Is it the Cabinet, the Legislature, or the Judiciary? If you follow what has been written by the honourable Minister, you would think that they are trying to portray the Executive as more important than any other organ in this country. To me, the people we serve are the most important organ and therefore, they deserve to be served immediately. If the government cannot serve them, we invite investors to come and help the government to serve the people of Uganda. As such, I will be very pleased to open NTV at midnight. Thank you very much.

3.35
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also share in the sentiments expressed, as well as express my displeasure about what is happening regarding the matter of the closure and reopening of NTV. The reopening should have been done two weeks from the debate. That is the reason I do not buy into the argument that a relative died today. The fundamental issue here was about reopening rather than the real presence of the minister in question.

We have all along talked about institutional development in this country. Government has often told us that they are developing institutions. Where is the institution now? Where is the institution, if you are referring to a person? We have had unfortunate incidents in this House where a minister or a Member of Parliament dies. Now, supposing it was a minister, God forbid, that had died, would the ministry also die today? –(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seek clarification from your Chair and from the entire House on whether it really makes sense to keep on debating this issue, if we already know that actually the issue will be a positive –(Interruption)

MR GODI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue on the Floor right now is the motion to be debated. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to mislead the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She was seeking clarification. I do not know on what.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification. Since members seem to know that this company should be reopened, does it make sense to keep on debating? Madam Alaso, for example, is asserting that it should have been reopened two weeks ago – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you should have moved that the question be put. Is that what you are suggesting?

MS MUGERWA: Yes.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I guess you can appreciate my reluctance to yield the Floor. However, I would like to say that the fact that the honourable Minister, and not even Government, has found it convenient to answer back to this House on a resolution that was moved, speaks volumes about the actual reasons behind the closure of NTV. I think at this point I will be right to imagine that the reason for the closure of NTV was neither administrative nor technical. The reason was never told to this Parliament. Otherwise, what is the justification for failing to address simple administrative and technical issues? 

It is at this point that Ugandans must understand that there is a bigger problem about the freedom of the media in this country. Nation TV is only one unfortunate case that we have discussed in this House. We have had the beating of journalists in this country, which is also a question of media freedom. Madam Speaker, I would like to submit. Thank you.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to oppose the motion for the following reasons. (Interjections) Any member who has never made a mistake in this House can hang me. 

My first point of opposition to the motion is that I think the motion was moved out of anger. When we act out of anger, we tend to move out –(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I have been in this Parliament since 1996, which is about 11 years. At every point, I debate in the interest of this country and every time I am very sober. The Minister must know that I do not drink alcohol like other people. (Laughter) Is it in order for the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, a professor of psychology of Akamba women, to misrepresent me in this Parliament by saying that I moved this motion under serious anger or under some other intoxication? Is it in order for a minister to misrepresent me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I am certain that you did not move the motion in anger. You are a very sober man.

PROF KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to have it on record that the reaction was very sober - (Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, honourable members, I am being restrained. I had decided to keep this note which hon. Kabwegyere has just written to me, but let me read it to you so that you can know what type of people you are dealing with. Is it in order - (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I need your protection. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Order! Hon. Kigyagi, can you restrain yourselves!

MR DOMBO: I rise on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker.

MR BANYENZAKI: I am raising a point of order, honourable –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order members! 

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, when we came here as Members of Parliament, each member was provided with a copy of the rules. If members cared to read the Rules of Procedure, they would know that procedure takes precedence. That is what our rules say. I am surprised that a Member of Parliament can stand on the Floor and shout, “Order takes precedence” when he has a copy of the rules in his or her hands. 

The point of procedure I want to raise is that, whereas I respect the facilities that were provided in the House to enable members exchange notes and other communication that facilitates debate, it would be procedurally right that if issues happen between two members, this should be a bilateral communication between the two and they should not deviate from the principle of the motion. 

I thought a member had moved a very important motion, but now we are killing the motion by raising unnecessary points of order and soon we may lose track of the debate. Is it not procedurally right that the issues between two Members of Parliament be sorted out by the two in the lobby, in order to allow us to debate? I seek guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, notes which you write to one another do not come to me. So, I do not want you to ask me to adjudicate on your bilateral issues. You finish those in the canteen. (Laughter)

PROF KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the position of Government on this issue is to question the time limit. What we have now is a statement or a resolution that may be passed by this Parliament, which says, “Do this by midnight”. This is pushing decision-making to the very limit, and to imagine that there was no reason at all before you listen to the statement. If this death had not occurred, the Minister would have been here and the motion would not have risen. 

If we can allow ourselves at least to have an iota of trust in Government, we should not get this House to pass a resolution, which gives an order for a time limit, like is proposed in the motion. The motion is like having a horse. You take it to the well and it has refused to drink, and you are pushing it, looking for a kick, which to me is not the right thing to do in this House. 

I also want to say that, much as we have said that Government is independent of the life of individuals and is there whether we are alive or dead, Government is also there to serve human beings. Somebody is saying, in a language I understand, the mother died a long time ago; even mentioning that your mother died a long time ago, is an emotional statement. The honourable Speaker has acknowledged receiving a procedural note from the Minister. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has come up – (Mr Otto rose_)- Please, let me clarify before you clarify. 

The Prime Minister has said that he did not have enough time to allocate the responsibility to another person. You can be sure that there are other people who could be assigned this job. There was not enough time for the Rt. Hon Prime Minister to assign the task to some other person at the time the information about this unfortunate incident came to Parliament. I think this is a reasonable argument, presented by a reasonable man, the Prime Minister. Why would we have to push Government and have this House resolve, given all these parameters, that the decision must be made at this hour and that the opening must be done at this hour? 

Honourable members, let us not be artificial in demanding action. We are talking of human beings. We are talking of a Government that works and we are saying, “Open NTV by midnight”. Suppose a decision was made following this resolution and it turned out that by opening NTV by midnight something wrong happened. Who would be accountable? It would be Government, because it would have obeyed the decision –(Interruption)

MR GODI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. By the time I came with hon. Henry Banyenzaki to your office, it was 11.00 a.m. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister did say that he was with the hon. Kivejinja at 1.00 p.m. At 1.00 p.m., I was with Minister Kivejinja for lunch at Fairway Hotel. 

Madam Speaker, the issue here is whether we shall open NTV or it will remain closed. The information I am giving the Minister is that it would not be prudent for him to come and lie to this House. It is a simple matter. A motion has been put forward for our consumption. We either support the motion or oppose it. I think monopoly compromises quality. The issue of NTV going onto our air space would be of value to all of us. After all, it is a media house, which is coming to inform us, including the Minister for Disaster. (Laughter) Thank you very much. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Well, I think the House can judge whether that was information or a presentation of a view. I want to conclude, Madam Speaker. Do we know what is involved in opening or closing? Is it like a door where you put in a key and open and close? Why are we trying to overlook what may be technically needed beyond the time the motion is demanding?  

Lastly, this is information to hon. Okot Ogong. I am not a professor of Akamba studies. (Laughter) I think you may not know what I studied or profess, but do not have in your own mind certain crazy ideas of professing a study of a people. If I wanted to be a professor of anybody, I would like to be a professor of Ugandans -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: In respect to the last issue, honourable Professor, we are well aware you wrote a book on the sexual behaviour of Akamba women, -(Laughter) - his thesis. Would it be right for you to come to the Floor of this Parliament and ignore the endowment you have given this world as far as monitoring the sexual behaviour of Akamba women is concerned? (Laughter) Why would you not take the credit hon. Okot Ogong has given you? That is the little clarification I wanted to seek.   

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Madam Speaker, apparently there is a need to educate my colleague. I did not study the sexual behaviour of the Akamba, much as that could be an interesting area of study. I wrote a book on the changing society among the Akamba. It was not a thesis. I had already finished my Masters and PhD. It is a book published in Australia, Canberra, and I will have the honour to give you a copy tomorrow. It is not on the sexual behaviour of the Akamba. 

My thesis, actually, was on Uganda; the politics of state formation, the nature and effects of colonialism in Uganda, which has now been revised to talk about the politics of state formation and destruction in Uganda. It is available to those who are interested. I do not have to say anything more. 

I would like to close my contribution by making a plea to this House that we do not push a decision with a time limit or even go to the point of appearing to say that this House has been dishonoured. This is what it would mean the moment the talking has been done. This is an indication –(Interjection)- I believe there is sufficient ground to show that this need not have been brought forward. So, my view would have been that the honourable member, Okot Ogong, withdraws the motion and we do not vote on it.

3.56
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to oppose the motion for the following reasons:

One, of course it is not good that decisions of this House are not respected. It is not in anybody’s interest not to honour resolutions of this House. However, when a resolution of the House is not honoured -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of information from hon. Tinkasiimire.

MR MWESIGE: I have not finished the preamble, Madam Speaker. I am sorry, but I am not taking the Information because I have not finished the preamble –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: But the Speaker has ruled. 

MR MWESIGE: The Speaker does not rule on information, honourable member.

Madam Speaker, I was saying that when resolutions of this House are not honoured, there are two assumptions one can make. I say “assumptions” because the honourable Minister of Information is not here to give us the facts. One assumption could be that for some reasons beyond the Minister’s control, a decision of this House is not honoured. The other assumption could be that a resolution of this House is perhaps impracticable for reasons the Minister should give. 

My proposal, Madam Speaker, is that before we take this decision, we give the honourable minister time –(Interruption) 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have information for the honourable minister. In the Seventh Parliament, they made a decision. I was not here but I had the privilege of knowing what was happening. I had a representative. I even have the Hansard where it was decided that they should not sell UCB, but Government went ahead and sold UCB. 

We made a decision here that NTV should be opened within two weeks, but they have not opened NTV. Here he is telling us that the Executive is not disregarding Parliament. Is that not sufficient information for us to believe that the Executive wants to really undermine us who are seated here representing thousands and millions of Ugandans? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the impression being created by the Minister is that suddenly a motion has been moved and we are now requesting Government to open NTV by midnight. That is the impression the Minister is creating. However, we know this matter was resolved two weeks ago, not just now. I heard the honourable Prof. Kabwegyere insinuating that we are just taking Government by surprise and that the Minister who is in charge is not around so we should not move. 

Madam Speaker, I just want to clarify to my colleagues on the Front Bench that this matter was resolved two weeks ago. If there was any problem that was encountered, a written communication would have sufficed, but none of that is available on your table. This suggests that Government is not interested in respecting the resolutions passed by Parliament. Short of that, a clear answer should be received from Government. We are waiting for that. I thank you.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Two weeks ago, Parliament passed a resolution to reopen NTV and members made substantive contributions, looking at the merits and demerits of the same. We are also aware that Government has institutions under which to operate, and the absence of an individual does not mean the absence of the office. We are also aware of the fact that it was not Government that came here first to indicate that they were not ready. Now therefore, I beg to move a motion in accordance with Rule 68 that the question be put and we vote accordingly. (Applause)

MR MUWULIZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sharing in the mood that is on the Floor and the concerns about the matter, and also aware that we share responsibility in whatever has to take place, I would like to move an amendment. Aware that whatever has to take place must be given a minimum time to be effected, I move an amendment that at least the motion stands but allows for only one week before NTV is opened. [Hon Members: “No, No, No.”] – Only one week and NTV is opened. Only one week.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I want to object to the amendment moved by the honourable member on two counts. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not seconded.

MR WACHA: I rise on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker. Hon. Namayanja moved a motion under Rule 68, “Closure of Debate”, and it reads as follows: 
“(1) After a question has been proposed in the House or in Committee and debated, a Member may move ‘That the question be now put’, and, unless it appears to the Speaker that the motion is an abuse of the rules of the House or an infringement of the rights of any Member, the question ‘That the question be now put’ shall be put forthwith and decided without amendment or debate.” (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be now put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House approves the motion as moved by hon. Okot Ogong. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Wacha raised a matter, which I think is extremely grave. Parliament consists of the Speaker and Members of Parliament. If a member of this House has actually alleged that the Speaker is a noisemaker and comes here to waste his time making noise with you members, it is extremely grave. On behalf of the House, I would like the Prime Minister to ensure that hon. Onek, if he really made those statements, comes here and explains. (Applause)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The rules of natural justice demand that hon. Onek be heard. So it is only proper that he comes here and reply to this allegation. It is only natural and I demand that natural justice be honoured. I have no hesitation in directing that hon. Onek come and be heard on Thursday. I thank you. (Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Point of information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what? On this matter?

MR KIBANZANGA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Kibanzanga.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. According to the information we have and as read by hon. Ben Wacha –(Interjections)- there is a lot of noise behind me. I do not know what is wrong with these –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected. Honourable members, allow him to speak.

MR KIBANZANGA: Hon. Hillary Onek should be given time to be heard in this House. However, there is another officer who has no right and will therefore not appear in this House to explain and that is the engineer of Uganda Broadcasting Council. Apparently he said in the newspapers yesterday that he cannot be directed or moved by the resolutions of Parliament. I want the Executive to tell us what to do to such an officer? 

Hillary Onek is appearing here. How about his junior officer who said he cannot be moved –(Laughter)– by the voice of the people in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Constitution is very clear. We have committees of this House and they have the powers of the High Court. You can summon anybody to your committee so the relevant committee, please deal with it. I think that is hon. Karooro’s committee. 

HON. MEMBERS: ICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: ICT, okay. So, the Committee on ICT will handle that- (Interruptions)-Where does the Broadcasting Council fall? Hon. Baliddawa, where does the Media Broadcasting Council fall? Are they in your committee? 

MR BALIDDAWA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So can you summon that person?

MR BALIDDAWA: Yes, Madam.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, the guidance I want to seek is that the officer’s reaction was towards an assurance, which the government undertook on this Floor of the House. Would it not be prudent if the Committee on Government Assurances took up the matter? This is because he is trying to ignore what the government has undertaken –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I think for that it is the minister to come and explain why he failed on the assurances he gave here, not the other officer. Committee on Government Assurances can invite the minister to explain why he reneged on the assurance.

MS MUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I want some clarification. I have been a member of the press and the most active member of the press in this House at that. We are raising issues that have appeared in the newspapers and we are taking them as gospel truth yet it may have been taken out of context. Why don’t we give these people a chance to come and explain?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the Committee on Presidential Affairs is the one that handles Ministry of Information where Uganda Communications Commission falls and therefore Uganda Broadcasting Council should also fall under Ministry of Information and the Presidential Affairs Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no problem. Let it go to the right committee. I had said Mary Karooro’s committee but somebody said no, it is under ICT. Let it go to the right committee. Let us go to the next item. Honourable members, I want to alter the Order Paper and allow the Minister of Finance to lay some papers on the Table.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to lay on Table the supplementary expenditure schedule No. 1 for financial year 2006/2007.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I also beg to lay an addendum to the supplementary schedule NO. 1 2006/2007. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The papers are committed to the Committee on finance- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Point of clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the papers?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Yes, it is very important. Madam Speaker, the Minister has laid the papers and I want to thank him. The minister has laid papers showing the expenditure but he has not laid the papers showing income because it is quite important that he shows us where he is going to get the income that is going to fund the supplementary budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a requirement, Minister?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, you have already guided that the Committee on Finance will handle this issue. Therefore, that is where every other information that the committee will require will be given. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure you have got access to the Committee on Finance.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is true that you have laid the expenditure but why didn’t you take the expenditure to the committee? Since he has brought it inside the House he should also lay here the income because it is Parliament that receives income and appropriates it and that is where the expenditures are handled. The supplementary must move with a supplementary income.

4.13
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nsubuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect hon. Nandala knows that our Rules actually require the Minister to table the supplementary expenditure. But regarding the income, that information will be submitted to the committee and you know it very well. It is not a requirement of this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I expect that after the committee has considered the supplementary, they will report to this House. So if they come back without the income you can object. He is the Member of the Committee on Finance, isn’t he?

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala is a Member of our committee and we shall benefit much from him. So reserve those questions for the committee.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the Chairman of the Committee on Finance I think we must run professionally. You are bringing expenditure so there must be income and if there is an income, why should he take it to the committee? It should come to the House. 

The Budget is brought to Parliament both the income and expenditure which is appropriated here. When you bring the supplementary, you must bring also the supplementary income. If we have been doing something wrong or illegal, let us correct it but not say that we should continue with illegality. Please. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET PERFORMANCE FOR THE FIRST HALF OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the ministers were due to make their responses on the issue of the budget debate. I do not know whether you are coming first or last. I do not know how you want to proceed. Do you want to come first? Yes, Minister of Public Service.

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Sezi Mbaguta): Madam Speaker, during the debate on the report of the Budget performance for the first half of July-December 2006, the honourable members raised concerns over issues that affect the Ministry of Public Service.

The first concern was enhancement of salaries of judges. The honourable members may recall that a resolution was prepared for judges’ salaries and placed on the Order Paper for deliberation. It was, however, removed in order to harmonise some aspects that were required for further consultation. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform Members of this august House that the paper and the resolutions are already in the Office of the Clerk to Parliament, waiting to be place on the Order Paper.

The second question that was asked was why the conditional grants released for some local governments are less than the current payroll requirement? Our response is that the budgeting for salaries for the conditional grant is based on the approved staff establishment in case of primary school teachers. The expected numbers of staffs to be recruited in each financial year per vote are also reflected. 

Salaries are generally paid to bona fide public officers who are properly appointed by the Public Service Commission, issued letters of appointment and are deployed to those specific posts to which they have been appointed.

In the case of teachers, there are a number of teachers who are appointed locally and are above the staff establishment of the school. So, the salaries for such teachers are not provided because they are outside the staff establishment that is provided for each school and in many cases they are paid under PTA.

The release of funds for salaries is based on actual number of staff on a payroll on a monthly basis. It has been established that there are delays, particularly when new districts are created; there is delay in separation of payrolls from one district to another. 

The ministry has under taken to review the method of access to the payroll by providing a code number for these members of staff, so that when there is a split of a new local government from the parent one, we can automatically locate these staff by county and sub-county. That process is on going, Madam Speaker.

Another question that was raised during the debate was: Why are civil servants in local governments paid salaries late? As I already said, the split of payrolls of the new districts delays the process. Secondly, there are deductions that are not automated, which are done by local governments at source and are often done manually. So, these manual deductions also often delay the payments beyond 28 of every month.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, another question that was asked was on the status of payment of severance packages for local government staff by Ministry of Public Service. I would like to inform the honourable members that officers who are properly appointed into the service of Government, but are prematurely retired due to abolition of their offices or for reasons of review and reorganisation of local governments or any other department are paid several packages. The severance pay is to cater for lose of employment and repatriation costs.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to give information that indicates that payments have been done. A number of submissions were received in the Ministry of Public Service as of March 2007, of 5,821 from local governments. Of that number, 4,828 have been processed and approved by the Ministry of Public Service for payment. And of the 4,828 that have been approved, 3,556 have been paid.

A total of 1,270 cheques are being prepared for issuance for local governments to pay. In all, by end of March, the Ministry of Public Service had paid Shs 14.8 billion in severance packages to those who were declared excess or whose jobs were removed from the establishment. But there remain 930 officers, whose cases have been queried for one reason or another. I would like to highlight the reasons for querying these 930. The reasons are varied, but I will focus on a few:

First, when one is supposed to be paid severance package, one must be on the payroll, therefore one must have the last payslip indicating that this person was a bona fide officer appointed and deployed in a field post.

Another reason for query is that the staff who were still employed against abolished positions – there are a number officers in local governments that were held against posts that were abolished long ago, and therefore, they have no position to indicate that they were public officers because their posts were abolished. Among these are the copy typists, who were abolished some time back.

Another reason is that in the Public Service, retirement is at the age of 60. And in the data that was submitted, we have established that there are staff who were long overdue for retirement and once those are indicated for severance packages – you know, they should have gone under normal mandatory retirement; they are not included in those receiving severance packages. 

The fourth category is of those unresolved appeals. In some districts, the procedure was for individuals to check them, review them and indicate whether they are suitable to be retained in the Public Service, and the District Service Commission of each district did this.

In some districts, it was found that the officers appealed according to procedure, to the Public Service Commission and some of these appeals are yet to be resolved. There is a case, where the whole exercise of a district, like the district of Mukono was nullified and the process had to start again because a number of officers did appeal that the exercise was not fairly done and so it had to be re-done. 

So, in that district, no one can receive severance packages until the exercise is completed; and we find that in the case of Mukono, the nullified exercise affects over 400 members of staff in that district.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, another question was about budgeting for pensions in local government. Pensions in local governments are covered by a different act and local governments are responsible for budgeting and paying pension to their staff. Save for arrears that Government requested to support local government, of Shs 17.5 billion. When districts split, there is guidance given to local governments for the new district to take up all the liabilities once they split. Therefore, the new districts should also budget for the pensioners that were hitherto in the parent district. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thought that we would give those clarifications in the questions that were asked to the ministry. I would also like to lay this on table because the attachment is showing how much we have paid, how many districts did receive cheques through our ministry, from that Shs 14.7 billion, and it also indicates the balance of staff who have been queried, and we expect the queries to come out of local government. It also indicates a list of cheques that are being prepared as at 31 March, from which the remaining numbers are going to be paid and indicates what we have compiled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us hear from that Minister of Justice.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, an issue was raised on the status and funding of district land tribunals by hon. Wilfred Nuwagaba. It is quite an intricate subject and its history is very well known. 

Under Article 243(1) of the Constitution, Parliament made a law to provide for the establishment of land tribunals. Part (5) of the Land Act, Chapter 227, established district land tribunals. But then, our Amendment Act of 2004 transferred the land tribunals from the Ministry of Water Lands and Environment to the Judiciary. 

Following the expiry of contracts of the members of the land tribunals, the Chief Justice on the 1 December 2006, made practice direction No.1 of 2006 to enable magistrates courts to exercise jurisdiction over land matters until new members of the said land tribunals are appointed or otherwise. 

Clearly, the said practice direction No.1 of 2006 is a temporary measure. There is need to address the issue of whether indeed or not District Land Tribunals should continue to be operational. The Justice Law, and Order Sector has embarked on two extra studies on family justice and land justice and we expect an input from that sector to see what to do with the District Land Tribunals.

There is an issue, which hon. Nuwagaba raised that even after the expiry of these contracts, there was inability to properly handover because some premises, which were rented could not be accessed and some of the facilities were locked therein. 

I have talked to the responsible officers in the judiciary and they are still investigating this matter. But should it be found to be true, it will be immediately addressed.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was there something from the Office of the Vice President? Let us hear from the Minister of Finance – no, let us hear hon. Nandala first.

4.32
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri, County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The ministers have ably answered what they are supposed to answer. But I still have a few issues to raise. The law is clear on taxes; they say if you collect taxes, you must remit it to Uganda Revenue Authority. 

Now, we hear local governments have been collecting taxes on behalf of Uganda Revenue Authority: these are taxes like VAT and pay as you earn. Then, they deduct from the workers while withholding the taxes. This money has not yet been remitted to Uganda Revenue Authority. 

The same local governments turn around and say, “No, we used the money”. When in reality, this money has been used by the CAOs and the town clerks. So, we need the Minister of Finance to quickly sort out this issue; the CAOs and town clerks should be arrested for having collected money and utilised it on their own personal will without the authority of Parliament.

On CHOGM, I think CHOGM is a very good thing. But the way it is being managed by the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Foreign Affairs leaves a lot to be desired. In Malta, which hosted the past one that took place last year, they asked businessmen to bring in cars, specific types of cars and they were told that they would not pay taxes, but that they would be given number plates of a country, which will use that car, and Government saved all the money on taxes and businessmen applied. Actually the number was beyond and they saved money from the purchase of vehicles and they got the best cars. 

However in Uganda the way we are handling it leaves a lot to be desired. We have given the deal to one man to bring in 200 cars. What will happen after using them? This is a serious matter that we need to ask the Minister of Finance to quickly look at. It is unfortunate that I bumped into the man who is supposed to bring in these cars and he told me, “I am the one who has the deal”. I said, “We saw no advert so how did you get such a deal”?

Minister of Finance, you must tell us the procedure of how people are getting contracts to deal with CHOGM because issues like those concerning cars must be revisited for purposes of saving the Shs 20 billion supposed to go for cars. 

On hotel exemptions, it is very good. It is a good idea to give people holidays but well laid down rules must be applied. You cannot give someone an exemption without bills of quantities. How can you base on the taxes that someone is going to get? Somebody comes and tells you, “I have brought in materials and I want tax exemptions worth a billion shillings” and you pay. Is that fair? Supposing he took it to Kikuubo, or used it on other things? I think you must quickly revisit that and look at tax exemptions so that everybody benefits. Also the rules must be spelt out clearly so that everybody understands. 

We have been seeing in the newspapers that the President has directed that a person be given $ 4 million. We have seen a person who has also been given $ 8 billion as 20 percent investment in the hotel at Munyonyo. Article 159(2), which I will read verbatim states: “Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament”. 

I want the Minister of Finance to tell us under which law we went into a joint venture and gave money to Munyonyo Investments. How did the President carry out the analysis that they should give somebody $ 4 million? Let them be clear so that all Ugandans can apply and also get this money so that they all invest instead of using a selective system. 

This issue of knowing the President- I remember when we disposed of Binaisa, our current President was the Minister of Defence. He said the reason Binaisa had been disposed was because he had turned State House into a clearing house. What is the difference between 1979-80 and now where people go and get exemption letters and then go to Bank of Uganda to get money? Isn’t this more than a clearing house?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you said that you had two points. That is now point No 5.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is for our benefit. On page 13 of the report the Minister says that all unutilised funds at the end of the financial year had been posted in the Consolidated Fund account. However, when spending agencies apply to the Secretary to the Treasury, he releases yet we have the law. Section 19 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act says, “Every appropriation by Parliament of public monies for the services of the financial year and every warrant or other authority issued under this act in respect of the financial year shall lapse and cease to have any effect at the close of that year and the unexpended balance of monies withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund shall be repaid to the Consolidated Fund”. There is only an exemption in 19(2) for equalisation grants and unconditional grants to local governments. Those are the only ones who can retain. 

Therefore, Minister of Finance, under which law did you spend this money? I want to tell you that there is money you returned and have never brought here for appropriation the following years. In 2002/2003 you took back Shs 2.2 trillion. Look at the Auditor General’s report. We have never seen Shs 2.2 Trillion as income from the year 2003/2004. 

In 2003/2004, you took back Shs 1.6 trillion. In the following year we never saw that money for appropriation yet the warrant expires as soon as the financial year ends. So, which authority did you use? In 2004/2005 you took back Shs 1.5 trillion. If you use simple addition how much is that? I think that is about Shs 5 Trillion. We need you to tell us where the Shs 5 trillion is now because it is quite important. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. This is a holy week. I will start by distributing the copies of my submission. As you are aware Article 152(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda obliges any person with powers to waive or vary taxes to report to Parliament periodically on the exercise of those powers. I have not exercised the powers to waive or vary taxes because under the current tax laws there are no provisions granting discretionary powers to any person to waive taxes. 

I wish to remind this august House that I reported the matter of not exercising the powers to waive or vary taxes during the Budget Speech presented to Parliament on the 15 June 2006 and it is under paragraph 120 of the Budget Speech. However, for my ministry, it is a Government policy that each line ministry is appropriated funds under its budget for purposes of paying taxes on goods and services procured by persons operating under their jurisdiction provided the activities involved are deemed to supplement social and economic programmes of Government. 

In accordance with the above policy, my ministry has paid taxes on behalf of the persons indicated from July 2006 to January 2007 as is shown under appendix 1 which with your permission I wish to lay on Table and it totals to Shs 8.5 Billion. 

As for the reasons for tax payments, my ministry takes responsibility for organisations which are motherless, that is, whose activities cannot be tied to other line ministries.  Most of these are traditional churches, Christian and Islamic Organisation.  

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development supports their social and economic programmes which are deemed to supplement Government programmes. The Ministry of Finance also has an obligation to pay taxes on behalf of certain international organisations in lieu of the tax exemptions, for example, the World Vision International and the Belgium Technical Corporation. The obligation is normally spelt out in the agreement between the government of Uganda and these organisations.  

In the recent past, Government decided to promote the hotels sub-sector by assisting the hotel developers to upgrade their hotel establishment to the standards that meet the expectation of the forthcoming CHOGM.  In this regard, Government decided to pay taxes and duties on hotel equipment and construction materials on behalf of the hotel developers as has been given in the appendix.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I interrupt you a little.  Honourable members, as I announced earlier we have in the Distinguished Visitor’s Gallery, the Rt Rev. Dr Edward Muhima, Bishop of North Kigezi Diocese who has come to celebrate the Easter Service with the Anglican Chaplaincy.  He is accompanied by several distinguished members of the Church, including hon. Dr Kabushenga, who is the Chaplain of the Anglicans in Parliament.  You are very welcome - (Applause)- Thank you for coming to pray with us.  

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is why I talked about the Holy Week. I have listened to debates and presentation by various persons. I request that I be given opportunity to give my submission and then I can receive reactions thereafter.

Appropriation-in-aid

As a matter of policy all funds allocated to Government ministries are remitted to the Consolidated Fund as non-tax revenues and budgeted for accordingly.  However, public universities and referral hospitals have been allowed to retain and spend the money at source as appropriation in aide because of the nature of their operation.  

For financial year 2006/2007, a total of shs 79.7 billion is projected under appropriation in aide for public universities of which Makerere University is expected to generate and spend Uganda shs 41.6 billion while shs 2.4 billion is projected for referral hospitals of which shs 2 billion is meant for Mulago Hospital. These institutions should therefore comply with Section 17 of the Budget Act and report to this august House through their ministries.  

Under URA, under performance leading to a shortfall of shs 2.78 billion the URA collections for the first half of 2006/2007 amounted to Shs 1.239.38 billion against the target of Shs 1.242.16 billion reflecting a shortfall of Shs 2.78 billion. This represents 99.78 of the four months achievements.

The slight underperformance was on account of poor performance on corporation tax, import and local excise duties and VAT on locally produced goods.  

Under item four, Government taxes, Government taxes perform at 38.3 on the procurement of goods by Government institutions and payment of taxes for NGOs. The under performance is on account of the slow space procurement at the beginning of the financial year, which however picks up as the year progresses.  In addition, some NGOs and donors did not procure as projected, hence, at 8.3 per cent performance.

Under item five, Government should consider giving URA a wider scope to collect Non-Tax Revenues.  My ministry is in the process of reviewing this, and when the review is finalised, we shall forward the recommendation to Parliament for the necessary input and approval including those non-tax revenue recommendations for transfer to URA, taking account the cost and efficiency considerations.

Widening of the tax base

The Government does not undertake on an annual basis tax measures intended to widen the tax base.  The tax measures are usually discussed and approved by Parliament.  For instance on page 3, this financial year 2006/2007, Government extended excise duty to landlines and public phones and cement. Last financial year, the rate of VAT was increased from 17 to 18 percent. We appreciate the comments raised by Members and my ministry will continue working closely with members of Parliament to explore means of widening the tax base.

Item seven on page 3, concerning shortfalls in wage releases to local government when salaries are obligations, the Minister of State for Public Service has already given us guidance on this.  

Item 7.1 gives an explanation as to why Public Administration sector overdrew its budgets during the period by 7 per cent.  The Public Administration sector overperformed in the first half 2006/2007 by 6.4 percent as shown in the table on page 6.  The reasons for this performance are given in the supplementary Schedule 1, which has been tabled this afternoon and appropriate answers will be given through the Committee on Finance accordingly.

Under item eight, why only 15 per cent of Chief Administrative Officer’s wages was released, the Minister of State for Public Service has already answered this.  All those who have been captured on the payroll have been paid and shall be paid, and if there are any arrears, they will be appropriately handled.

Under item nine, on page 4, unutilised balances which the Shadow Minister has raised during a Holy Week, according to the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003, any unspent balances at the end of every financial year are expected to be returned to the Consolidated Fund.  Once these funds are returned to the Consolidated Fund, they form part of the government position to the next financial year.  However, the Secretary to the Treasury can allow these funds to be retained and spent in the coming year based on justification by the spending agency. Local governments that have been allowed to retain these funds are acquired to budget for the funds and present them to their councils for approval as part of the budget estimates for the coming year.

Under item 10 on page 5, development budget for roads works sector had a shortfall of 23 percent during the half year. The development budget of the road sector performed at 79.3 percent and had a performance of 20.7 percent. The low performance was due to delays in construction processes which normally happens at the beginning of the financial year but improves as the financial year progresses and by the end of the financial year we expect the sector to have achieved close to 100 percent performance.

My ministry is addressing the issue of collecting and withholding tax, PAYE and other taxes by local government and officers who are involved will have to be taken to book as recommended by the honourable member.

Concerning the issue of CHOGM, there is a committee that is handling that and at an appropriate moment they can be requested to bring a comprehensive report to this House.

On hotel exemptions, I have already given this information. I will challenge the Shadow Minister to give us more information about the Shs 5.3 trillion he is talking about and we shall handle it appropriately. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, concerning this committee on CHOGM, do they actually participate in the deliberations or they are just – you know I have not heard from them since they were appointed.  Are you talking about the ad-hoc committee of this House, comprising of the chairpersons of committees? Who is actually going to report to us on CHOGM?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, if I can recollect well the Minister of Foreign Affairs made a report here on the issue of CHOGM and there is a committee, which is handling this and it is not directly under the Ministry of Finance. So, the appropriate committee will give a report on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which is the appropriate committee?

MS KIRYAPAWO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is an ad-hoc committee on CHOGM of this House, chaired by hon. Kiryapawo- (Laughter)- We have met once and we had requested the Minister to come before us and give a brief on CHOGM activities. We were to meet him today but he said he would be meeting us on 12th April. So, after that we shall be able to report to this House -(Laughter)

4.56
MR STEVEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My clarification is in respect of the appendix showing a summary of the people and companies that have benefited from tax exemptions and I am also raising this matter in respect of CHOGM.

About one week ago, there was information that the cabinet sub committee on CHOGM had been reinforced by some private business people to speed up its activities, and amongst the three private business people that were put on this committee is Mr Sudhir Ruperllia, Mulwana and another person.

I am seeking clarification from the Minister or the Prime Minister whether by sitting on the committee on CHOGM, a cabinet sub committee going to deal with CHOGM when Mr Sudhir has facilities that are going to host CHOGM – I am not sure whether he would not have a conflict of interest, when he is going to sit on a committee dealing with hotels and other institutions that are going to benefit from the decisions of this committee where he has been put.

I thank you.

4.57
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last week when we were debating the Budget, I raised a component of the budget, which was not reported on. It was the issue of the Energy sector. We budgeted Shs 169 billion and set aside – we said Shs 70 billion should go to expenditure on thermal power, Shs 89 billion on the construction of hydropower projects. 

We are interested in knowing the status of that money because we understand the thermal power project is complete. It is only the hydro power projects which are going on. Sylyn is already on the site. We want to know how much has already been spent because he has not answered anything and he is the custodian of our money.

4.59
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is on page 3, that is paragraph seven. I note with concern that we still continue to debate issues that this august House disposed of sometime back. Just a few minutes ago, the House was excited about an issue simply because we made resolutions and recommendations, which were passed and ignored.

Likewise when you look at page 7, a Committee on Public Service and local governments we made recommendations to this House and they were passed without any change whatsoever.

It beats my understanding as to why the Ministry of Finance in collusion with the Ministry of Local Government, Public Service continues to refuse to separate conditional grants and salary grants. They still do not tell the truth and insist that they are giving local governments unconditional grants to give other services to the local governments when actually in most of these local governments, even the money sent to them as unconditional grants is not enough to cover even salaries. And yet they say that they are giving this money on the standard payroll as provided.

Surely don’t they read these figures? They are very clear. I know many other districts which are almost about to close, simply because they cannot meet even their salary obligations. Here we are being told that there are unconditional grants which are paid to local governments to meet those obligations. It is very unfortunate. I think it is high time we started telling each other the truth otherwise the scenario you have just seen a few minutes ago will continue to be a regular occurrence in this august House, which is very unfortunate.

In addition to that, we made a recommendation to the effect that, “Look here local governments have a problem.” There was money appropriated to the tune of Shs 51 million to cover pension arrears. We were not getting any money from anywhere else so we made a recommendation which was passed by this august House that at least Shs 5 billion be put aside to cater for the messy problem of pensions in local governments up to 2001. It was agreed upon but no action has ever been taken. It is still very unfortunate that no answer clearly has come out to that effect.

I now go to the energy sector; my colleague has more or less talked about it, but I also have a particular problem on this sector. The energy sector was given some money; we appropriated quite a lot of money to start with. To date I have not seen any tangible result, not even clearing sites.  

I have one in particular in my place Isingiro South in Kigagate. The first hydro power station in this country I think was in Kigagate in a place called Kasiketi supplying power to Mbarara region and Northern Tanzania. Unfortunately, for reason unknown to me - because I do not remember why the turbines were destroyed and then they were connected to the main grid in Jinja. Of course because most of the wars were starting from that area, everything was destroyed. 

We were very lucky very recently we got a Chinese company willing to invest in this  sector with their own money but they have been frustrated. Minister of Finance, I do not understand what the problem is with UDCL. Yet, we are crying we do not have power, we are crying we want to destroy Mabira and maybe grow sugar cane and then get some of this money to have more energy - we are not going to have this anyway. We also need some explanation on some of these issues. 

I was so excited; I took them to my colleague and neighbour, the honourable Member of Ruhama County because we were all going to be beneficiaries of this power. At least we were all excited but what has happened is that these people are going back frustrated left, right and centre. I have moved to the Ministry of Energy, I have moved wherever, I might be misunderstood to be a shareholder and it is very unfortunate. We need some of these answers but most specifically I would like to be educated a little bit more on why the ministry has refused to adhere to our recommendations as passed by this House so that the district knows that they have a wage bill of Shs 80 million per month.  

We also recommended, Madam Speaker, that at least - you remember before the Parliament did away with graduated tax, local governments used to correct well over Shs 80 billion as revenue. They were promised that there would be some compensation at least to a certain extent. We expected at least 70 per cent of it. What has been happening to the Shs 25 billion? What do you think about your districts? Are they providing any services to the people as expected? We should all get concerned about those issues. Thank you. 

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, I am adding up from what my colleague, hon. Byaruhanga, has just said on paragraph 7 (iv). It is also debatable whether we have a decent raised payroll anymore because under (iv) the Minister is saying that they are not able to ascertain the shortfalls on a regular basis. This is not true because what we are calling a standard payroll is actually generated by the Ministry of Finance produced by the Uganda Computer Services, which is an agency at the Ministry of Finance. 

So, Madam Speaker, Parliament may need actually to put the Minister to task so that he explains to us more why they are the ones producing the payroll and then they turn around to say that they are not able to ascertain the shortfalls. This is disturbing and I think the Minister should come up and be clear in telling Parliament what actually is going on as regards to the payroll and management of salaries in local governments. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know this phase is for seeking clarification but it seems Members are now reopening the debate completely.  

MR BYARUGABA: Let me conclude. It is very unfortunate, honourable members, when we get this kind of information telling us that local governments are responsible for meeting their own salaries and pensions when actually we know very well that these local governments used to do it before they were denied their major sources of revenue, which sources of revenue we were promised under a compensation sort of deal which deal has not been forthcoming. So, it is important that as we debate and we get more clarifications, these issues also come out very clearly.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the Minister on page 2; he talked about NTR. I would have loved to hear the minister cautioning the collecting department such that they can improve the collection of these NTR rather than saying that they are going to send them to URA.

The second clarification also goes to widen the tax base. I am just surprised that the Minister in his interpretation thinks that when he increases the tax rate, he is widening the tax base, which is not true. We need to see that many other items and sectors are put on board rather than increasing the rates for the already identified sectors. This would be completely unfair.

My last clarification concerns the balances; hon. Nandala raised this issue. We all know that we run a cash budget and at the end of any financial year, balances are transferred to the consolidated fund.  But, I would love as Parliament, which is an Arm of this Government that we actually advise that during the previous budget we have Shs 1.2 trillion as the balance such that we do not have to always start at zero. The question is: Who is accountable to this consolidated fund? At the end of the day, Ugandans need to benefit from this fund. We should not be really budgeting and at the end of the financial year, you close. 

Honourable minister, you should have come out very clearly - I know if you read the Hansard, your thinking is our thinking. I am surprised that this is a holy week and you are coming up with such a statement which is not precise. Ugandans want to know the balances because if at all you compute them, there is no need for this Government to go for a loan. The question is who are the beneficiaries of that fund? We would love to be told that there is a balance and the projected revenue for this financial year is this. You will find that at the end of the day, we can finance our budget internally to a tune of 80 per cent. I will take the information

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. The Minister says the Secretary to the Treasury is the one who spends and we know the warrant expired and the Secretary to the Treasury has no authority unless it has been done by Parliament that you must spend this money. So, the Minister coming to state this is trying to lie to us in the holy week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you through?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I want to conclude by saying that as Parliament, we need to have these balances tabled and we know how wealthy our consolidated fund is other than just continuing getting budgets on zero yet our account is fertile.

5.12
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The first issue I want to raise is as far as annex 1 is concerned. Looking at the summary of taxes paid for the hotels and other organisations, the two tables – I have got reliable information that this is subject to abuse; that all these hotels and businesses are mostly linked to big shots in Government. I do not want to make this a subject of contention but I want to request the Minister to bring us the location of these hotels – I mean the districts. It is not enough to say J&M, Island Club. Island Club is a dancing hall and I wonder how Government of Uganda can pay taxes for it. I do not know if it is in anticipation of CHOGM. 

So, we want the Minister to tell us the districts where these hotels are located in one column and in the second column, tell us the proprietors so that if it is a lie, in future we shall just send the Clerk of Parliament to the Registrar of Companies to bring us the actual owners of these hotels. We have information that even ministers have smuggled their hotels into this category and they are not paying taxes yet they are better placed members of the society who can stand to pay taxes. 

Mr Minister, I still insist I have reliable information that this tax exemption and payments in the spirit of CHOGM is being subject to abuse tantamount to Shs 5.3 trillion.

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you, hon. Otto, for giving way. When you look at the annex by the Minister under beneficiaries, (a) hotels, No 30 is Islands Club. Then when you come now under organisations, (b), Island Club is No.38.

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, with your guidance, I would request you to order the Minister tomorrow in the course of Parliamentary business, to lay on Table the requested version of this annex containing the district and the proprietors. Some of the districts are even not where CHOGM is bound to take place.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I have got some information that Uganda Revenue Authority is actually querying certain hotels because they imported so many metres of curtain materials – over 38,000 metres which was not actually used and about 300 TV sets which were sold in the market and yet there were no taxes on these items. Government is paying money and these same people are selling these materials in the market.

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, as somebody from the business community in this country, CHOGM is actually not helping all the business people. You find somebody with a hotel of 100 rooms importing over 500 TV sets and curtain materials enough for a hotel of 1000 rooms. They are actually importing more than what is required for the hotel and they are using this as a disguise because Government has nobody responsible to monitor whether somebody has imported what is enough for his hotel only. 

What is happening is that people are importing goods under the CHOGM tax exemption and these are the goods they are bringing to the market tax free and out competing us who are paying the taxes. There is an outcry from the community and as we talk now KASITA is preparing a petition to Parliament.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, let me give some information on this. As a committee, first of all, we have been demanding for this information and it has not been forthcoming. As a committee, we believe that though the honourable minister is saying that this is not tax exemption and he has opted to say that he has not waived, Article 15 of the Budget Act is very clear and it demands what the honourable members are requesting for, especially, hon. Otto. 

Let me read it verbatim and we believe that the Minister has not complied with this article: “A person or any authority having power to waive or vary any tax under Article 152 (2) of the Constitution shall make a quarterly report to Parliament which shall be on or before the 30th day of September, the 31st day of December, the 31st day of March and 30th day of June in each financial year” Sub-section (2) says, “ A report made under section 1 shall include inter alia, the organisation or person exempted from the tax, the reason for the exemption, the amount of tax foregone by the government and the benefits from the exemption.” 

The modality of reporting on this is not through responding to a report of a committee. The article is very clear that it should be quarterly and even in our recommendations, which we outlined in our report, we said the Minister needs to comply to this article and if need be we need an interpretation of this by the Attorney-General. That list of beneficiaries from taxes - the government itself has been giving them cheques to be presented to the URA. We interpret this as a tax exemption from the taxpayer but Government is meeting his tax. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am glad I am not a professional economist but if such issues can attract such serious comments, it shows the gravity of the matter.

Has this Parliament created a committee to help it monitor the CHOGM operations? Because if that committee is the one being led by the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, then this country is not helping the organisers of CHOGM in any way. I am one of those MPs who stood up on day one to support the coming of CHOGM to Uganda even when some big shots in my party were against it. So, I would be the most disappointed to see that CHOGM is being surrounded by tax fraud and yet Parliament is very competent to institute a committee that can brief it. Now that we are left with about 30 weeks, they should brief Parliament monthly on the progress of the CHOGM.

Madam Speaker, I am not even sure of which districts the CHOGM delegates are going to stay in. If we had known the districts, we would automatically remove some of the hotels from this list, like Aponye Hotel. There is another hotel in Kasese and another one in Kabale –(Interjection)- no, there are many hotels honourable member, I am not singling out any specific hotel. (Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to inform my honourable colleague that apart from Kampala, the delegates could also go to see the outskirts of Uganda to help them and even help us appreciate because at the end of the day some might become investors. So, you never know, some will even visit the eastern, western and northern parts of the country. So regarding the spread of hotels, there is no problem. What we want is the mechanism and procedure used. I thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I rest my case on those hotels, Madam Speaker. 

Lastly, I have seen a situation in local governments in relation to what the Minister said on page 4, bullet 9 where he says, “In case of local governments that have been allowed to retain these funds, they are required to budget for the funds and present them to their councils for approval.”  The statement says, “In case of local governments that have been allowed.” Can the minister tell us which local governments have been allowed to retain these funds? 

Can we have a schedule? Because I have seen like in my local government in Pader, there is a lacuna. The technical staff says that the money, which remained, is returned to the central Government. Now the central Government is today telling us that some local governments have been allowed to use those funds. 

So, if this kind of lacuna is not addressed properly, we shall find that individuals who walk all the way to the bank are just eating excess money not utilised in local governments. Could the minister tell us which local governments have been allowed to utilise these funds and how much? This will help the MPs to zero down on them to find out whether the councils really budgeted for it.

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, of course clarifications being sought by the honourable colleagues are very important, but the budget process is ongoing and certainly, most of these queries will be answered in due course. However, on section 15 of the Budget Act, which was quoted by hon. Banyenzaki on reports on exemptions of tax, it is important to read most of these provisions in harmony with other existing laws. 

Under the Income Tax Act - to the best of my knowledge - of 1997 as amended, there are no more tax exemptions. So, these reports are not necessary. This provision is for the time being redundant -(Interjection)- yes, let me clarify. If there are tax exemptions, hon. Shadow Minister for Finance, I want you to tell me under which law those tax exemptions are being given? Because that law is very clear. We have got a harmonised commodity code, which is for all people. You access benefits on an equal basis. If the minister has given an exemption, he needs to tell us. Yes, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much Attorney-General for giving way. Well, I am one of the architects of the income tax you are talking about. You are talking about capital allowances; that is true. There are some allowances in the income tax law, which everybody benefits from, and that is quite clear. 

The issue of the tax exemptions, which are referred to here, these do not use the word “exemption,” and they differ from others. Tax exemption means you are not paying tax. If a tax has been waived, you do not pay. If Government pays, does a taxpayer pay? No. So, there is no difference between Government paying and saying, “You have been excused”, because even the excuse you are talking about - what Government does, it writes a cheque to URA, URA credits its income and at the same time writes a cheque paying Government thereby making it zero, and crediting it with zero balance. There is no tax paid. It is just a book entry. What we want is to do things professionally. True, the law is clear on income tax but we must also read the law clearly. Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: I will find it very difficult and I am very constrained not to agree with the Shadow Minister of Finance on the interpretation of section 15 because it is not talking about exemptions by operation of the law. It is talking about exemptions under discretionary powers and it is very clear. The language is very clear to a person or an authority having power to waive or vary any tax. This implies discretionary powers and not exemptions by operation of the law. I am very aware that under our law you have zero-rated; tax exempted and many other forms by the operation of law, but that is not the reference under this section.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying that what we have been given by the minister are not exemptions?

MR RUHINDI: The ones he is talking about are not exemptions under discretionary powers referred to in section 15.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if the Act gives the minister power to use his discretion, is that not under the law? It is under the law.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker –(Interjection)- I have not erred and I will find it very difficult to buy that. Section 15 is talking about laying of reports on exemptions under discretionary powers. And under the law there are no more discretionary powers. Discretionary powers were abolished under the relevant laws, the Income Tax Act, which I quoted, being one of them. Even some finance statutes abolished tax exemptions given by the Ministry of Finance under discretionary powers. So what we are talking about was then. This provision is not applicable for the time being. I so submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Budget Committee and then the Committee on National Economy.

THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr William Okecho): Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General who is in charge of laws is really taking me aback. Is he telling us that now Section 15 of the Budget Act does not hold anymore and, therefore, we should not apply it?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Madam Speaker, I would like the honourable minister to baptise what he does when he authorises Government to pay money out of the Consolidated Fund to private individuals. Let him tell us what it is?

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, this issue has on several occasions come up in our committee. The minister himself apologised for not having complied with Article 15. So when the Attorney-General comes here to tell us that when you say, “A person or any authority having power to waive,” and yet you have waived tax of these hotel owners; they are not paying it and the Ministry of Finance is paying a cheque for them saying, “We are covering these taxes for them,” - and you say that that is not a waiver? You say that you are not waiving that tax on Munyonyo Resort and these other hotels? And you are you saying that Article 15 of the Budget Act is redundant, as the chairman has ably articulated? I think you need to have some time in the chambers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omach, what was the mischief you intended to cure by paying these taxes? (Laughter)

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, in the report we said, “In supporting Government’s intentions, we went ahead to pay the taxes on these hotels,” and we have given the justification in this report. 

In the interpretation of Section 15 of the Budget Act, it is true when we came to the committee, we did apologise for not complying with it, but the Attorney-General gave us guidance on this matter and we recognised that on the 15th of June 2007, when we submitted the Budget Speech, we did give to this Parliament the list of hotels and other issues which were paid for by the Ministry of Finance and so today when we tabled this listing, we were just giving what the ministry paid for. 

If additional information is required as is contained under Article 15, we shall oblige and give those details as to which organisations, reasons for exemptions, amount, which was forgiven, and the benefit for the exemptions. This we can undertake to give. But the interpretation of the law as far as ministries are concerned, our chambers are the Attorney-General. I thank you very much.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been watching my TV. I have an office that is fully equipped and I have been following so I am fully abreast with the debate. But the information I want to give is:

Once you appropriate money, like the money we appropriated for CHOGM, it is the money that the Ministry of Finance is using to give for the operations of CHOGM. But the tax exemption after harmonising with the East African Federation, which removed the powers from the Minister of Finance to exempt a tax, that one is not a tax exemption.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is it, is it a gift?

MR KAKOOZA: That is what I am trying to say. After appropriating, the minister should tell us because if it is a tax exemption, it is wrong. By the Finance Act, 2002, this Parliament pronounced itself. There is a standardised code of anything imported in this country by law, but a minister has no powers to exempt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he has powers to direct.

MR KAKOOZA: The money, which the Minister is using, is the one we appropriated here for the operation of CHOGM but it is not a tax exemption.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Supposing the ministry had not paid this money, who would pay it?

MR KAKOOZA: Where did the minister get that money to pay in lieu of that tax?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I am not a lawyer but I just want you to guide me before I can proceed because this response is from the minister and the ministry is made up of technical people and I understand they got the advice of the Attorney-General.  However, when you read paragraph 1.1 and 1.1.2: “The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has an obligation to pay taxes on behalf of certain international organisations in lieu of tax exemption.” Just listen to that: “In lieu of tax exemption.” Assist me to understand that sentence and then I can proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It means, “instead of”.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I just want to assert that maybe under the East African Community – I am a Catholic – I can decide to baptise my child William and you baptise yours John; they are both Catholics and these are just a change of words. (Laughter). This is real exemption and by the way, this money is from our fathers. These are our taxes, which we are using to benefit a few people. So irrespective of whether the other law was made redundant, as Parliament the minister is supposed to submit a list of those people who have benefited from the so-called “exemption”. They are obliged to submit and they should submit.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I have noted a very awkward scenario today that may compel this Parliament to ask all the technocrats to sit in the distinguished strangers’ gallery. Because I do not expect a Member of Parliament who sees the minister being zeroed in on by Parliament to take chits from the technocrats and run on the Floor of the House to add to the problem of ensuring that the minister gets an exit route. This will not be acceptable to us as Parliament. 

For that matter, we may even be compelled to create a special committee to monitor all the CHOGM related activities in this Parliament. Because there are people who are smiling all the way to the bank and they are happy today that Parliament is not hitting the exact spots. We may close today’s session without achieving that and they will laugh saying, “We have been technical enough.” What I can submit is that I saw in the New Vision newspapers that this tall building behind Serena belonging to Karim was given Shs 750 million. I presuppose it is the same honour of Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort. In case it is not, can the honourable minister tell us where we have got such instances? Because when they interviewed Karim, he said, “Government is paying my rent well in advance.” He said that Government was paying the rent for that hotel in advance to enable him complete the structure, so now we are in a katogo of affairs. There is special money for CHOGM, which should be utilized for this activity. 

I would request you to advise me on whether it would not be right to move a motion that this Parliament creates a special committee of competent persons to monitor CHOGM. Otherwise, the Committee of Presidential Affairs will not achieve anything in this aspect I can assure you without impudence, Madam Speaker. May I move my motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, before you move, my information is that the committee comprises all the chairpersons of the standing and sessional committees as well as the leadership of the Presidential Affairs Committee. That is what I was informed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I happen to be a chairman of a committee and I have never received an invitation for a meeting concerning CHOGM. In any case we do not need an ad hoc committee. We need a real committee of Parliament or a special committee to deal with this because if you are talking of these committees of chairpersons, you know how we were selected so we could easily have a problem at the end of the day.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unless you want to go back on what was agreed, the committee was set up here after debate in this House. That is what you wanted to do; now I do not know whether you want to change positions.

MR ODONGA OTTO: With all due respect to the guidance you are ably giving this House, the issue is wider than the committee. As a Member of Parliament for Aruu County, I am not aware of the scope and magnitude of my participation in the entire CHOGM business. The way things are going on now, Members of Parliament are just spectators and we do not want a scenario like the other time when President Bush was coming to Uganda. 

It is Minister Tom Butime who warned Members of Parliament not to rush to Entebbe simply because they wanted to meet President Bush. We do not know what is going on because we are not involved. The fraud is slapping our faces while we are here in Parliament. I do not want to pre-empt and start justifying my motion before I move it. May I, therefore, move a motion without notice, Madam Speaker that this Parliament urges the Office of the Speaker to constitute an all inclusive committee of Parliament to monitor the activities of CHOGM and any of such activities related to the events that will be coming to this country? I beg to move, if I can get a seconder of this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you say an all inclusive committee, I have informed you that I have been made to understand that the ad hoc committee consisting of all the chairpersons of the sessional and standing committees was constituted and I believe that this is all inclusive. How much more inclusive do you want that to be? The chairpersons of your committees are there and they are all inclusive.

5.43
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, Parliament did agree that all chairpersons of sessional and standing committees become members of the CHOGM committee. However, what is at stake right now is that ever since its creation this committee has not moved an inch and most probably it is because the person who was supposed to head or chair it has been busy battling our legal matters in court probably, or there may be other things related to it therein. I would, therefore, wish to propose that your office takes a decision and takes charge in terms of getting somebody competent to head it so that they can move. 

This is because as of now that committee is not moving at all. Actually it aborted before even it showed its first date of birth. So I think as we move close to November, activities in preparation for CHOGM will need to move at a higher speed hence the need to have a competent person to lead that committee. Thank you.  

MR OTEKAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted clarification from the minister particularly on page 3.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us deal with this matter first. 

MR MUHINDO KYETUNDA: Before the motion, I would like to say something small. I have read the list of beneficiaries of this whole matter and despite the fact that in Kasese we have a national park named after the Queen; it is not a beneficiary. This is quite surprising. Is that in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was in Kasese yesterday and I saw the Cape Hotel. It is there in Kasese. 

MR KYETUNDA: Where is our hotel, Madam Speaker? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Cape Resort, I saw the name here.

MR KYETUNDA: It has been created behind me, Madam Speaker, because I did not know. There are more prominent hotels than this in Kasese that I don’t know yet I have been in Kasese for the last 40 years. That is why we are saying some of these things need to be perused seriously. I, therefore, support the motion that it be moved.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I am not intending to stifle the motion moved by hon. Otto but it came when we were trying to adopt the report. I seek your indulgence since we are about to finish that we dispose of this matter that we are handling and then we move on with the motion of hon. Otto so that we can move systematically.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Otto’s motion is a simple one that is urging the Speaker’s Office to review the situation.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, having considered the incompetence of that committee as they have not reported any progress here, I also seek your guidance on one thing. This is soon going to be the home for CHOGM and under some requirements we should be having a well-constituted and performing Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, which we have not done up to now. I would think, therefore, that this should be taken very seriously. I do not know when we are going to do this and if we had one in place -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, about ten days ago the Clerk wrote to the Whips of all the parties asking them to give nominations for the CPA.  

MR ODIT: We would be very pleased to get progress from your office, Madam Speaker. We have not heard anything.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree with you that a fortnight ago, the Clerk to Parliament did write to the Opposition Chief Whip and the government Chief Whip. For us as a group, we did sit and I submitted the name, because the Opposition was supposed to have one slot, and I submitted the name of the person from the Opposition - that is hon. Okupa Elijah. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we jump into this fray, some of the office holders in the CPA are ex-officios. There is nothing you can do about the Clerk, you cannot substitute him, and neither can you substitute the Speaker; the elective ones are really three. So for CPA, I think the process is ongoing, that is what I can say.

5.50
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I am standing to support hon. Odonga Otto’s motion that you constitute a committee that will be more active, that will rejuvenate the activities. In Kigulu South, that is Iganga, people expect me to be the most informed - the most up to date about CHOGM. But when you get there, you are asked, “What is going on: will Lusoga be included in the CHOGM arrangement?” But I am not informed. “Will the Queen be visiting the source of the Nile?” Again, I am ignorant.  

When you look at the list of the hotels listed, recently we lost our institution here in Kampala, that is, Shimoni, in the guise of constructing a hotel in preparation for CHOGM at the site. As we talk there is nothing going on at that site. So, can we get clarification from the minister? It is not listed, and how much has been paid? That is why I am concerned. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

5.52
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you so much Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion of hon. Otto. Whatever is happening in this country, especially in issues where Parliament is expected to be active, and we do not come out to show that we are active - it reflects on the whole institution that it is not performing. That is why even certain Members of the Front Bench can afford to say certain words that despise the institution to which they also belong. It is because we have not come out assertively to state that certain people on the Front Bench take us for granted.  

Whatever has been happening - these questions we are asking the Minister of Finance, about the taxes on hotels, tax exemptions; in lieu of tax exemptions and so on are because the committee has not done its work. I want us to admit that, for instance, I as Justine I am not capable of doing everything. But I am good at certain things. On the issue of CPA and CHOGM, especially CHOGM, we need some people who are good at public relations, people who are going to articulate issues for Parliament in CPA. So we need a committee of people who are going to show the public that Parliament is participating.

Madam Speaker, the committee that was set up constitutes chairpersons of committees in this institution, and these are supposed to be very active but they have not come out to show us - and by the way, this is a vote of no confidence in you the chairpersons –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am a committee chairperson, and you know very well that I recovered money from a minister who had dodged for a long time - for three years. We know that we have a committee chairperson who has never called even a single meeting, and our rules are clear that the person who calls a meeting is the chairperson. A chairperson who is just a Member cannot call a meeting. So, is the Member in order to tell the whole public that Members who are chairpersons of other committees are incompetent when we know very well that we are very competent and capable of delivering to this country?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, it is improper to pass judgement on a single activity when the chairpersons have been here presenting reports, chairing meetings - she is out of order. But anyway, let us wind up on this matter.

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, this committee was set up months ago, but they have never reported to us; that is why we are supporting this motion, because we are not satisfied with their performance. The chairperson has said that since the committee was set up months ago - by the way, it is about two or three months ago - the first meeting was supposed to take place today. So I want to suggest that we get people who have good public relations and who are going to articulate issues and show how active Parliament is in the CHOGM. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House approves the motion as moved by hon. Odonga Otto.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So we shall come back to inform you about the review.  

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, the issues that I wanted the minister to clarify are on page 3 of this report, bullet 7.0: shortfalls in releases to local governments. 

My major concern is on 7(3). Local governments are responsible for payment of salaries to staff up to a certain percentage. I was in local government, but this percentage of 1/12 of the annual budget, I do not know how it was arrived at first of all. 

Secondly, the releases of unconditional grants were not fixed. Because if Soroti received Shs 60 million in January, it would receive about Shs 40 million in February and Shs 30 million in March. My concern is how is it fixed to one over twelve of the annual budget? I would like the minister to clarify that. How was the one 1/12 arrived at and why are unconditional grants sent to local governments varying from month to month? 

In addition to that, considering that graduated tax was scrapped by Government and that local governments are not able to raise enough money to pay wages for their decentralised employees, isn’t it possible for Government to make - since payment of salaries is a social obligation - to make all salaries in local governments conditional? That way, when money for Soroti District for salaries is sent as a conditional grant, if the salaries amount to Shs 90 million, the money should be sent as Shs 90 million of an unconditional grant.

Another issue is in bullet 6.7 as a way forward. We are in the last quarter of the financial year. The compensation for graduated tax, even the Shs 20 billion has not properly arrived because we had budgeted for Shs 45 billion. We are coming to the end of the financial year and the law says that if any money is not utilised by the end of the financial year - because by June all local governments will be concluding their budgets. Can the minister make at least some clarification as to when the remaining balance of Shs 25 billion will be sent to local governments? This way when we go back – I am a Member of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government - when we go back because we are starting to move to districts we shall be able to explain to them as to approximately when the balance of Shs 25 billion will go so that they are able to make arrangements to spend that money. Otherwise, it will just be returned at the end of the financial year. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kaddunabbi, is there something very new?

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister on page 2, concerning widening the tax base, rightly noted that our tax base is narrow because of the three reasons he gave and said it is made worse by the current power crisis. I had expected the minister to tell us how Government has addressed these concerns, which to him or to the ministry are the ones responsible for narrowing the tax base. 

In addition to that, when he talks of the power crisis, when we were debating the first half of the state of the economy report we noted that there was increased export of power and power tariffs have more than tripled. I would expect the minister to tell this august House how Government has addressed those concerns so that we can move forward altogether. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, can you respond? Is it not covered in your report? You are the owner of the report. I do not know whether you –(Interruption)

MR OKECHO: There is a small point I want to raise with respect to the minister’s response in paragraph 2, on Appropriation-in-Aid. The minister knows very well that we have at the moment various institutions, which mainly fall under two ministries. There is the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Health, which have actually been granted permission to apply the funds they collect in Appropriation-in-Aid to do some of the work they are supposed to be performing. We have actually indicated to him or to the ministry that these people have not responded. I also wrote to the Prime Minister to help us get these institutions to respond because you know, they fall under two ministries and we could not write to both of them. 

The Prime Minister has directed that these two ministries and various institutions that fall under them should report by 20 April 2007. This year they have a bit of time. I am holding a copy of a letter from the Prime Minister. This is a bit of the information and it is copied to very many people and institutions, including the Rt hon. Speakers of Parliament -(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I am just surprised because hon. Okecho is the Chairperson of the Budget Committee whose report we have been debating. I know very well that the chairperson is supposed to be given time to answer some of our queries, which fall under his jurisdiction and even the minister is given a chance. I am just surprised because I see the chairperson in front and another chairperson behind. We need to be advised because some of the issues, which are being raised, should come in a separate report. Let us be guided because we are receiving new information, which needs to be debated –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, I do not know the purpose of that information, which is for the 20 April –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, if you recall very well in my presentation of this report, the recommendations which were given from our committee, in bullet 3, I emphasised the recommendation that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development causes the respective ministries in charge of institutions under Appropriation-in-Aid to report to Parliament on the performance of Appropriation-in-Aid as required by law. I articulated under Article 17 of the Budget Act and it is very clear, which the minister has also not complied with –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I raise on a procedural matter. Hon. Okecho got up to make his submission yet he is a substantial chairman of the committee. I do not know under what procedural law the vice-chairperson presented the committee report yet the chairman was around and also struggling from the Back Bench to present his views. I do know what kind of arrangement that is because what I read between the lines is hon. Okecho seems to be feeling cheated. I need your guidance. Is hon. Okecho in charge of the committee or he doubted his capacities to pursue this Parliament the way hon. Banyenzaki is doing? I need some guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have the chairperson and we have the vice-chairperson of the committee. The report belongs to the entire committee. Whatever hon. Banyenzaki has presented is a report of your committee. Therefore, I do not know what new idea you are adding to that report.  In fact, members of your committee are not supposed to be debating.

MR OKECHO: I know we are not debating but –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are you doing?

MR OKECHO: I know we are not debating but can I just answer hon. Otto?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, we have nearly finished a year in this Parliament and every Member of Parliament was given a copy of our Rules of Procedure. Before that, Mr Kasirye, a senior officer of this Parliament did conduct an induction for our new brothers and sisters who joined us in the Eighth Parliament. 

It is very clearly stated in our Rules of Procedure that when the Speaker is talking, we shall listen to him or her in silence. Ever since then, I have seen hon. William Okecho stand up and argue with the Speaker face to face, even raising his arms in the air –(Laughter)- as if he was conducting NRM mobilisation in Tororo. Is the honourable member in order to disregard our Rules of Procedure and to disrespect the institution of the Speaker of Parliament? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order and let us not introduce new practices, which are outside our rules. (Laughter) Hon. Okecho, the report is for your committee, you are not supposed to debate this matter. Minister, please answer. (Interjections)– no! You were not here when they were presenting, you were not here when the debate was going on, how can you answer? No, please, hon. Okecho, we know you are the chair really. It is on record that you are the chair.

6.09
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am responding to the issues, which were raised when I presented the report on 27th March and some of the issues have been replied to by the honourable minister, while others have been raised, which need more clarification. 

The issue of unspent balances at the end of the financial year; this issue has been articulated by hon. Nandala and as a committee it is our concern on how this unspent balance of every end of financial year is handled. Because even the committee recommends that the manner in which this account is handled is not transparent. So, the committee was concerned. Even we raised it within our proceedings of the committee and we need more transparency on this issue. I think Parliament should recommend that the Ministry of Finance addresses this matter not to re-occur once again. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to give information to the chairman, hon. Henry Banyenzaki. There is no need to ask Finance how to operate it. They should bring that money here for appropriation. That should be one of the sources every financial year; nothing more.

MR BANYENZAKI: I agree with you entirely because you are recommending that when such resources are returned to the Consolidated Fund, we are noting that no mention is made by Government on how much is returned to the Consolidated Fund at the close of a given year. And we are calling upon the government to be transparent and disclose such amounts for efficient budget management.

On unutilised loans by Government, as the bi-annual budget performance report of the Budget Committee highlighted, there are concerns of non-utilisation of contracted loans in various sectors, especially in infrastructure and agriculture sectors. 

We recommend that Government negotiates for affordable levels of funding as counter-funding has continued to be a major constraint for absorbing such loans.

The performance of justice law, hon. Ruhindi has ably answered this. On tax exemption, which we have been debating about, I think Rt. hon. Speaker and honourable members, we do not actually agree – I personally do not agree. We need much more clarification on this. Because we passed that this money that Government is paying on these hotels and other organisations constitutes into a waiver and the ministry needs to report to Parliament. 

The law is very clear because it says the minister in charge has to report to Parliament quarterly. Whether you exempt or you do not exempt, the law says you shall report quarterly and the dates are indicated as I read the Budget Act very clearly. So, on that date, you are supposed to come here and report to Parliament; and you are not complying with that provision of the Act.

On loans, grants and guarantees, we perceived in the committee that these guarantees continue to be made on loans, yet at the start of each financial year Government does not mention any guarantee made during the financial year and we recommend that a comprehensive report be made on all guarantees made on loans before the closure of Financial Year 2006/07.

The issue of non-remittance of PAYE to URA by local government was raised again by hon. Nandala and we note that the PAYE is a statutory remittance and all local governments must deduct this tax from emoluments of employees in all local governments. And there is a temptation of using the funds meant for PAYE and this is due to limited funding by local governments. The Ministry of Finance needs to address this so that this does not arise.

Various key sector issues in various sectors like arrears of coffee seedlings, under-funding of health activities, road construction activities, constituency development fund releases, among others - I think the line ministers if they have not been addressing them - need to do this. 

The challenge of implementing Universal Secondary Education was also raised in the debate and we recommend that a comprehensive policy be introduced in this area to cover the challenges in this service delivery because as you well know, honourable members, we do not have a policy as yet on Universal Secondary Education, which is so comprehensive.

On classification of Parliament under public administration, we recommend that a legislative sector be created in the medium-term expenditure framework under which Parliament will be placed under key sector issues or activities so that it is adequately addressed. And this will be consistent with the Judiciary as an arm of Government, which is under the justice, law and order sector.

The inadequate sector funding under MTEF; we recommend sector prioritisation, which is demonstrated in the MTEF ceiling generated by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. As a result, sectors like agriculture, which receive three percent of the budget, which we all agree is insufficient for all key sectors. We recommend that Parliament should have a role in deciding how ceilings should be derived so that we address this issue, which has been arising time and again. 

On the under-funding of missions, Madam Speaker and honourable members, we need a policy reversal on our foreign missions because this issue has been coming up time and again. I actually made a research on these missions abroad and found that in countries where Government may not find some embassies very important, it appoints honorary counsels there in order to cut the cost of funding and improve on the remaining foreign missions because in countries with honorary counsels we may not spend on them. 

We have examples like His Excellency James Mulwana, His Excellency Gordon Wavamunno and His Excellency Bony Katatumba who are Ugandan citizens representing other countries here. Those countries are not spending money on their embassies. They are staying in their own houses, driving their own vehicles and maintaining their offices. We should adopt this kind of method of work in order to reduce on the expenditure on foreign missions. If need be, you take up this recommendation and in case we need to come up with a motion to reduce on our foreign missions, we can table it.

On supplementary expenditures, Madam Speaker and honourable members, we observed that supplementary expenditures on some spending agencies were overtaken by budget overruns, in contravention of Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. We, therefore, urge the Minister of Finance to explain why this provision of the law is not being adhered to as in the report on Appropriation-in-Aid as my chairperson was trying to explain on the response from the minister on page 120. But this defeats my understanding, the Minister of Finance is very aware of the Budget Act and it is very clear on how you should report to this Parliament. 

However, when you bring these issues – let me read this provision 17: “A Minister responsible for any vote on Appropriation-in-Aid shall make a quarterly report to Parliament on the manner in which the Funds from that Vote are expended.” We are concerned as a committee. The Minister of Finance is actually overlooking - he is not complying with some articles within the Budget Act yet it is even very clear that any person who does not comply with provisions within the Budget Act will be held liable. I would not like this Parliament to hold you liable because you know the repercussions, honourable minister. But please, comply with the Budget Act. 

We are here to follow the laws, this Budget Act is a simple one and when you report quarterly, it does no harm. Instead of coming here and we start having some interpretations, which are not very clear, like we have been having an interpretation, which is not even clear up to now on Article 15 of the Budget Act and which is still a subject of debate as up to now. Madam Speaker, I end my submission by thanking you and honourable members for being patient as I was presenting the report of the Budget Committee and I thank the committee for their contribution.  

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: There is one correction, which I want to make before the honourable minister answers. On page 3 on the chairperson’s answer, I want to correct bullet (h) regarding narrow remittance of PAYE to URA by local governments. Madam Speaker, I want to disagree with the committee that PAYE is supposed to be remitted irrespective of whether local governments have enough funds or not. It is a discipline. If you are hungry, do you steal? It is a discipline; it is mandatory.  

If Parliament comes up with such soft amendments then you are not helping this country. Many local governments have run into problems of having their accounts frozen because they failed to remit PAYE. I want to assure you, Madam Speaker, that when Parliament approves a report like this some of the accounting officers will use this loophole to eat the money. So, PAYE is supposed to be remitted irrespective of whether they have the funds or not, they are not supposed to use it. So you will agree with me regarding (h) that the statement as it reads, “The temptation of using funds meant for PAYE is mainly due to limited funding option,” is not correct. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Let me clarify it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you can just delete it.

MR BANYENZAKI: The response here, which I have given in this, is not the position of the committee. These are my concerns, which rose as we were debating and the committee could not sit immediately - overnight.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Banyenzaki, for me - (Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: It is my personal input not the input of the committee -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Banyenzaki, you are saying that the local council should obey the law; period. Do not even say, “Bambi, I know sometimes you have no money!”

MR BANYENZAKI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay you can delete the second part.

MR BANYENZAKI: Most obliged. Then that provision - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That sentence should be deleted.

MR BANYENZAKI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we delete “that” from the temptation et cetera. “That” is deleted. It is no longer part of the record.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, hon. Banyenzaki the Vice-Chairperson of the Budget Committee gave us his response to what we raised and on the first page he is trying to answer for the energy sector. He briefly started and finally did not talk anything. Do I presume that I am going to get an answer by reading the paper or the line minister is going to answer? I am totally confused.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether he is the right person to answer on energy? It should be the Ministers of Energy and that of Finance.

6.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. As far as the energy is concerned, the Minister of Energy will give a comprehensive report on this issue and he has sent me a note to that effect. 

On the issue of Section 17 of the Budget Act, I would like to read it verbatim: “A Minister responsible for any vote on Appropriation-in-Aid shall make a quarterly report to Parliament on the manner in which the funds from that Vote are expended.”

I mentioned in my submission that there are two ministries responsible for votes on Appropriation-in-Aid, that is, the Ministry of Education and that of Health. I am happy that the Rt on. Prime Minister has written to the Ministry of Education to do the needful and we  expect the Ministry of Health to also do the needful. The Ministry of Finance does not have any Appropriation-in-Aid to do.  The other issues that I would like to comment on are tax exemption and tax payment. Every year this Parliament appropriates funds for tax payment by different ministries. And what I have given today are tax payments, which were appropriated by this Parliament to be utilised under my ministry and we offer to give further details. This financial year we gave a total of Shs 51 billion to the Ministry of Public Service. However, we did explain to the Committee on Local Governments that the Shs 5 billion they had requested for was not used to pay arrears for the local government. My ministry, together with that of Local Government and Public Service are undertaking to see that a greater portion of the Shs 17.5 billion will be met during the next financial year, which we are already beginning to handle.  

Under tax compensation, we have committed up to Shs 25 billion in addition to Shs 20 billion to make a total of Shs 45 billion as included in the supplementary No.1 Schedule, which was tabled today. We shall be able to pay immediately this supplementary as passed by this august House.

On the issue of sending non-tax revenue to URA, this was a recommendation of the committee and we are saying that we are doing some investigations to see what would be best, whether we should give it to the URA or revitalise the ministries to collect them in a better way.

On the issue raised by hon. Otto and the motion that has been passed, we shall just be most obliged to receive the new committee and work with them appropriately.

On the issues that have been raised by hon. Capt. Otekat, about the 1/12, this is only referring to the fact that the payments are on a monthly basis, and we have been doing our level best to make sure that the amount sent is the same. 

About the issue of the compensation that he raised, I have already explained.  

The issue raised about the tax base, my ministry has been very open to Parliament. We have been very open while discussing with Members of Parliament about the best ways possible to increase the tax base so that we can increase our revenue and GDP ratio from the current 13.5 percent to something better. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Budget Committee on the budget performance for the first half, from July to December, 2006, that is, of the fiscal year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, honourable members, we should go for mass; otherwise God will get angry with us. So the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 04 April 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)



