Thursday, 03 April 2008

Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I regret we may face a problem because there are echoes, which I detected but let us hope they will recede after sometime. I want to welcome you, honourable members, for this sitting and also wish to welcome again students from Uganda Christian University, Mukono. You are welcome to your Parliament. (Applause) We also have students from Kabatereine Memorial School in Mbarara District, Kakoba Division- (Applause)- You are welcome. We also have students from UICT Training Institute, Nakawa. You are also welcome. 

Honourable members, when we met here on Tuesday, we received a report from PAC on the disposal of public land in Luzira and I think it was Butabika land. After the report was read, we decided that we should have a special committee to look into the legal aspects and to clear the matter as to the other laws we should consider when we are debating that report. I am happy to say that I have selected the following honourable members to constitute that ad-hoc legal committee that will tell us whether there are other laws to consider. These are:
1.	Hon. Peter Nyombi, the convener and chairperson
2.	Hon. Ben Wacha
3.	Hon. Asuman Kiyingi
4.	Hon. Abdu Katuntu 
5.	Hon. John Baptist Kawanga 
6.	Hon. Steven Tashobya. 
Please handle the assignment and report promptly so that we can start debate on the report. Thank you very much. 

2.37
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wanted to seek your guidance. It is good you have said you are going to get members to look at it. I was thinking –

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, before you come in, there are people I had seen earlier. There are residents here from Kazooba Central Forest Reserve, Lwemiyaga County in Ssembabule District. You are welcome. 

Also, there are changes in the committees on the government side and in the designation of the NRM on session committees. These are the changes that have been made: hon. Brian Asiimwe, Physical Infrastructure, hon. Florence Odong Omwony, Foreign Affairs, hon. Lule Mawiya, Foreign Affairs, hon. Simon Lokodo, Public Service and Local Government, hon. Sarah Mwebaza Wasike, Finance, Planning and Economic Development and hon. Steven Bakka Mugabi, Information Communication Technology. Concerning Standing Committees, hon. Brian Asiimwe, Budget Committee and hon. Simon Lokodo, Government Assurances committee. These are the new changes, which will take effect immediately. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Public Accounts submitted their report to the House and I had anticipated that the House would debate it and after that amend the report. Through your wise advice, you have said that you have formed a committee of legal minds to look at the legal issues. Would it not have been better that after looking at this report, this team gives their report to the Public Accounts Committee who have been involved in the report first for them to consider it either as an addendum to their report or to amend their original report? Because that would be the best way to enable members to debate it. Why am I bringing this up? If we say that for every report being submitted, a committee must first come in before the House has debated the issues that have been raised, will it not set a bad precedent, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I received the copy of your report on the subject before it was tabled and maybe I could have advised that we address some legal issues. But as I indicated, I only received the report when it was being tabled and I was here. Now the report is owned by Parliament but should the committee come up and say that there are certain legal issues we have to consider, we may give the opportunity, should it be necessary. It may not be necessary because the committee may come out with the conclusion that all legal issues were considered and that we may continue debating it. However, should they come out and say, “There are these laws that should be looked at before debate” then you may feel free to have this report with you, go back, look at it and state whether you need to amend or to have an addendum. That will not prejudice your right to amend should it be necessary. I don’t know whether it is clear, honourable member.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if that is the way, then we have nothing to do.

THE SPEAKER: You said that maybe the committee should come to you but already your report is with us and it is this House that has constituted a committee and they have to report to us and then use the report. This was done in good faith, just to help because as I read the report, I realised that a number of legal matters were not considered before you made the conclusions.

2.42
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on the second report. We have another report ready and we also have the executive summary. I can lay this and then give members a chance to read and react to it after one week. It will just take five minutes; it is also ready.

THE SPEAKER: That is on the Order Paper. Let us finish the business as it is. It is part of our business today, isn’t it? 

MR SEBULIBA: What I was trying to say is that it will take only five minutes since it is only three pages.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us follow the business as it is. We shall reach you.

2.43
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I have just come out of a committee meeting and I didn’t have time to consult you to grant me an opportunity so, I would request that you do so, so that I can raise an urgent matter in my constituency. 

I also wanted to seek your guidance regarding this committee and the report of PAC. Most of us in the other committees and basically accountability committees come across issues related to land transactions. I think that whereas this is good, the law related to land transactions is quite complicated. As such, I think that we may need to consider strengthening our legal department in Parliament so that they can be more available to all committees as we handle audit reports regarding other districts and Kampala City. 

We have come across similar situations where transactions have taken place and sometimes it becomes complicated as to what decision to take. We have sometimes consulted ministers and they are also in a difficult situation. Therefore, as this may be an interim measure, Parliament needs to come up with- and I hope the committee will guide Parliament in its report on the overall policy position so that in future, all committees will use this to guide them in making decisions especially with the input of the legal department.

THE SPEAKER: I have informally discussed this with PAC. My view is that whenever you sit, you should have in your presence somebody from the Auditor-General’s office and a legal person. We have a department here but should we have few members of staff, we can always contact the Attorney-General’s chambers for assistance but you should have these officers with you. Also as regards any other committee, if there are technical matters, you should have some technical person to help you while you are transacting business. We shall look into this and should there be need to get some people from the Attorney-General’s chambers, we shall do it but we have a department here.

2.46
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, in view of the fact that this small committee has been constituted and aware of the fact that we are dealing with backlog, we are giving a blessing to this small committee but the time frame for submitting their report to us in the House is left open. I wonder how you are going to guide me.

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know and I only see one member, hon. John Kawanga. Is it possible to indicate how long this may take you?

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, I don’t think it will be a very complicated matter. I think Mr Nyombi will chair and convene the meeting and I think that it shouldn’t take us more than three weeks to be able to complete this exercise.

THE SPEAKER: Two weeks?

MR KAWANGA: Okay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That is the time frame.

2.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some time ago, one of our colleagues, hon. Odonga Otto, moved a motion of concern about events in Zimbabwe and at that time, Parliament, recognising that the content of the motion impinged on the sovereignty of Zimbabwe, defeated the motion. We have had opportunity, as Parliament of Uganda, to give our views on things that were happening in Kenya and for which we got a very good response from Kenya. I don’t want to think that our concern as Parliament and as a country is limited only to East Africa. Zimbabwe has had an election, which was potentially very explosive but to the relief of all of us, we have not seen the kind of violence that took place in Kenya. 

Yesterday, the Electoral Commission of Zimbabwe released official results that showed that the Movement for Democratic Change and the other opposition parties gained the majority in the Parliament of Zimbabwe. The people of Zimbabwe, according to the media, are anxiously waiting for the results of the presidential elections. I just thought that since we are part of the government system that goes through elections, we should take this opportunity to thank the people of Zimbabwe for keeping the calm that they have. With results not being announced for over a week, in other countries they would probably end up in a situation of violence. That they have kept very calm, I think that as a country, we should commend them. On our part, we would like to congratulate the opposition in Zimbabwe for getting an upper hand in the parliamentary elections. I thought that as the Opposition, we should put this on record. (Laughter) 

2.50
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I smile but with a very heavy heart. Today, death has befallen us and as you gave me the opportunity, I thought I should let this august House know that one of our members from “Save Mabira Crusade” was killed last night. Mr William Kasirye was one of those accused for the murder of the three in the “Save Mabira Crusade”, and last night, he was stabbed by unknown people in Kamwokya in Kifumbira zone. 

This one, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, is very sad especially for us members of the “Save Mabira Crusade”, because it has given us a heavy heart for the loss of our colleague in the struggle, and secondly, it has sent down a very chilling message among us. Therefore, I would request that Police intensifies investigations into this death and those found guilty of murdering Mr Kasirye William, be brought to book.  

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, as we are about to commemorate one year down the road since we protested against the Mabira forest give-away, this one still brings us to think twice that a year down the road Ugandans are being kept anxiously waiting for the position on Mabira forest. I therefore take this opportunity to request that Government comes up very clearly and makes its position on the Mabira forest give-away on the Floor of this Parliament. We have been fed with information from the media and we are being blindfolded. We would like to have this clarified on this Floor of Parliament, so that we who are in the struggle and the Ugandans at large are put to rest. We are so anxious of the final position. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.53
MR OKOT OGONG(NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, as we debate the illegal allocation of Butabika land, I have noticed with a lot of concern the rampant, blatant disregard of government departments on illegally disposing off Government land. I would like to inform this House that Mbuya Military Barracks has already been fenced off. The primary school that was located there has been dismantled and pupils from that school and the teachers and the staff have been relocated. 

This is done in blatant disregard of our existing laws. So as Parliament, we need urgent action because this is coming on time; everyday, we report this. As I talk now, - may be the Prime Minister or anybody in Government will help us- that other Government lands within the city and outside the city - there is one for prisons on Nabugabo road that has already been sold. We are also told that Kibuli barracks and Mbuya barracks are in the process of being disposed off because there is total land bonanza in this country. So, Mr Speaker, as Parliament, we need to protect the assets of this country. We cannot sit in this Parliament and see our assets being disposed of in a manner that is in total disregard of our law.  
Mr Speaker, I would like to give notice that I would like to move a motion in Parliament in regard to this matter. This I would like to serve, as a notice to this Parliament. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You are right to move a motion; you go and draft your motion and submit it, we shall accord you time.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (MS RUTH NANKABIRWA): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As far as I recollect, the duty of managing and re-location of land belongs to Government; it lies in the hands of Uganda Land Commission.  [Hon. Members: “We can’t hear!] I was saying that as far as I know, the mandate of disposing off of land belonging to Government lies in the hands of the Uganda Land Commission and that it is the Uganda Land Commission that is supposed to sell if that land is supposed to be sold off. 

As far as Mbuya land is concerned, once Cabinet takes a decision, then the Uganda Land Commission goes ahead and this is what happened with Mbuya and –(Interjections)- I have not finished. Cabinet sat and passed a resolution to dispose of Mbuya land. I am aware that there was a school on that piece of land and that prior notice was given to them; and that all efforts were done to make sure that the children of the soldiers are helped to relocate. As I speak now, the Uganda Land Commission is preparing to dispose of the land in Mbuya. So, I was wondering when my colleague requested that this august House comes in and runs the mandate, which belongs to the Uganda Land Commission. I do not know where we were heading, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, since hon. Okot Ogong is bringing a motion, we should not pre-empt our contribution on the motion. I think we can rest this case as here, until the motion which has been promised comes up. 

2.58
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I am seeking for your indulgence to allow me raise an urgent matter. I told you that I could not come to your office because I had a committee meeting and I just came here; so, I am seeking for your permission. Thank you. 

Mr Speaker, the people of Tororo county request that the minister for trade brings a statement to this House regarding the delayed start on construction of the inland port in Malaba by Great Lakes International. The Minister Of Trade And Industry licensed Great Lakes International, after a meeting of the East African heads of State and the strike by the traders that as a means to decongest Mombasa, there should be an inland port in Uganda and Malaba in Tororo was chosen. 

The Ministry of Trade and Industry licensed a company but, Mr Speaker, some Government officials moved to block this matter. As you have advised in the past, I have been following this matter closely. The President even constituted a subcommittee of Cabinet to study the matter. However to this date, the investor, despite having invested a lot of money, has not got the clearance from Government to start the construction. May I request through you, Mr Speaker, that the Minister of Trade and Industry brings a statement on this matter to this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS BY THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS

THE PRIME MINISTER(Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, under Rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I am required to make a statement of government business for the week starting on 8 April 2008 and ending on 10 April 2008. Since I cherish the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I must proceed to do so. 

1.	Motion for the second reading of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2007  by the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.
2.	Motion for the second reading of the Education Bill, 2007 by the Minister of Education and Sports.
3.	Motion of the Second Reading of the Local Government’s (Amendment) Bill, 2007  by the Minister of Local Government. 
4.	Motion for the second reading of the Business Technical Vocational Education and Training Bill, 2007 by the Minister of Education and Sports.
5.	Report of the state of the economy for the First Half of the financial year 2007/2008 by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Committee on National Economy. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS ALASO: Clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have heard what the Leader of Government Business is going to bring to the House and what we will be doing shortly. 

Mr Speaker, again we asked before Christmas recess about the status of pension payment, and there is a lot of concern actually in the public domain that pensions are not going to be paid shortly, and we asked that public service bring this matter to this House; at least a statement. I do not hear it coming from the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. Would he like to allay my fears and at least promise us a statement on the payment of pensions?

THE PRIME MINISTER: Mr Speaker, I have consulted the Second Deputy Prime Minister, who is the Minister Of Public Service, and he has agreed to bring those matters next Wednesday. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 55/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY

3.05
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative): a) “When does the minister intend to cause the constitution of the Uganda Communications Tribunal provided under section 75 of the Uganda Communications Act?” 

b) “Is the minister aware that his continued failure to constitute the tribunal leads to the suffocation of the rights of citizens who are aggrieved by the decisions of the Uganda Communications Commission?”

3.05
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ham Mulira): Mr Speaker, the question which was raised on the Floor of Parliament was: “When does the minister intend to cause the constitution of the Uganda Communications Tribunal provided under section 75 of the Uganda Communications Act?” 

Secondly, “Is the minister aware that his failure to constitute the tribunal leads to the suffocation of the rights of citizens who are aggrieved by the decisions of the Uganda Communications Commission?”

Mr Speaker, the response to the question is as follows:
The Uganda Communications Act, 1997 part 12, Section 75 provides for the establishment of the Uganda Communications Tribunal. Section 79 (1) states that the tribunal shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all matters relating to communication services arising under the said Act. 

The ministry of ICT recognises the need to establish the communications tribunal as provided for under the Uganda Communications Act, as an arbitrator in view of having several operators now in the sector. 

Following the establishment of the ministry of ICT in June 2006, procedures were put in place to establish its structure and its mandate, and following the approval of the structure of the ministry of ICT in April 2007 by Cabinet, the Broadcasting Council and administration of the attendant Electronic Media Act were transferred from the Ministry of Information and National Guidance to the Ministry of Information and Communications Technology. 

Consequently, owing to the convergence of the different technologies – information technologies, communication technologies and broadcasting technologies – the ministry of ICT embarked on the process of harmonising the two Acts: the Uganda Communications Act and the Electronic Media Act, aimed at establishing one tribunal to cater for both communications and broadcasting operations in the country. 

However, this process has been stalled or halted following the communication from the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, requesting the ministry of ICT to stay action on the transfer of the Broadcasting Council as directed by Cabinet, pending further consultations. As soon as this status is clarified, the ministry will revive the process of establishing the Communications Tribunal but with a widened scope given that now there are dozens of FM radio stations and TV stations being established in the country, together with multiple telecommunications providers. 

Although the harmonisation of the two Acts and establishment of the tribunal is the most desired option; It may take sometime to implement, hence, we are now looking at the original Act where the establishment of the tribunal as per the Act of 1997 should be effected.

Having said that, in parallel to the above process, the Ministry of ICT is currently working on a review of the telecommunications policy which will also involve harmonising the relevant framework.  It is through the holistic approach that all the relevant policies and laws will be harmonised as highlighted above. However, in the absence of the communications tribunal, there are measures put in place. 

The Uganda Communications Act, 1997 provided for another avenue for protecting the interests of consumers in the general public.  Section 4, (L) and (M) spells out that the functions of the commission: 4(l) “To receive and investigate complaints related to communication services and to make necessary action upon them;

4(m) “To promote the interests of consumers and operators as regards the quality of communication services and equipment.”

Arising out of the above functions, the Uganda Communications Commission take in the following steps to execute these functions:

(a)	UCC has put in place a dispute resolution mechanism where consumer complaints are received, investigated and resolved. As part of this process, UCC has a consumer complaints desk and a dedicated helpline number which the public can use to lodge their complaints.

b) 	UCC has established brochures on the following: Procedures for logging complaints, and secondly, consumer rights and obligations.  These brochures are distributed during public fora, workshops, consumer public dialogues and at the UCC reception desk.

c) 	The commission holds regular public/consumer dialogues as a mechanism for disseminating consumer information and obtaining the right public feedback on communication services in the country.

d) 	UCC has reviewed its organisational structure and created the following position to specifically strengthen its consumer affairs function, by introducing two new posts. One post for the consumer specialist and two posts for consumer affairs officers.

e) 	UCC has for the last eight years had a healthy working relationship collaboration with a consumer associations, such as Uganda Consumer Protection Association, Consumer Education Trust and others.

Related to the above, under Section 5(1)(d) of the Uganda Communications Act, UCC has powers to arbitrate disputes arising between operators and consumers and enforce its decisions. Through this avenue, UCC has since its inception managed to help the public and the operators resolve their disputes without resorting to courts of law.

Further to the above, the commission, UCC itself is comprised of many different stakeholders, including the chairman of the commission, representatives of the professional engineers, a prominent lawyer, a member of the broadcasting council, two eminent persons and the executive director. So it is broadly representative.  
In order to ensure that UCC carried out its functions spelt out, Section 6(1)(e) above provides that two of its seven members shall be eminent persons of good repute from the public itself.  These are there to ensure that the interests of the wider public, including the rights in general are taken care of in all UCC policies and decisions.  In addition to the above, the Ministry of ICT has, through its oversight role –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have been over generous. You are supposed to answer this in three minutes and maximum five minutes.

DR MULIRA: Okay, thank you. I will just wind up by saying that, however, from the comments made by the honourable member, it appears that he has information about some aggrieved citizens whose rights have been suffocated by decisions of UCC.  We would therefore appreciate if these citizens and their grievances were brought to the attention of the ministry and we would be more than ready to look into them and follow them up and resolve these grievances. I thank you.

3.15
MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, my supplementary question number one to the hon. Minister after of course saluting him for answering the question. Honourable minister, in the absence of the communication tribunal, do you have any other avenue within your sector that is independent, competent and legally constituted and knowledgeable as envisaged by Parliament when it enacted Section 75 of the Communications Act?

THE SPEAKER: I thought he gave the answer to that. Did he not give you the alternative? I think he did.

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, Uganda Communications Commission acts as a regulator. It also participates in issuing licences, at the same time acting as an arbitrator. Honourable minister, doesn’t that constitute a conflict of interest?

 3.16
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My understanding is that the minister has failed to answer the question because the question was very simple.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have a supplementary question?

MR KAJEKE: Yes, sir. Mr Speaker, the question was, when and he has tried to explain; he has not told us when-  

THE SPEAKER: Please, do you have a supplementary question?

MR KAJEKE: Mr Speaker, I have the question and I am asking. The question is: When are you constituting the tribunal? But you have tried to elaborate and you have not told the House as to when you are constituting the tribunal. Can you tell the House as to when you are going to constitute a tribunal?

Secondly, the minister was explaining that there is a mechanism within UCC to address the grievances of the sector. Are you saying that there is now no need for the tribunal because there is a mechanism within UCC to address the grievances? Thank you.

3.18
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question to the minister is that I would like to know, if I petition UCC, like I have personally done on some matter, and I do not receive any feedback at all for quite a number of months - all I receive are the invoices for the licence fees - where do I go?  You said we come to your ministry. Are you legally empowered to do so?  Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Section 75 of the Act was not enacted in vain; it was after a thorough discussion and thought and it required the establishment of the tribunal to envisage disputes that arise out of a decision which is taken by the communications commission.

The details the minister is indulging into are outside the parameters of what is envisaged under Section 75. It is some sort of supplementary question but it begs the answer of the question itself, because we are asking, “When does the ministry intend to operationalise Section 75?” 

Two, what happens to the people who are aggrieved by the decisions of the commission? That is the import of the second question.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I have one question and it is a simple one. Why has the minister not established this tribunal up to now?

MS MUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I once brought here an issue of national importance and I have spoken to the minister over telecommunications masts. I asked him last week what his ministry was doing; he put an advert in the newspapers and gave guidelines. I have always said that these investors who come and even ignore the rules that the ministry has set and continue to operate in this country with impunity – and we have sought redress and failed. We cannot go further with these UCC, NEMA and the others. What should Ugandans do in this case? Are we not promoting anarchy where Ugandans will take the law in their hands? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.22
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: (Dr Ham Mulira): Mr Speaker, I think some of the questions were intertwined. But starting with the conflict of interest, as I stated in the response, UCC has a component of legal empowerment in the Uganda Communications Act to act as an arbitrator within this sector as spelt out in the Communications Act. So, on the issue of conflict of interest they have legal empowerment. Yes it is a regulator, but now if it is the feeling of the august House that that needs to be changed, then let that section of the law, which established UCC be changed.

In my opening remarks, I mentioned that the Ministry of ICT was established in June 2006 from scratch and within that period, there was a need to establish not only the mandate and the structures that would run the ministry, but also a need for the approval of the structures which were recommendED. And as I mentioned, this was done in April 2007. 

Once the structure was approved by Cabinet, then the Ministry of Public Service together with the Public Service Commission started on the recruitment of the staff to work in the ministry. When that was being done, there was that convergence of the three technologies: broadcasting, telecommunications and IT. I would like to request that it be noted that these Acts were made more than ten years ago. The technology was different and there was no convergence at the time. This gave an opportunity to review and renew the approach to these technologies. 

While this was being done, the Rt hon. instructed us to stay the decision of harmonising and therefore establishing the tribunal. Nevertheless, the process of the Prime Minister’s instruction as to the consultation is coming to a close and I am reliably informed by the Second Deputy Prime Minister who is also the Minister of Public Service that within the next three weeks, there shall be a position available which then will allow us to proceed with the establishment of the tribunal as stipulated. I think this answers the “when” question – Section 75 and so on.

With regard to whether there is legal empowerment when someone is aggrieved, I think UCC as a point of arbitration is the first point of hope. The Minister who is responsible for ICT is also empowered to oversee that sector. And in this case, if there is any grievance, much as it would not be from a legal resolution, certainly as an overseer of the sector, I am empowered to see how best to handle such a situation. Nevertheless, if all that fails, there is the normal legal process where the courts of law can be brought into the picture.

Regarding the issue of the masts, I think that has received quite substantive debates both on the Floor of the House and in public debates. I think the measureS which are being taken were widely published as to what the ministry is doing together with the regulatory authorities, in the case of the Uganda Communications Commission for the telecommunications regulation and the National Environment Management Authority, which is responsible for the environment in order to see how best to move forward from here.

But I should mention that on the issue of masts, we are not the first country to have the GSM technologies. We have about 740 masts and if we are to receive the service, this is part of the infrastructure. If you are to drive cars on roads, you have to build the roads. These are the digital roads - provided environmental and other effects have been taken into account.

MS MUHANGA: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. Actually our issue is not that we are trying to block investment of communications as you call it, but the impunity with which people come to install them. One comes and just places a mast on top of your house or wherever without the permission of the people living on that village. 

You do not just put your mast anywhere, there is a procedure; you have to go to NEMA, and get an environmental impact assessment, you go to UCC, and the village sits and agrees that they need –(Interruption)

MR BALIDAWA: Thank you, hon. Muhanga, for giving way. Mr Speaker, this matter of masts is under investigation in the committee on ICT and the honourable member has appeared before that committee and she is aware that we are investigating this matter. So, is it in order for the Member to bring this on the Floor and to leak most of our findings that have not yet been brought to this Floor? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think the Member should wait for the conclusions of your committee.

MS MUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. What I was saying is that, I have appeared before the committee on ICT like he has said, but just to present a petition of people. But what I was asking the minister is that, in the event that people do not follow the guidelines that he himself published in The New Vision, what happens; where should Ugandans seek redress? If we cannot go to these organisations and seek redress, where should we go? Does he allow people to do things the way they want just because we need communication? I need a telephone, yes, but somebody cannot come on my house and put up a mast and walk away.

I have been to the Ministry of Works; I took engineers to this mast on which I keep complaining –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: If there is a nuisance being committed by somebody, you think there are no proper tribunals to handle such a situation? [Ms Muhanga: “Where?”] The courts are there. Apart from these domestic tribunals, the courts can handle any complaint you raise before them.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, while I agree courts are there but not every ordinary Ugandan affords the requirements to engage lawyers and go to court. If Government can do its work, why not do it?

THE SPEAKER: You mean when you go to these tribunals you will not spend a penny? Can you answer, honourable minister?

DR MULIRA: Mr Speaker, I think I was going to rest my case because as the chairman of the committee on ICT has already pointed out, this issue has been for considerable discussion within the committee and other avenues and I think it is best to wait for that report. If there is any serious grievance then the courts of law exist just like they are used in all other sectors. I thank you. Article 50 of the Constitution is very clear.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 07/01/08 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.31
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): “What are: 
(a) The arrangements in place to facilitate poor students to pursue university education.
(b)Plans in place to improve the remuneration of academic and administrative staff in public universities?”

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to report that the Minister of Education and Sports learnt about this question this afternoon and I have requested the Permanent Secretary to draft the answers. I promise to bring the answers next week.

MR SEBULIBA: I agree but it has taken long since last year. Next week when? Because I understand next week we are going into the budget process. I don’t know when exactly - Thursday? Tuesday?

THE SPEAKER: I have just been informed by the chairman of the Budget Committee that we start meeting to plot as to how to handle the budget on 8th, but that will not prevent the House to sit for the time being. We shall sit I think next week. You have not started vigorously as committees to consider the budget; that will come after next week.

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, as the minister has said that we come next week, I am also agreeable to that, but how did this question come on the Order Paper? I thought by the time a matter is put on the Order Paper, “Question for Oral Answer” at least the minister must have indicated to the Clerk to Parliament that he is ready with the answer. So, how did it come to the Order Paper?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the Order Paper is arranged by the Clerk. As far as the Clerk is concerned, maybe he has sent the question to the ministry and therefore he thought that it should be answered, that is why he included it. But apparently the minister says, maybe he was not aware, and what not. Maybe it was sent to a wrong ministry - I do not know. But let us give him benefit of doubt. On Tuesday, he will bring us the answer.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I wish to suggest that when questions for oral answer are sent to the ministries, they should be signed for. Number 2, they should also be copied to the ministers of state and the permanent secretary. This is what I always do. Whenever I write to the senior minister, I copy it to the ministers of state and to the permanent secretary. So if the minister is away as hon. Bitamazire is away, it does not cause any problem.

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, Prime Minister, for giving way. But I remember I asked another question last year and even the Minister, hon. Rukutana – it was about people working in Iraq - came and briefed Parliament that he was going to bring a substantive answer. But up to now, we are yet to get an answer. We have been interacting with these ministers ourselves, but at times also – I do not blame the people who prepare the questions but they receive them, and maybe they are busy or they do not inform you- but I know they are informed.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 50/01/08 TO THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS
3.35
MR OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): “(a) How many registered private security organisations are operating in Uganda? 
(b)How many private security organisations are operating in Kampala? 

In light of the criminal activities that some personnel of these organisations have been involved in -
a)	what measures is the ministry putting in place to ensure that private security organisations do not get out of hand?”

3.36
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Rt hon. Prime Minister did instruct my ministry to answer this question. The answer is as follows:

Honourable colleagues, there are 63 registered private organisations responsible for security operating in the country. There is an appendix that is attached to the written answer that has been given to hon. Okello-Okello.

A total of 45 security organisations have their operational headquarters in Kampala. Some of these companies however extend their operations outside Kampala by establishing branch offices upcountry. The list of the companies operating in Kampala is also attached to the written answer to hon. Okello-Okello and which will be available because I intend to put the details on the Table here.

There are also four other companies with their headquarters in upcountry districts but also operating in Kampala using their branches. In total therefore, 49 private security organisations are now operating within Kampala.

We acknowledge that there has been a problem in some of the private security organisations where some of their personnel have got involved in criminal activities. Most of the cases recorded are those related to theft of property and cash, from the very places where the personnel guard. For example, in 2006, at the offices of the “Children Aid Fund” in Ntinda, a guard deployed by International Investigations and Detectives Ltd (Interid) broke into the office and stole some money and property. In another case, and in the same year, guards deployed again by Interid at NEMA offices broke in and stole property which included computers, television sets, and other items including cash.

To minimise incidents similar to the above, and other related matters, we have put the following measures in place: 

We have put elaborate vetting and assessing processes before registration and licensing. The operations of a private security organisations are governed by the Police Act and under the control of private security organisation regulations. Under these regulations, private security organisations can be licensed to provide the following services: guard and escort, duties investigations, guard and escort electronic alarms and surveillance consultancy and also provision of guard and escort and investigations.

A private security organisation can be licensed to undertake more than one service and is free to operate in any part of the country. Mr Speaker, the application for registration of a private security organisation passes through various vetting stages. The structure for assessing of the application includes the following:
•	The area police;
•	The district security committee; and
•	The national licensing committee. This committee is composed of members from the following organisations: the Police, including CID, CMI, Internal Security Organisations and External Security Organisation and also the government security officer as well as a legal officer from the Police. It is only after going through the scrutiny of these organs that a private security organisation may be registered and licensed to operate.

The second measure is restricted entry into the industry, to bring down the number of private security organisations to a level where effective control and supervision can be achieved. It is now a policy to allow registration of only private security organisations which can achieve a high degree of operational efficiency.

For that reason stringent registration requirements have been put in place. Before any private security organisation is registered the following conditions must be certified: 
•	The presence of a good and secure office accommodation with a strong and reinforced armoury for storage of firearms and ammunitions.
•	 Evidence of proof of integrity by the promoters
•	Good organisational setup and quality of management.
•	The level of competence and experience in security management.
•	Good financial strength.
•	The nature and type of the logistical and technical, equipment to be used, for example, motor vehicles, communication equipment, extra. 

Following these requirements, only four private security organisations were registered in 2007 and out of all those only one was allowed to operate with limited firearms.

The third measure is regulatory control and supervision. Mr speaker, in addition, private security organisations in operation are constantly monitored for compliance by use of physical inspection submission of returns, detection and carrying out investigations on matters of non-compliance to the regulations operational guidelines and other existing laws.

Because of this monitoring and evaluation, in 2007, 11 private security organisations had their operators’ licenses cancelled and one had its licence suspended. Those that had their licence cancelled are:
•	Superior Guards Limited;
•	Allied Security Systems and Investigations;
•	Aloysius and Associates Limited;
•	Axe Security Systems;
•	Security of Eagle Eye Nature; 
•	PRZ Limited;
•	International Investigators and Detectives Limited;
•	K9 Patrol Limited;
•	Maxima Force Limited;
•	Swiller Security Services Limited;
•	Nile Investigators Group Limited; and
•	The 12th Instant Security Systems had its license suspended. 

The reasons why their operators’ licences were cancelled or suspended were because these companies contravened all or some of the following regulations and the guidelines which in summary require that all operators employed by a private security organisation be finger printed and vetted before they are deployed. Two, personnel salaries be paid promptly; and three, private security organisations must construct or have proper storage for arms and ammunition; prompt and monthly payment of firearms rentals is made by those private security companies which hire Government firearms. 

Annual renewal of operators licence is done. Each company should have proper offices for their operations and company uniforms are gazetted and personnel employed are properly trained before they are deployed; insurance cover for personnel is in place. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think the answer is a very long one. As I have indicated before, you only have three to five minutes. So, it should be a brief answer, but wind up.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, for your guidance. As I wind up, Mr Speaker, the other measures are that we have developed a set of operational procedures to guide the private security organisations in their management and operations. These emphasize recruitment and training, personnel supervision, personnel discipline, matters of crime management and firearms management.

We have also provided special investigations for people in security companies who get involved in crimes. In addition to monitoring, the ministry has now undertaken other measures, which include updating and amending the Police Act. 

Mr Speaker, in a nutshell, the number of security organisations in Kampala and Uganda is in place and we are taking stringent security measures including cancelling licenses of some security organisations that are not operating up to required standard. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.50
MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for his elaborate answers.  However, I have a few supplementary questions.

One, are there foreigners who have invested in private security organizations? If so, what do such investors bring into the country? (Laughter)
 
Two, Mr Speaker, some of these personnel in private security organisations get involved into crimes because they are paid peanut salaries. Is the minister aware that Ugandans working in private security organisations are being used as chief of slave labour? And what does government intend to do to protect these Ugandans?

Three, I would like to know the rental fee per gun per month and where is it paid - (Interjections) - yes, they are hiring the guns from government. What is the rental per gun per month? It is a very simple question.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, in the list given by the minister, most of the private security organisations are legal entities but others appear not to be. They are groups or organisations or services. Now, in case there is need to sue these organisations, what will happen if they are not legal entities? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.51
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the hon. Minister for the elaborate answers and I am actually privileged to know the number because 63 to me seems to be a big number. I want to know what our security organisations are doing because the Police and all those other private security organisations, which total to 63, are many. Are they not going to be a source of insecurity instead of security? I really want the minister to assure us that we need the 63 – if Government cannot manage the security, then I do not know what we are going to do with all this. Won’t these security organisations, one day, take over government? (Laughter)

3.52
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I am constrained to ask almost a similar question, though mine is in a different context. 

The 63 security firms in this country seem to be a source of insecurity. I have, of late, been a victim of some of these security men who actually organise to shoot and rob residents in many places where they stay. And when it comes to investigating, they actually constrain the work of the police as well. There are instances when you end up with a situation where the police itself say that maybe those security organs that are licensed in haphazard manner are the ones whose personnel are involved in these crimes. To us this is a very bad occurrence. My question is, are these private security organs in corroboration with the Police or they operate separately and therefore try to constrain the Police work? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, retired?

3.54
MS JESSICA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I like the way the hon. Minister does his monitoring and evaluating of the 63 security firms. My supplementary question however, is that, what is the exact strength of the 63 security firms? And besides, what is the exact number of guns that are under the hands of the strength of these 63 security firms? Thank you very much.

3.55
MR SIMON GERALD MENHYA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question to the minister is: are serving security officers in the Army, Police and Prisons allowed to open up security organizations?

3.55
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM PWD Representative, Western Region): Thank you Mr Speaker. My supplementary question to the minister is that, did the ministry make a needs assessment for the extent to which private security firms would be established to complement Government security? This question arises from the fact that we may have endless establishment of private security firms which would lead to cut-throat competition and compromise efficiency. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.56
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question I would like to ask the minister is that, where does the government get these arms that you give out for hire? 

Secondly, because we have those arms moving around in Karamoja and other regions of this country, how capable is your ministry to control and manage the activities of these people who have the arms and those who have hired them from government? How capable is your ministry in making sure that the activities are controlled and managed?

3.57
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question I would like to ask the minister is a simple one. Ndugu Rugunda, while you were away, your junior minister came to the Floor of this House and asked for 4,000 guns to arm militia in Karamoja. I am surprised to learn that you have 63 private firms. Wouldn’t it be very useful for the ministry to deploy these firms in Karamoja to help the government to keep the peace and security in that area?

3.58
MR ALBERT ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just one supplementary question to the minister. Is he aware that some of these boys and girls who are in the employment of these private organisations are given empty rifles without ammunition to go on duty?

3.59
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question is on the security firms around Kampala who are recruiting Ugandans to be deployed in Iraq. I want to know if it is the private security firms who are recruiting Ugandans to go to Iraq and what mechanism government is putting in place to make sure that these people recruited actually go to Iraq and not elsewhere. 

MR ABURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the question which was raised by hon. Okello-Okello was focused on the firms that are recruiting in Kampala here. People who are bankrupt politically always talk about Karamoja because it is the only way they get votes in their area -(Laughter) We are not talking about Karamoja; Karamoja is already being disarmed and those who are not aware of anything should know that the UPDF is on the ground. We are focussing on the firms here. So, the bankrupt people should talk now.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. I can hear the Government Chief whip saying he has finished. But in this House if you make a very serious allegation, the rules demand that you put right or you clarify. 

Mr Speaker, I have heard the hon. Abura Pirir talk about bankrupt politicians and I am aware that in the course of the debate it is hon. Malinga who has just asked a question in relation to Karamoja. Does he want to say that hon. Malinga, the Member of Parliament, who has been sent by the people of Kapelebyong twice to this Parliament, or any other Member and moreover, hon. Malinga’s constituency has come under a lot of difficulty from the guns in Karamoja, is a bankrupt politician? Or if it is not, can he tell us who the bankrupt politicians are and if he cannot tell us, is he therefore in order to say that there are bankrupt politicians in this House?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable. Can you substantiate please.

MR ABURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was saying and I insist and I firmly say we are discussing the issue pertaining to the firms that are recruiting people. This is not the issue of disarmament of Karamoja. It is now focussing here on Kampala. I said the word “bankrupt.” I said, if a Member who talks does not contribute anything pertaining to the firms in Kampala, and talks about Karamoja, it is the normal people, the neighbours. The government has already answered that and addressed –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what I will ask you -(Interruption)

MR ABURA: So, Karamoja is out of this topic completely.

THE SPEAKER: I think I will ask you to withdraw the reference to bankrupt politicians and then we proceed.

MR ABURA: Mr Speaker, the Members in this august House are at national level of governance. When we talk we represent every inch of Uganda in this area. Now, when you become provocative and make fun of others, it also brings another dimension. So, if I have said, whatever I have said –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I advised you because the way you used it is causing confusion. Would you like to withdraw the reference to bankruptcy? That is all.

MR ABURA: Mr Speaker, on your request, I withdraw but I will never forget. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please answer the questions but give very brief answers. 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the reaction by colleagues to the questions raised by hon. Okello-Okello and the answers we gave and the interest generated. 

Briefly, are foreigners able to invest in private security organisations? The answer is yes. 

No. 2: the details of investments are available and this information is available with us and also with the Uganda Investment Authority. Nevertheless, you are doing a good job by creating employment.  

The question of salaries: salaries range and the minimum that is on our records is Shs 60,000 per month but we know that many private security organisations pay much more than that. 

Then the question of rentals; yes, guns are rented from the Police or hired from the Police. And they now pay Shs 7,000 per month per gun. Nevertheless, I should point out that these security organisations, private as they may be, are doing commendable work in general terms. 

Are they legal entities or not? They are legal entities. It is a requirement before licensing.

The fear that they are too many; well, I would not say that they are too many but I would say that the number is being closely monitored by the Police and the number that we have so far is the acceptable number. We think that gradually we should reduce it to have stronger and more efficient and effective private security organisations. They play a complementary role to the Police and in fact it is a good example of public-private partnership in ensuring that there is security in our country. 

The exact strength; one would need to check and make this information available but we have the figures of both the numbers and the number of guns that they have.

Are serving officers in the Police or in security agencies allowed to have private security organisations? The answer is no. In fact, they form part of the supervisory mechanism of the private security organisations, so it would be a conflict of interest for them to also own private security organisations.  

Many issues were raised but all in all, the private security agencies are doing commendable work. They are supplementing the work of the Police. We do not have enough policemen and women to cover all the security needs of our country and the private security organisations have greatly complemented the work of the Police. The Police give them advice; it gives them supervision and it gives them the necessary support. So, we should look at them as allies not as competitors. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE QUALITY OF SEEDS AND FARM IMPLEMENTS DISTRIBUTED BY THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, question 42/1/08 appears on the order Paper but I think it is procedurally right that since it is in on the Order Paper, we put on record that it has been answered -

THE SPEAKER: It was an oversight. The question was answered a long time ago and I remember the answers. Now, are you ready to debate this report from the committee on Agriculture?

4.09
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I also thank you and thank Parliament for taking the complaint, which I presented before the House, seriously and I want to thank the committee for the work done. 

I read through the report of the committee and apart from formally complaining on the Floor of the House, I also appeared before the committee. I gave my concern in writing before the committee. But when I look through the terms of reference of the committee, especially on page 4, I find that in the content of the report, some issues were not clearly answered by the committee. For example one of the terms of the committee in their own report - No. 4 - was to establish the magnitude of the financial loss as a result of procuring low quality inputs both to the farmers and Government.  

I also read through the report but I did not find out whether the committee had to establish whether there is any conflict of interest and the persons responsible for these irregularities, if any. And another term of reference of the committee was to establish what measures have been taken, if any, to rectify the anomalies in view of the allegations made against the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. 

Mr Speaker, I had raised a number of issues, which among others, came from the Background of the Budget that was read in June 2006, which gave the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness funds for mobilisation. Funds for mobilisation were Shs 1.6 billion, seeds Shs 2.4 billion, implements Shs 1.7 billion and the balance on account was Shs 2.1 billion, totaling to Shs 8 billion. 

My concern, which the committee did not bring out in their report, was how the money for mobilisation was used. Because I raised this concern here that people who were recruited as mobilisers were questionable. They were posted to the North and they were paid in advance. Each of them was paid Shs 2.5 million in advance and we wanted the committee to establish the reality of this. Unfortunately this has not appeared in the committee’s report and yet this is part and parcel of the overall fund that was meant for the emergency needs to send back the displaced persons.

Mr Speaker, the other issue that I raised was that of the Chief Administrative Officer of Gulu who was also interdicted on the basis of this concern and up to now he has not been reinstated. I thought that the committee was going to come out clearly, either to state that the chief administrative officer was involved in all this or to clear his name so that he can return to his job. The CAO is a human being like us; he has a family; he has children; but to subject him to this kind of situation is really unacceptable. 

When you go to page 15 of the committee’s report, the preliminary analysis that the Prime Minister used to cure some of these items, indicated that the hoes, axes, pangas and sickles complied with the standards. And that is what the committee noted; that it is only the donation from China that did not comply; the entire donation from China did not comply with the Ugandan standards. 

If you go to page 25 of the committee report, the committee came out to confirm that the tools I laid on the Table here, plus the ones provided by the Minister for Disaster Preparedness himself and all the others, did not comply generally with the Ugandan standards including those ones that were given by the companies that supplied. When you look at pages 25 and 26, you find that clearly indicated that the entire thing never complied. 
I, therefore, go to the recommendations of the committee, from page 27. I would not like to go on one by one, but I am concerned that when the committee gave recommendations on 8.3, the budgeting and resettlement of the IDPs, it is recommending that in future there should be that improvement. As I said earlier, this money was provided for and the question should be: why did the Office of the Prime Minister fail to provide this transportation from the district headquarters to the beneficiaries yet the funds were provided for?  

When you go to page 29 of the recommendations of the committee, 8.8 where the committee noted that the procured axes, pangas and hoes by the Office of the Prime Minister were of good quality, this is a contradiction of what is on page 26 and page 25 of the committee report. The findings of the committee are that these were actually not to standard but here the committee is arguing that they complied. So I find a lot of difficulties in understanding this recommendation because the committee only emphasises this matter of the donations and yet in the findings on pages 25 and 26, these items were clearly found by the committee to be sub-standard.  I would then wish for a clarification at the end of the day from the chairperson of the committee over this matter.

When you go to 8.11, it is again a clear sign of abuse of office and I think the committee is giving it minimal attention yet something meant for people who are desperate should not be diverted. Here was a clear case where the seeds and implements were meant for people who are in IDP camps but they were diverted by the Office of the Prime Minister. This is really unacceptable, Mr Speaker! The people in the IDP camps were in very difficult conditions. Now if this aspect can be found at this stage, that means that it is the habit of the Office the Prime Minster to divert what is meant for the IDPs; and I think that the minister and his team should be responsible because people continue to suffer; people want to get back home, then you divert what is meant for them? We find this extremely sad and the persons who are responsible for this diversion should have been identified by the committee.

In general terms, I agree with the recommendations of the committee but when it goes to the conclusion part of the report on page 33, 9.1, I do not see some of the companies. I do not know whether the committee did not find these companies because when I raised this issue, I mentioned some companies like Thika Seeds, I do not see Thika Seeds in this; I also had Crocodile Tools, it is a company, I do not see Crocodile Tools among these except. I see a new company, which I did not mention, called “Chillington Tools”. I wish to know from the committee whether these companies, which I tabled here, are not part of the companies that were responsible for this process. 

In 9.2, the committee notes the low viability of the seeds and how these seeds were delivered in January 2007 and distributed in May. The committee of course blames the delay of this process on Gulu but this budget was ready by June 2006 and the seeds were sent late. Now the question is: why? What was the Office of the Prime Minister waiting for all this period with the money in their pockets in June 2006 and they waited until January 2007? And if you read the committee report further, some of the seeds were not even delivered! Because by the time I raised the issues here, some of the seeds were not even delivered and that was in July. When I raised the issue here, that was one year after the budget had been passed. So, where was the money? Why were these seeds not delivered up to that time? One year down the road these seeds were not delivered, and it was noted in the committee report. 

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you for giving way. I want to follow the sequence of events. You are talking of 2006 and 2007. What are we really talking about? The seeds in Gulu were delivered in January 2007?

MR OKUMU: Exactly, Mr Minister, I am talking about the money. Because when you delivered ,that is when you bought and was able to deliver but you got the money much earlier. My concern is that it was meant for people in displaced camps. There was a planting season that began in August 2006. Why did you delay all this time up to January the following year to supply these seeds yet the farmers would have used that season? That same year in July, in August, in September, that is the last planting season in which they would have used these seeds. So, that is where my concern is.

The conclusion in 9.4 is also one of the concerns I raised about the Epuri-puri sorghum, which really we have never grown in Acholi. For example, we have never grown it, we do not eat it, and it is really meant for brewing. So at this stage what was needed was something that the people could go out and grow and eat. So, why was it so hard to get the right species for sorghum, you know seeds for sorghum? Why was it very easy for the Prime Minister’s Office to go and buy and then take it to Gulu and yet you know it would not be of use? That is as if you want to kill the displaced persons; you want them to brew and drink! You are encouraging people to drink and yet these are very desperate people. I thought that the committee was also going to come out clearly on that and get it out of the way.

The committee, in 9.6, on the last page of their conclusions, talk about the broken hoes and the sickles, which were donated but were of poor quality. These tools were supplied to Amuru through the Gulu stores. I also want to disagree with this conclusion because on pages 25 and 26, the committee notes that actually the quality of all these tools was poor. Whether they were supplied by China or distributed by the Office of the Prime Minister, they were all of poor quality. That is after the test, including the ones submitted before the committee by the minister himself. You went and checked the same tools, you found that the tools were fake, and it is on pages 25 and 26. Now that does not tally well.

Secondly, you only sampled the tools that they were supplied to Amuru. The tools I brought here were actually supplied in Gulu and I can name the places they were distributed in: Lugore in Aswa; Odeki in Amuru County; Chetug in Amuru County; and Pacor in Aswa County. So they were not in Amuru. They were supplied because that is where I picked them from.

Also, one of the tools, which I laid on the Table here, actually had a mark “made in China”. That, therefore, means that the ones which were for donation were not limited to Amuru because then how could they find their way to the other parts of the district?

Finally, I want to thank the committee for this report because if you read the body content of this report, I think the findings are very clear that the Prime Minister’s Office has not been very responsible in terms of monitoring the supplies of these items to the displaced persons. But I think most importantly, I would like to know the fate of the CAO of Gulu because he was interdicted after this matter came out; he was interdicted because of this phenomenon. 

Now that these finding have come out and proved that actually at least there were problems that were not of the CAO’s making, the problem is now shared; part of the responsibility is the Office of the Prime Minister and part of the problem is the delay in Gulu. The CAO may share that problem, but also he can justify himself by saying, “You never gave me the money; why did you want me to divert the money to supply these items to the rural areas?” 

Mr Speaker, I thank you; I thank the committee, and I thank the Prime Minister’s Office for the co-operation and I think that in future, it is better that Parliament handles this situation this way other than having an exchange between the chairman of a district and a minister responsible in the news. This will not help. Thank you. 

4.27
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also thank the committee for the commendable work, although to me, the general recommendations leave a lot to be desired in terms of their reference. Some of the districts, for example, were not reached. I do not know the reason. Generally, the recommendations -(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you honourable colleague for giving way. In meeting the district leaders, we did not go district by district simply because of resources in terms of funds and time. We grouped all of them. The Acholi sub-region leadership was met in Gulu and the Lango sub-region leadership was met in Lira and then Teso leadership, all of them were met in Soroti. So, it is not true that we did not meet Kitgum. Actually, we met them and we had - if you look at the report - we have responses from that area. I thank you. 

MS AOL: Thank you, chairman for that information. I do not want to repeat what hon. Reagan Okumu has said to the House, but let me make my observations. 

On page 3, one of the complaints was about poor quality items that could have been delivered due to the conflict of interest. I remember very well that that was also an area of concern before this work was given to this committee and we talked about it.  I remember even attending a meeting at the Grand Imperial Hotel with the minister. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness was present in that meeting where he accepted some of these weaknesses in handling this disaster problem. But last year when we had a meeting organised by World Vision and hon. Nobert Mao was there; I was there and I talked sentimentally. I was provoked to talk because of the exploitation of the vulnerable people of the North - taking them things, which you thought they deserved, but for us, exploiting the most vulnerable is even bad before God.

So, there was this issue of conflict of interest and we had addressed this earlier. It was also brought up in the terms of reference on page 4, the last bullet. But then in the findings, I tried to read through and I did not come across anything, which addressed this issue properly. Maybe I also need to be helped here because this Uganda right now is full of corruption, like it or not. We are not very sure of the credibility of some of those companies which were given the contracts to supply the seeds and the implements and this did not come out very well. I also need to be given an explanation to my satisfaction.  

On the emergency relief, we had the emergency last year of floods and then this emergency of IDPs.  Well, it is not something, which is very much - but my general remark on this is that this has been handled the way the emergency of floods was handled. I later on spoke to some chairpersons of the affected districts and they wanted this fund to be decentralised to the districts so that it is handled better and the Office of the Prime Minister would only monitor and supervise the implementation of that relief. Even if it is relief, IDPs are not something of emergency; they have been here for over ten years. So my feeling is that we should not treat it like an emergency of floods, but have it treated differently. That means we should allow the decentralisation of these funds and leave the supervision to the Office of the Prime Minister. 

To some of us, this focuses on conflict of interest. Some are interested in trying to ensure that the supply contracts are given at the central level here so that there are some benefits to the people who are at the forefront. This is very unfortunate. It does not come out very well in this report and if it has not come out today –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, these events happened in the past and we set up a committee to investigate the circumstances under which they happened and why. The committee has made a report. Should we go back to the history of the subject of inquiry or look forward to prevent the reoccurrence? Where should we put the emphasis when dealing with this report, on the history or the future? Should we again go back to the history or we should now say that, “History has taught us this, so this is what we should do for the future”?

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was only trying to emphasise the point where it says, “To establish whether there is any conflict of interest and the person responsible for these irregularities, if any”. I can leave this aside but I said it already that I am not satisfied especially in this area. But the future will tell. Even then, if we are to talk about the Kazini thing, when did it happen? It happened a long time ago, but he has just been imprisoned recently. And we hope that this is not going to be the end of digging out facts about the exploitation of the vulnerable people of the camps.

Hon. Reagan Okumu highlighted that fact that some money, which was given to some people who are called relief or camp officers, is about Shs 2.8 million in one or two months. We felt that that was also misuse of funds, which would have been used to address the problems of the vulnerable people in the camps.

On the China issue, the China items were donations for distribution. But it is unfortunate for us not to check on the quality of these donations. I do not think that our people deserve that kind of quality of donations. This goes to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. I do not know its work – it cannot even check items that come from outside Uganda? At least we can accommodate items from within. When people organise themselves from here to take some things to the camps, we can accept any quality; but not for things which come from outside Uganda. This means that these goods that come from China need to be checked properly.

My other concern is on mixing the China items and the items which we budgeted for here. That was a problem; it was to confuse people so that we do not get the right amount of goods, which should have been delivered to the people. That is very unfortunate.

I would like to say that the Minister of Disaster and the Office of the Prime Minister need to do a little more if they are to help the people of the North. We are soon going to PRDP, which is not very far from this report, which has been investigating the implementation. If we are not very careful, this will repeat itself and that will be very bad. We who are on the ground feel very bad because we are in the middle of these problems. 

The contracts to supply goods should be given to people; it must be decentralised whenever it is not something of very high emergency like for floods, landslides and other such things that happen all of a sudden. We need decentralisation of these things. We do not need to have every implementation done in the Office of the Prime Minister and at the end of it all the impact is not felt by the people. Thank you. 

4.39
MS BEATRICE AMONGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to appreciate the good job done by this committee. I would like to limit my comments to the tests done – page 22: summary of the report of the analysis of the above farm implements by UNBS.

When I look at this analysis, it looks as if most of the companies that supplied the tools had sub-standard tools. That makes me think that most of the tools that we have on our markets in this country are sub-standard because I do not think that all these companies just imported their tools; maybe some of them bought them from the market here and supplied. That indicates that we have a big problem of sub-standard tools on the market. 

What does that mean for the peasants? It means that whenever you go out to buy a hoe that should last say for six months, it gets destroyed in two months and then you must buy another one. That means that since we are starting the budget process, we must seriously consider strengthening UNBS in terms of finances and manpower so that they are empowered to do their work. It is wrong for us the leaders to complain about UNBS not being able to do their work properly when we have not given them the tools to do it.

Secondly, I would like to appreciate what my honourable colleague, hon. Betty Aol has just said –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the concern expressed by my colleague on the role of UNBS, but I have a case in point, since I am a Member of this committee. We learnt that when a farm, which is very influential in Soroti called, Akuku Farm Seeds, heard that government wanted seeds, they went in and got their way through. When the tender was offered to them, they went to the markets to buy what is supposed to be produced for food instead of supplying seeds. So in the end, what was supplied out there were not really seeds.

Then the last one is where we discovered officers from the Prime Minister’s Office, the National Bureau of standards and URA going into serious conflicts and denying UNBS a chance to certify and inspect the products that were supposed to be supplied to the beneficiaries. Therefore, you are right to tell us that government needs to empower UNBS because they are really helpless in circumstances like this. Thank you very much.

MRS WONEKHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Lagada. I am also a member of the committee and while meeting UNBS staff, they told us - first of all, they are very few indeed. Their laboratory is not even equipped, and the kind of work they do is haphazard. They just wake up one day and decide to go say to Owino Market or Kikuubo and inspect whichever goods they will have decided on that day. It is time really for Parliament to ask government to put more funding in UNBS. We have been told of bathroom slippers that arrived on the Ugandan market and that when people wear them, they actually cause blisters on the feet. So who knows what next? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a member of this committee and I would like to inform my sister hon. Beatrice Lagada that her concern about the quality of tools supplied after first samples were taken and supplied by the bidders for inspection and approval by UNBS before the PPDA process started, is quite genuine. 

You remember that before this Act came into force, Government used to have what they used to call the Central Tender Board, which used to take care of all supplies given to Government. Government’s interest during the operations of the Central Tender Board was represented by a non-governmental organization; a Swedish Organisation known as SGS, which would ensure that the right quality and quantity of goods and services that the government wants to procure is delivered. 

But in this particular case, when these tenders were awarded after having diligently followed the PPDA process; government was not represented at the receipt and delivery of these items. Therefore, there was a lot of room for these various entrepreneurs to first supply a sample, which would be approved and later on go and bring sub-standard items. We as government, the Prime Minister’s Office was not represented to ensure that the quality that they had agreed on was what they delivered. So it is that absence, which actually led to all this mess. Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you very much for that information. Mr Speaker, I was just saying that I wish to appreciate the concerns of my sister from Gulu, hon. Betty Aol about the need to decentralize and let the districts do the purchases. But sometimes I really wonder whether that is a solution. There are many times that I sometimes feel that we may have decentralized problems - decentralized corruption - to the district.  

Decentralization is a very good thing and we did really urge for it when we were making the Constitution, but the sort of things that I see happening down in the districts raise concerns, especially since it seems that the central government ministries - once they have done their part, they do not have follow up mechanisms to see what the districts are doing. 

Mr Speaker, I will give you a very simple example. I imagine it is the Ministry of Agriculture –(Interjections)- I am not talking about the flood funds for buying seeds and planting materials. These monies were sent to the districts; maybe my colleagues got to know about it, but many coffers did not know that these monies had been sent. By the time some of us got to know about it, it was two or three months down the road. Actually only this Monday we were in hon. Obua’s constituency, Moroto, and hon. Omara Atubo said he did not even know that this money had gone to Lira District’s local government. 

By the time we got to know about it, the local government had already used Shs 20 million of that money purportedly to sensitize or to find out from the farmers what sort of seeds they need. Is that being sober? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, by the time I got to know about the money in my district, some technical staff were already very busy trying to see how they can purchase seeds. But which seeds when even the population did not know that this money had come for them?  

I think that is because of a breakdown in communication; a lot of things go wrong down there. A case in point is the restocking process. The central government sends money under restocking - who are the people who supply the animals? I have seen very tiny goats supplied to NAADS groups. In fact the people in my village rejected the goats. The cows, which are supplied under restocking, you may want to weep when you see them. If the population is not empowered enough to reject them, then who are these people who buy these miserable things to cheat the population?

The central government ought to have a mechanism of following up whatever monies they send to the districts and ensure that these things – not only that, when they are purchased even then there is a lot of discrimination. The women never get these things; it is as if women are not supposed to own cows and goats. 

So I want to say that there must be a mechanism of following what the central government does, otherwise, decentralization may be beautiful in concept but in practice, we need to take a closer look at what is happening down in the districts. I thank you.

4.50
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee and the chairman for the presentation made yesterday; it was superb. When some honourable members made allegations here in the House, and other people made allegations outside the House, I was terribly disturbed or shall I say annoyed and I said, “What is happening?”

If you have read the report, you have seen some of the allegations which were made by some Members here such as that the Office of the Prime Minister selected the firms who supplied these things - that is a serious allegation! An allegation like that seeds viability tests were made and they were four per cent to 15 per cent viable. But when I went through the report, these are not the percentages. (Interjections) I have read and understood, and they talk of 60 – 80 per cent- (Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. engineer for giving way. You were informed on page 22 and page 23 on parabongo, patongo, Lira-Palwo, Pader town council. When the committee visited these locations, their findings were that the seeds failed to germinate except the second consignment. In Parabongo, on page 33, more of the seeds never germinated. So the information was that most seeds did not germinate. Thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Okay thank you very much hon. Ekwau but I am talking of the general. I am not looking at specifics. If you take the average, the seeds performed far better than the four per cent – the 15 per cent of what was put in the allegations.

Mr Speaker, I have gone through this report and I think the programme was started on firm foundation. I thank the government for this emergency humanitarian action plan. This programme was started under a national policy which had been worked out to work on the displaced persons to address their needs and to address them effectively.

So, the Office of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness went through a national policy which I hope was accepted by this House and also, Mr speaker, they formed a joint monitoring committee and this committee comprised of officials of the government, civil society organisations and donor representatives. I think that was a very good start by the Office of the Prime Minister to see that this moves very well, not only on the national level but even at the district level.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank my colleague, hon. Byandala, for giving way. In the report of the committee, there are definitely glaring omissions on the part of the Office of the Prime Minister. Despite the fact that the joint monitoring committee was in place, it is stated in the report that even facilities like transport were not catered for, to the extent that whatever was supplied, taken to the districts, could not be taken to the final destination. And so I would like to inform you that the level of organisation was lacking, and this is why most of the seeds actually stayed in the stores for months. Definitely this was a failure on the part of hon. Kabwegyere as a minister.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Amuriat. But, Mr Speaker, I told you that the Office of the Prime Minister delegated effectively these operations to the joint monitoring committee. So, the Office of the Prime Minister did its work, and now we can only look on what happened but the fact stands that the Office of the Prime Minister -(Interjections)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you very much honourable member for accepting this information. You know the relief ministry as it were, is a ministry in which I was privileged to have worked right from its inception, after the overthrow of President Idi Amin. There was a ministry known as Ministry of Relief and the first minister at that time was - [Hon. Members: “Apiliga”] - hon. Moses Apiliga was for supplies- he was not for relief - that was a deputy secretary general of UPC, hon. Masete. Hon. Sempangi also served there as a deputy minister. (Interjections) They were UPC, yes, but they were the ones who started that ministry which you are holding now.

So, the information I want to give you is that this ministry, to which I served until the restructuring process which moved this department to the Prime Minister’s Office, used to have a comprehensive budget in which case if there was a relief item to be supplied, the ministry that time had a contingent of 29 long semi trailer trucks donated by the Italian Government and these vehicles used to be fuelled and they would take these relief items to the target clientele, up to the place where they were supposed to receive these supplies. 

The problem we discovered was that, the Office of the Prime Minister did not have these arrangements and resources in place, which I think is a budgeting issue that for us as a Parliament we should be able to proactively look into this, so as to make this ministry effective. Otherwise, if it is just a matter of delivering something to the district headquarters and we wash our hands, districts themselves are also handicapped with resources and therefore, we will continue to have this dissatisfaction from the districts and the target clientele.

MR BYANDALA: I thank you very much for that –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleague for giving me the opportunity. I just want to give you information that this issue which we are talking about, if you read the report of the committee clearly, it has not been the responsibility of the joint monitoring committee to supply these seeds and tools. It has been the Office of the Prime Minister which supplied and the question Members are concerned with is basically about the quality supplied but the quantity was not queried so much because it was on the basis of budget constraints. 

The second information I want to give you is on page 2 of the committee report, which clearly states the concern that brought the committee to investigate this matter. It was not a total dismissal that all the seeds would not germinate. If you look through it was stated there that the complaint was that 98 per cent of the sorghum seeds could germinate, and 97 percent of the millet seeds could germinate; so the concern was on maize which was only four percent and ground nuts which was only 15 percent. This was tested by a qualified government agricultural department of Gulu district and has not been disputed. If you look through on page 25- 26, you confirm that actually the items including what the minister presented before the committee as evidence were actually of low grade. Thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much. I told you I took an average of all the seeds and I came up with that position. (Laughter) But anyway, Mr Speaker, I am particularly happy that the procurement procedures were followed. What is bothering me are the comments by my colleagues about conflict of interest. I think they suspect that some of the technical officers or the ministers supplied. I do not know whether they mean that. But I am comforted by the fact that the PPDA investigated this concern and concluded that the procurement process followed the procedures, rules and regulations as set out in the PPDA Act. I would imagine they would have checked on the directors of these companies to ensure there was no conflict of interest. So, when my colleagues start talking about conflict of interest, I really get puzzled.

Mr Speaker, having said that, I would like to say that I am further concerned about the tests shown in here. I think those on page 15 all show to have passed while those on page 25 show to have failed. This also puzzles me. I do not know what happened. I wish they showed the details of the tests as it is on page 15. I am saying this because they did not give the details. I think this is a grey area where something has to be done.

Finally, Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to say that I am not happy with some officers in the Office of the Prime Minister. When you read the appendix on this internal memo from an officer called Tondo Zaina of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards to the executive director – see the bottom of the second last page of the report. I think it is not a comfortable one. The inspection of the above –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Which annex, a, b, or c?

MR BYANDALA: I do not know, but the second last page of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR BYANDALA: The second last page and it says, “The inspection for the above consignment was made difficult because full access was denied by one officer from the Prime Minister’s Office, Mr Were and the clearing agent, Mr Wagayo. Mr Were claimed that Uganda being a poor country, quality of donations was not important and thus inspection was a waste of time.” I do not agree with that. I request the Prime Minister to tell this gentleman, if he is still there and other members, that this is not acceptable. I think we need to talk to these people so that they know that we need these things to be on specifications. 

Meanwhile on the last page, even in URA, people are being told not to remove some things, but they remove them. I think the Minister of Finance who is in charge of this should also talk to his people so that issues of importance like these ones are followed. Thank you very much. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a small contribution because Prof. Kabwegyere is taking notes and he is in charge of what we are discussing. But I have been discussing with hon. Omach, the Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance, concerning the statement that when the Prime Minister’s Office participates in the awarding of contracts and it supervises the distribution of goods, there is a conflict of interest. I have, therefore, requested him to cure this problem by bringing a paper to Cabinet then we shall come here. I am saying this because I do not want my Office to be accused of having a conflict of interest. I thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: I have information for the Prime Minister. I probably would want to substantially contribute to this because the sub-counties mentioned Parabong and so on are actually in my constituency. But I would like to appreciate the concern you raised in streamlining procurement under your Office. 

If you look at a simple example of the seed supplier, Atukur, something seed supplies - I am a farmer and I know many seed companies in this country. I do not know that company as a producer of seeds and therefore capable of supplying quality seeds. If the committee cared to follow up on the record of that company, you probably would find that they won that tender when they were incompetent to win it. All these things about germination and the seeds being roasted is really, for me, a cover because the wrong company was allowed to supply the seeds. 

The chair of the committee worked with this seed company and so he should have followed up the issue of incompetence of the suppliers and the actual quality of the seeds. I am saying this because there is no package anywhere in the market that belongs to that company and yet they supplied seeds. 

So, I appreciate what you have said. We may gloss over the matter, but the temptations where many things pass through your office are very high. You need to have very stringent procedure to protect even those who handle these things from swallowing poison because at the end of the day they will suffer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Although the Prime Minister is not holding the Floor, you can later give us that information; but you give the information to a person holding the Floor.

5.10
MR JOHN EMILY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like also to join my colleagues to thank the Committee on Agriculture for this report, but I have a few observations that I want to give. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at the observation of the committee on page 28, paragraph 8.6 about the viability of the ground nuts seeds being very low - in Teso, before the planting season, the seeds are left unshelled until actually few days to planting. So, I thought one of the recommendations that the committee would have given would be that in future, if seeds like ground nut seeds are required for planting in a disaster area, it is better to transport them in unshelled form to be shelled from there because they are planted; that is when the germination will be quite high because they will be neutral. I thought that should have come in.

On the issue of epuripuri, the Ministry of Disaster has committees in districts. I thought consultations between a ministry and chairpersons of the disaster committees should have been done to make sure that instead of taking epuripuri to Soroti, which is used mainly for brewing, you could have heard from the CAO of Soroti who is also the chairperson of district disaster committee about whether epuripuri was not required at that time; Sekede would have been the right seed to take at that time. 

Instead of saying that an assessment should be carried out, there are disaster committees in districts that should be used so that you just have to make a telephone call and find out from the chairperson, who happens to be the CAO, what kind of seeds are required at that time.

On the issue of sickles, I have read the recommendation from the chairperson and the committee. It says that they have not been procured and yet that is a very serious implement back home in Teso because most houses that were destroyed by the floods were grass thatched. As such, the people are really waiting for measures of getting grass for thatching. So, if the Office of the Prime Minister has not secured sickles, I think there is need for them to urgently look for sickles so that the people of Teso and other areas are able to get grass for thatching.  Thank you very much.

5.11
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very concerned that every purchase in Government involving huge sums of money turns out into a disaster. Here we have fake pangas, fake hoes and fake seeds supplied. The other day it was a story of fake helicopters- (Interruptions) - Fake junk helicopters, you can call them fake. This Parliament has received so many complaints on roads which are being constructed and they have ended up being fake. We are hearing stories of soldiers paying ghost soldiers. I think, Mr Speaker, something has terribly gone wrong. Why is everything about the Movement fake?  

THE SPEAKER: Is this being turned into a partisan debate really? (Laughter)

MR MABIKKE: Government procurements are all marred with irregularities. I would like to say that initially when Government was doing away with the Central Purchasing Corporation, we thought we were doing away with bureaucracy. But I think we did away with a process which was more transparent and with an institution that saved this nation billions of shillings. 

Mr Speaker, today we have got the PPDA. In this report, we are being told on page 12 that the procurement process was through the open bidding system and companies to supply the seeds and farm implements were selected. This was also confirmed in the report of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority.  My little association with the PPDA, in all matters involving the PPDA that I have come across, there is a problem. 

The PPDA is very easily abused and the problem with this office is that we do not seem to have experts in procurement. Procurement is a profession. But the problem is that we established an authority, gave it power and we appointed politicians to manage it. The procurement process takes place and then the PPDA comes in later on to try and sort out what could have been irregular. 

When you look further at this report and the recommendation on page 28, the committee strongly recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should always engage a mandated body to ensure quality during the delivery exercise. 

I strongly support the position that it is not the work of ministries to get themselves embroiled in procurement practices because at the end of the day, as the Prime Minister correctly said, we end up with a conflict of interest. It is high time that we reviewed the PPDA Act and even the process because a lot of tax payers’ money is wasted in fake procurements. In fact, if it were possible, this country should revert to the Government Central Purchasing Corporation with modifications. Yes, it was bureaucratic but it was more transparent and it saved us a lot of money. I submit, Mr Speaker.

5.17
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable Members. I have few issues I want the chairperson to clarify on, that is, page 25. According to that page, they did tests on samples on 14 items and every sample’s results and remarks were reading that they did not comply with Uganda’s standards. 

And then down in the observations, observation 7.1 bullet 3, they said “whereas both items did not meet some of the parameters tested for, they were fairly good as the analysis in the above table indicates”. If this is not professional dishonesty, what is it? What are you talking about? And Members of this committee are all professionals; so you will have to explain to us how the 14 samples can read non-compliance to Ugandan standards and at the same time they are fair and good. Even the ordinary person in the village had to bring samples here - broken samples of pangas; samples of hoes. If peasants would see that these items were non compliant with Ugandan standards, how could professionals say they were fairly good? Members of Parliament! This is professional dishonesty and it must stop.

My second point and the final one, I do not want to waste a lot of time, this country needs divine intervention -(Interjection)- They will clarify, I have no issues; I am reading their report. I have nothing to clarify. 

Mr Speaker, and honourable Members, the issues of quality and counterfeit products in this country is becoming a problem. I do not want to mention countries because you might chase me away from this microphone. Africa must be protected from being treated as a dustbin of the world. I know we are beggars but so what? Donations from some country you have named, I do not want to name it because you will chase me from this microphone. All the hoes, axes, sickles were junk; they were of poor quality. Our partners are sending us junk items. We are even lucky that these were hoes –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Christopher Kibanzanga. Actually when we considered the issue of these fake donations, the explanation we were given was that when your son-in–law brings you a small chicken, do you go out announcing it over house tops that “my son-in-law brought me a miserable chicken; can you see it”. So that is the information we got and you can now understand the situation the committee went through. Thank you. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker and honourable Members, my point was that the issue of treating Uganda, including Africa as a dumping ground simply because we are beggars must stop. We are lucky that these were items used by peasants in villages but there is also dumping in the field of drugs. The whole consignment of expired drugs left some country that I do not want to name, it is a parked at Soroti hospital. These expired drugs entered the country and because we are beggars we received the consignment.  Our doctors in Soroti hospital realised that the whole consignment was expired and it was sent from a powerful country; people whom we treat as our partners! 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the international politics of donation - these donations are not free. They are about persuading us to give citizens of those countries investment and trade rights in our country. They are about giving them favours in diplomatic issues. They are about swapping the obligations of their citizens here into equity where they have failed to pay. That is the politics of international donations. They are about persuading us to allow them to do dumping in our own country. Changing Uganda into a dustbin of their country; changing Africa into a dustbin of the so-called developed countries. If this is not dishonesty to our country, what is it? What is it? 

I want the chairman of this committee to clarify on those issues. That the consignment from China, let me name it, it went back to China because it lacked the standards and yet they wanted a lot from Uganda - swapping their debts, allowing their citizens just to come here and make pancakes and yet you give us junk! Expecting us to vote for you in the UN and yet you are sending us expired drugs which is next to poison to our people. We do not even know how to destroy it anyway. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, maybe the axes you are talking about are supposed to be used for working on soft wood and yet we have hard wood in Uganda. 

5.26
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I just have one or two comments or observations to make as far as this report is concerned. 

First of all, when I looked at the report, the volume of the report implied to me that I was going to have a comprehensive report that included everything I wanted.  Unfortunately it left a lot to be desired and I will just have only two observations one of which is on page 30. 

My concern is on page 30, bullet 8.1, where the committee says, “due to numerous demands by non LRA war affected district leaders, OPM allocated some farm implements to those districts.” When I read this and I was trying to compare it with a mother of five children, out of the five children, one of the children cannot afford living without half a litre of milk a day and this poor woman cannot afford that half a litre of milk a day but a volunteer offers that half a litre of milk a day but this woman does not think about the life of this poor child but instead gives this half of a liter of milk to another child who is not in this portion. You can try to imagine what we are going through. 

Mr Speaker- (Laughter)- in this case what I want to say is that we did not have enough in the pool to give out to these IDPs. Because when I was reading in the annex, I saw the allocations, the quantities of these seeds and the implements were not even enough to supply three of the Northern and Eastern Uganda districts that were affected by the LRA war. Now why did not the Office of the Prime Minister consider these districts and give out these seeds? 

I remember in Pader District a few of the households that got some of these seeds were telling me that a household was given, for example, a half a kilogram of millet seeds was given to two households to share. You can imagine just a half a kilogram of millet seeds to two households to share and yet for farm implements not all households were able to get.  

The second concern I have, Mr Speaker –(Interjection)- I think I can take that information.

MRS LAGADA: Thank you, hon. Member for giving way. What you are saying I think is a concept, which is in Government that when there is a problem in one place, the area must be extended to cover whatever is meant for that area with a problem. It has to be extended to cover as large an area as possible. That is why under PRDP, which all of us originally knew was to ensure that there war depressed areas was brought up to catch up with the rest of Uganda was extended up to Butaleja. So, that is a normal thing. (Laughter)

MS AKELLO: I thank the hon. Member for giving me that very useful information. But hon. Member, if I may add a bit because I also got to learn that Northern Uganda is extending day by day, it has even gone to the extent of Sironko and it is extending day by day- (Laughter)- that is not is not our concern anyway. But what I want to say, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, is that when something is meant for a vulnerable person, let it be for that vulnerable community or person. 

My last observation, Mr Speaker is that I want to request the Office of the Prime Minister especially the office of the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness, I know the Prime Minister at almost a personal level, he is a man who communicates-(Interjections)- yes he communicates; he taught me at the university. I know him; he communicates whenever there is - (Laughter) - But hon. Prime Minister, I want to tell you, please try to mentor these other ministers under you directly, you know, to communicate- (Mr Okumu rose_)- I will take it.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Honourable Member, thank you for giving me this opportunity. The information I want to give to you is that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness also taught me and he has been a good communicator but some time he talks too much.(Laughter)

 MS AKELLO: I thank you hon. Colleague also for that useful information. But what I was trying to say is that many of us as Members of Parliament from the affected areas did not get to know about this development especially to do with giving out these seeds and the farm implements to our people. Personally I got to know about it when my people were calling me on phone asking, “What is happening to these seeds you sent us, they are not germinating?” That was the first time I got to know about it. 

The second time I got to know about it was when I was in my constituency and happened to learn that the hon. Minister of Disaster Preparedness, hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, was also in my constituency consulting my people about the seeds quietly; I did not know about his being there. I happened actually to meet him the next morning when he was exiting the district for another district and he did not tell me about it. 

One of the reasons you hear politicians like us or like Mao, like hon. Reagan Okumu coming out with this to the press and to whichever kind of audience is because there is that very wide gap, which needs to be bridged by communication. Imagine if you had sent a circular to members of Parliament about these seeds when you were going to send them and about the quantities, quality and all that, there would be few problems. With this, Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: It seems there is a lot of interest and it is an important subject and yet we have to hear even the minister and others who are not here because of other commitments. I think I intend to continue with the debate, maybe we finalise it on Tuesday, is that okay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

5.36
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Rt hon. Speaker and hon. Members, I think what we are discussing is very important and is nothing but trying to address the poverty level of the IDPs’ who these poor quality seeds and farm implements were meant for.

My concern is, what lessons have we learnt about processing the suppliers who supplied fake seeds and farm implements? What punitive measures are we putting in place to ensure that this is not repeated tomorrow? This system of supplying fake seeds is not new. Remember way back in 1990 when a directive was given to supply cotton seeds in Northern Uganda? Now we were wondering: what is the value of the research, which was carried out sometime back, about what kind of seeds to be supplied to the North and Central? Then the farmers lost very greatly. 

In this phenomenon, the farmers who got the fake seeds lost very heavily. Now what are we going to do to these farmers? I know some of them who had planted one or two acres of cotton, of groundnuts and they really lost very heavily. And yet there is no recommendation from this committee as to how to address these farmers whose level of poverty will still increase. I think we should have given these farmers some attention, but if you discuss and leave it here, then those who are supplying fake seeds and these fake farm implements just become successful. 

MR  MALINGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the colleague for giving way. The farmers in Amuria have two proposals to the Prime Minister to alleviate their problems. Number 1, they demand an apology from the Prime Minister’s Office, first for deceiving them with seeds that would not germinate; and secondly, for -

THE SPEAKER: Apology or regret? The two are different.

MR MALINGA: They are demanding for an apology. (Laughter) They are asking Government to apologise for wasting their energy cultivating land with poor hoes and then they are given fake seeds that would not germinate.  

Secondly, they allege that there were meetings in Lira and Gulu where the Minister of Disaster Preparedness was involved with the local leaders and they agreed on the kind of seeds that would be provided. Instead of providing them with the seeds that they demanded for, the Prime Minister’s Office decided to provide them with what they did not ask for. So they are asking that the Prime Minister’s Office first apologises and secondly, provides seeds immediately and now when they are able to plan so that it will cover the shame that was caused by these wrong supplies.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving that meaningful information. In order to address this issue seriously, I have decided to start writing a very good book about how the IDPs -(Interjections)- a good book I have already thought of. It comes to my mind because there is no way we can remember this serious mistreatment, I would say, which the IDPs underwent, other than putting it in writing as a record. I am wondering: when will this government eliminate from its vocabulary the terms, junk helicopter, junk seeds, and junk farm implements? Maybe now there are junk Ugandans! 

You can imagine when even the Office of the Prime Minister, which has been doing very well, through His Excellency the President, thought that, “As we give the IDPs the seeds, let us also address the issue of accommodation”. Some iron sheets were supplied and to-date, my constituency has never been covered and we are discussing the matter. When are you going to effect this one too?

Another measure that we are going to put in place very soon is that my constituency will take the government to court. We have put up the walls and walls are collapsing; the mabaati were sent there and they were stolen and we reported but no action has been taken to that effect. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, hon. Member representing Erute North. I want to inform this House that the honourable member raised an issue of iron sheets in his district and in particular in his constituency. That matter was taken up arising out of the allegations that were made about the CAO and the RDC in the district and he truly knows that action was taken. I want him to be honest with this House that it is not theatre that we are really talking about issues, which solve the people’s problems.  

MS AMONGI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I just want to give further information that in my constituency in Oyam, I am completely bombarded with telephone calls over iron sheets because they were given by the Office of the Prime Minister when Oyam was still under Apac and to-date, the people of Oyam, the IDPs are still waiting for their iron sheets from Government. Thank you.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much for the information.  I wanted to accept the information from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness about the action, which has been taken about the iron sheets by not giving us. I think that is a good decision because we have not received them. So if that is the action you have taken, then I regret having heard from you, hon. Minister. The way forward we are trying to forge here is to assist the Office of the Prime Minister by giving him timely information, like the farmers did on the case of the farm implements. We ran here with samples of the farm implements and seeds. So measures could be taken to follow up these suppliers up to the factory where they got this kind of equipment from; then serious punishment can be effected to some of these suppliers.

I happened to witness one supplier. When it was advertised that somebody should supply animals for the restocking program, a briefcase suppler from Kumi succeeded. The condition was that you should have some cows and the man succeeded in collecting cows from the neighbouring villages to his farm, which had only five cows. So he qualified. So when it came to supplying cows, he had no cows to supply except for the very tiny cows that looked like goats; it was really disappointing. Is this how we are going to address the Poverty Eradication Programme?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, the name of my district has been mentioned rather negatively. As far as I know, the people of Kumi are honest and also God fearing. I wanted clarification from my brother, if possible to mention now who this supplier is so that we can go down to Kumi and encourage him to behave better?

MR ODIT: Let me assist the honourable members by stating clearly that this Akuku Farm Supply is from Kumi – very dishonest. And he went ahead to supply Epuri-puri knowing well that the people of Teso do not consume Epuri-puri. The gentleman is from Kumi; he appeared many times both here in Parliament before this committee and also in Soroti.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you honourable colleague for your assistance. I think that is now very clear. If the honourable member from Kumi wants to know this gentleman, he can call on me in my office and we arrange to go to that farm and we also take him to Lira to answer some queries, which we thought we could forgive and forget. For that matter, you just play it cool and do the needful.

This issue of supplying fake seeds and farm implements had a very big impact on our people. Even now we have not reached the level of taking off. We recommended that in Lango sub-region, those who should benefit should be given animal instructions; at least that would have done much better. 

Finally, we want to blame this on the insecurity; otherwise, we would not have witnessed people coming to cause us to have ill-feelings about the government. So my appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister is that besides doing the much you have done, please recruit the right officers who can respond very fast. 

I say so because last week I reported in this House what should have been a crisis and an emergency. One UPDF soldier went on rampage killing four people, burning 20 houses, killing eight cows and injuring so many people in Apoka parish in Oguru sub-county. Up to now the whole village is sleeping outside their houses scared of this man who is still at large. But up to now, no single assistance has been rendered to these families. How many times should we talk about the same thing? Is this going to be the subject for the next financial year? How happy shall we be to talk about the same thing, which is not addressed promptly? I expect to see a positive response about this. Thank you very much.

5.52
MS AGNES AKIROR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness – you know government entered into a contract with these suppliers, but what they have supplied is far less than the quantities required. For example, out of 300,000 hoes, only 17,000 have been supplied. So, when is the balance going to be supplied? 

And I think the committee needed to include another column of the items that have not yet been supplied. When I look at the maize, more than 290,000 bags have not yet been supplied and yet there was a needs assessment to the effect that we needed these things.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleague for giving way. When I was presenting this report yesterday, I said that those can be got in annex 1. So you disregard this column. That annex will give you the details of how much has been supplied so far.

MS AKIROR: And, Mr Chairman, in your report you pointed out that sickles had not been fully supplied but when you look at your report here, you say that 75,000 sickles have been supplied. So is it part of the donation or did you mix the two? We want to know exactly what is yet to be supplied.

You also recommended that we needed more bean seeds. But you know that in this country, many times people take advantage of these kinds of open recommendations and say that, “We need more supplies”, yet the first one is not yet fulfilled. So I would be happy if you recommend that they first fulfil the first supplies and then you recommend for additional supplies; maybe a local purchase order should be given to the company.

Thirdly, this is to the minister, there is this letter from Crocodile Tools Uganda, Ltd. They talk about 345,000 pieces of hoes yet here we are talking about only 300,000. In the end we might end up paying for 45,000 extra pieces, which actually have not been supplied anywhere. We need to have figures that tally. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: thank you for giving way. It is true some money was saved and extra hoes were bought. That is why you have moved from 300,000 to 345,000. So some money in the whole process was saved. We felt more hoes were needed so we purchased more.

MR AKIROR: Thank you. At least this time the minister is quite disaster prepared -(Laughter)- those were really my queries. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on many occasions we pay for goods that are not supplied in this country. So, I hope you will follow it up and see that all these suppliers fulfill their obligations.

And on the junk coming from China, I do not know whether it is not right that we request the Chinese Government or whoever donated those items to take them back because you know when it comes to disposing of junk, we have a problem with our own garbage and then they give us extra useless materials? Then we have another problem of trying to see how we get rid of it and most of it is metallic? I do not know what your ministry is doing to see to it that we re-ship those things back to them –(Hon. Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I really appreciate your contributions today but I sensed that maybe we have sat too long? And we were engaged in other exercises in the committees before we came here. What I suggest is that on Tuesday we shall start – the last person on this side was hon. Alaso -(Hon. Members rose_)- no, do not worry I will come to you; then Dr and hon. Alupo, then I will choose others. I think this is a convenient time to adjourn -(Maj. Rwamirama rose_)- yes, Minister of Agriculture, you will come back so that we continue with this debate on Tuesday. We shall start with those people I have mentioned. I thank you very much for the contributions. The House is adjourned until Tuesday.

(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 08 April 2008.)


