Friday 8th April, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Ag. Chairman, Mr. Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

1.  Miss Kabasharira Naume.
2.  Dr. Erisi Amuza Owiny.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Now, hon. Members, I will first of all ask you to stand up and observe one minute of silence for the two brother Presidents of the brother countries of Rwanda and Burundi, who died a few days ago in the turbulence in Rwanda.  

(A moment of silence observed)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  The reason for summoning you in an emergency Sitting is not very serious, but it is important.  As you know, we have not yet balanced our budget.  So we depend on borrowing from the World Bank and there is going to be a Board meeting of the World Bank on the 12th - sometimes after the 12th of this month.  Now, our Ministry of finance in negotiations with them has found that they are objecting to certain elements in the Cotton Law and in the Coffee Law, something like that.  They are objecting.  Now, if their Board meets when these two elements are still in the laws, then they may postpone; Uganda’s papers will not be presented for the next 100 million dollars recovery credit.  So, that means we shall have to wait for November.  Is it?  And that will destabilise the budget.  

So, I called you; it was my duty when I came to know of this.  I came to know of this actually when I was in Dar-es-Salaam attending the other meeting where the other Presidents were.  The Minister sent me a radio message and from there, I said let us have an emergency session so that we are not responsible for any inconvenience to the economy of Uganda.  So, the Deputy Minister for Co-operatives will be pointing out the offending part of the law and then you will see what to do about it. (Applause)  

However, before we go into those amendments, I want to make a few points.  Point number one is to congratulate all of you for either being elected or not being elected.  It does not matter. (Laughter)  But I congratulate all of you because the winner is our country.  Our country is the one which wins because when you are elected or not elected peacefully in a fair atmosphere, it is the country that is elected which wins, and this is something we should be very proud of. (Applause) 

I noticed a few weaknesses in this law later on when we were going along with the CA elections.  One of them is the ballot registration certificate.  I did not know that they were not stamping it.  You know, this certificate, they give you when you go to register, when you come to vote, they simply give it back to you as it is.  I think something should be done about this certificate; either it should be stamped or punched or something must be done on it to show that you have used it once.  and even if you want to use it again, we can provide that it gets stamped another time, there is no harm, you stamp it.  You stamp it for the CA elections, for Local Government elections, and for the General Election.  There is no problem.  But I think this was a weakness.  I was not aware but when I went to vote, I noticed it.  Then the second weakness was in the polling centres, you register on one polling centre, then sometime along the way, the Commissioner changes he says no, the parish is too big, I now declare three voting centres.  

So, my own view is that the registration centre should be strictly lined with the voting centre.  Where you register, that is where you should vote so that - and this question of distance should be arranged before hand.  Of course, the other consideration was money.  We were trying to avoid very many polling centres because that means more money.  

Then the other weaknesses are to do with the DESs; some of them are not very professional.  I do not know what we shall do about this but I thought this was a good opportunity for them to show their professionalism, to show that they are neutral, they do not care about who is elected.  They may have their private opinions but they will express them in the ballot box but not interfere with the process but this did not appear to be the case in many cases and I am asking for guidance from God how to handle these DESs.  How could I infect them with a spirit of professionalism?  But anyway, we shall see how to handle that.  

But all in all, it is good that elections were held in a very good atmosphere.  Now, coming to other issues, connected with elections, first of all, I would like to advise those who support the NRM system, not to shut out support because I have been hearing a lot of confusion on this question; who is NRM and who is not NRM.  

My own advice is as follows and I am going to put it in writing in a letter like the one I wrote for the RCs in the North.  I will now write to the RCs in the whole country about this question.  In Runyankore, they say, ‘orekye kutimba efura’ which means, ‘once a gentleman give you his word, take his word’.  Do not go behind him and say although this man has said he is Museveni, he is not really Museveni, he is something else.  I think that is not good.  When a man stands up in public and says, I am NRM, accept him please.  Gauge him on other considerations but accept his publics stand, especially if he says it in public.  If you go behind and you start saying, oh! this man, although he says he is NRM, but his mother was like this and his aunt was like this, you are going to cause us a lot of problems.  You are going to weaken us.  Accept anybody who declares that he is for the Movement because if he is telling lies, then this is not the end of the world.  If he says, I am this, then he goes to Parliament and behaves differently, the people are there.  

So, I would appeal to especially those who are involved in the Movement to really accommodate people according to what they declare publicly.  Then leave the rest to the voters; the rest should be for the voters to decide on.  I am going to put this one in writing.  Then the ones who want multi-party now should also imbibe a little bit of civilisation.  They should ensure that what they say is responsible and will not incite hatred among the population because the weakness it seems is that the political elite in these African countries think that politics is the beginning and end of the world and this is due to the backward neo-colonial economy where resources are only to be found in the public sector; in the bureaucracy and in the political elite.  But really the economy we are trying to build now is going to be mainly private sector.  

So, if you want participation, even if you are not elected as a Member of Parliament, or even if you are not a Minister, as long as the country is peaceful, there are many more opportunities in the private sector than in the public sector.  So, why the desperation?  Why should people be so desperate and behave in a manner as if going to Parliament is the beginning and the end of the world?  And you are willing to destroy your area, you are willing to kill just because you want to sit in this wonderful House, I like it very much but I can live without coming here and as you know, I am not very recent in the world.  Before I came here, I was also living, before I came in this Chamber.  

So, I think this desperation is dues to failure of knowing where the real contribution for running this country is.  The bigger contribution is in the private sector not here.  This is a controlling centre alright in the sense that it gives guidelines and so on but it is not the end of the world.  For instance in Italy, politics has collapsed the traditional politics and a businessman who has never been in politics has come to rescue the country.  I think he is the one standing for President or something like that.  These professional politicians have failed and a man who was a businessman is now - they had elections the other day.  I think he is coming to rescue the country.  

So, please, let us not behave in a desperate manner.  Let us ensure there is peace in our country, the one who is elected will go and have the burden of representing our interests in Parliament.  The one who is not elected will continue doing his work, political and private in a peaceful atmosphere and the whole country will progress.  

Finally, on my preliminary remarks.  It is on this sad situation in Rwanda and Burundi.  It is very, very tragic because these two Presidents left 15 minutes ahead of me from Dar-es-salaam and when they were arriving in Kigali, either they were shot down or the plane crashed or whatever, I do not know what happened.  But my reaction to all these tragic events in these two neighbouring countries is to emphasise what I may call the Uganda model of resolving conflicts.  I remember in 1985 during the peace talks, some groups brought up the idea of a peace-keeping force in Uganda.  Those who were in the peace talks remember.  We rejected this, we said we do not want peace keeping force in Uganda.  How?  For how long?  That I cannot live with my brother unless there is a peace-keeping force to make us live together, or with my wife my children or neighbours.  

The more durable solution in my opinion is for these Africans to learn to live together on their won because if they do not live in the case of Rwanda and Burundi, the amount of time we have spent on the outside with the Americans, with the Belgians, with UN, with OAU, in itself is a source of insecurity because you do not even know who is doing what in that type of situation because there are so many people, they are not under one authority, it is a source of insecurity.  It is very dangerous.  

So, in that type of situation, you spend more time trying to win the ear of the outsiders than trying to make peace with your brother and I do not think this is a very good model.  I made this point in several meetings but people have not accepted it yet but I think on this sad day, when we have lost so many people not only the Presidents - because I was reading the papers; Prime Minister, I do not know who, Ministers, it is a catastrophe not to mention the ordinary citizens.  Now, I do not know whether it would be responsible for us to simply keep quiet and say these are internal matters and leave it like that.  I think it is my responsibility to point out what I believe.  Uganda was one of the most complicated countries to manage, even more complicated than Rwanda and Burundi.  I do not see any problem in Rwanda and Burundi they speak one language, they are one group but it is mismanagement, small problem becomes a very huge problem.  But as you know, here we did not accept the idea of peace talks.  We brought together our own people, the ones who were with Amin, you are welcome, the ones who were with Obote you are welcome, the ones who were with these other groups you are welcome.  If you want to fight, we fight among ourselves without anybody coming to say, do not fight now, fight now.  Now when we are sitting here together, you know that if Rt. hon. Adyebo strikes me, I will strike him.  So, that brings peace. (Laughter)  

Yes, the fact you know that I am not here because of you.  I am here under my own scheme.  If you step on me, I will push you or box you; that is how things settle down.  Everybody respects another one but I think it is very dangerous and I am very, very sorry for our people, our brother Africans in Burundi and Rwanda and other African countries.  

I advocate African solutions for African problems.  National solutions to national problems.  Regional solutions to regional problems, not internationalising these conflicts which does not seen to lead into solution.  Now, coming to the business of today, I have got a lot of other things to do, but I would like to ask one Member hon. Ekemu, could you please kindly agree to help me in case I am tired and I leave the job to you? (Applause)  and then you - so what do we do, we call the Deputy Minister to move his amendment?  Okay.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. G. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Uganda Coffee Development Authority (Amendment) Bill, 1994’, be read for the First Time.  I beg to move.

Title No. 2

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. G. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill, 1994’ be read for the First Time.  I beg to move.

MOTION TO SUSPEND RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE NRC

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. G. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in accordance with Rule 55, sub-rule 1 of the Interim Rules of Procedure of the National Resistance Council of Uganda, I beg to move that I be permitted to proceed to the Second Reading of the Bill entitled: ’The Uganda Coffee Development Authority (Amendment) Bill, 1994’.  

The Bill is short, and it was circulated to the Members way back and I can say with confidence that, they are fully acquired with the Bill.  The enactment of the Bill is very urgent as it is linked to the timing of the Board, presentation of several credits.  Government has negotiated with various donor agencies including the World Bank.  For this reason, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that I be permitted to proceed to the Second Reading of the Bill.  I beg to move.

THE PRESIDENT:  Those in favour say, “Aye, those against say, “Nay’ and those against? (Laughter)  The ayes have it, so proceed with the Second Reading.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (Amendment) Bill, 1994, be read for the Second Time as agreed by the House.  But before possibly we discuss the Bill in detail, it is important that I give the hon. members some background of the Coffee Industry, particularly from the time when we liberalised the industry.  The Coffee sub-Sector Reform and Market Liberalisation Programme launched by the Government in 1990, and implemented by my Ministry, has brought about significant changes in the policy environment in marketing of coffee during the last three years in the following areas.

(i) Separation of regulatory and trading functions from the defunct Coffee Marketing Board by dividing it into two new institutions.  The Uganda Coffee Development Authority, which in brief we call UCDA and Coffee Marketing Board Limited or CMBL.

(ii) The monopoly of Coffee Marketing Board in export of coffee was removed.  At present, coffee exporters include one parastatal that is the Coffee Marketing Board Limited, seven Co-operative Unions and 56 Private Companies.

(iii) Effective from November 1991, crop-financing sanctions for the coffee sub-Sector were transferred from Bank of Uganda to commercial Bank.  In other words, the whole exercise of crop financing for coffee was removed from the Central Bank as an activity to be totally performed and carried out by the Commercial Bank, that is, leaving those who are involved to go and negotiate for crop finance.  Effective from July 1991, controls on producer prices, processing and export margins were removed to allow farmers prices and other margins to be determined by market forces.  Indicating producer prices are however still being announced to improve the bargaining position of the peasant farmers.  

(iv) Effective from March 1992, coffee proceeds have been exchanged at Bureau Exchange rates.

(v) In July 1992, export tax on coffee was removed; a withholding tax of 2 per cent of processor level has also been removed.

On the fifth point, on the farmers margin, our indicative prices for example, on Robusta, were announced as 210, but as we speak now, farmers sell their coffee at the price between 350 and 400/= per kilo.  The introduction of coffee liberalisation policy coincided with a sharp decline in the world coffee prices.  Although it was not an opportune time to introduce such policies, the liberalisation policy nevertheless, helped in the sustaining the coffee sub-Sector performance under advanced market conditions.  The Liberalisation Policy has had the following impact in the coffee sub-sector.  Farmers are now being paid promptly and they recover about 70 per cent of their production cost as against 31 per cent before liberalisation.  

As already mentioned, the price of Kiboko, which is the unprocessed coffee, is ranging between 350 and 400 to the farmer.  In fact, at one time, when the prices were rising in the world markets, prices to the farmer went as high as 475.  The trend of up rooting coffee trees has been largely reversed.  Farmers are now tendering the existing coffee trees and are eager to plant high yielding varieties.  This is likely to reverse the current decline in production and export.  It is very clear when we mention colonal coffee, wherever you meet the farmers, they are all extremely keen to have the colonal coffee.  

Crop finance is now the responsibility of the sub-sector and Government is no longer required to provide guarantees to the banking system.  Export price realisation in relation to the international price has improved and some new markets penetrated.  Efficiency and cost effectiveness at all levels of the marketing chain has also improved.  

In May 1993, we set up three task forces.  These were constituted to undertake comprehensive evaluation of the coffee sub-Sector policies and identify areas where adjustment, institutional arrangements and further investments should be required to improve the performance of these task forces, government has adopted a number of measures in that streamlining, to further the operation of the coffee sub-sector.  The measures include, the elimination of licensing under the Uganda Coffee Development Authority Statute and provision for further system of registration of coffee exports.  

As already mentioned, we now have 56 private exporters; while initially, we set off with very few exporters, then we bring in more competition and efficiency and of course, each one of them competes against the other to get a better price.  So, re-examination of the circulation of export flow price.  Unlike what was covered in the Uganda Confidential, over the most current issue where they were talking of having been pressurised to remove the flow price, I can say with confidence to you hon. Members and to you, Mr. Chairman, that we still maintain the system of the flow price, because we cannot leave ourselves totally open, we have got to know what is going on, we have got to monitor, we have got to know what prices are being offered both on London and New York market and finally, the side on the flow market, I mean flow prices.  

Now, amendment UCDA Statute to restructure the UCDA so as to provide for greater representation of industry participants on Board of Directors.  This has been the demand.  The people we had initially on the Board were mainly technocrats, we did not have opportunity of bringing in the farmers, and we did not bring in the exporters.  So, we feel in this arrangement, this is after the task force, we were then told that it was important to bring in all the players so that they know what is going on.  So, this is part of the exercise in the amendment.  

Complete liberalisation of transportation of coffee to the ports.  There has been a bottleneck; we have a problem where we had restricted the transportation of our coffee by rail.  We have a problem of availability of open wagons, so that even if we got containers, then you have a problem of securing open wagons and of course, a delay and as I have mentioned already, people are very effectively competing.  They will be competing for shipment at Mombasa and if they do not have open wagons in time, then they will obviously loose the scheduled ships.  

In that respect, we feel that it is also important to liberalise the transportation, so that if an exporter has a consignment that must go out immediately to catch up with the ship, which is docking any time in Mombasa, he can use the road transport.  Okay, permitting coffee exporters to choose the mode of export sales of coffee in order to implement these measures, it is necessary to make amendments in Uganda Coffee Development Authority Statute of 1991.  

It is not of course, my intention that I go one by one, each of these amendments, but, I am sure every hon. member has a copy and when we get to the Committee Stage, we will have the opportunity to go over each of these amendments if you so wish, but we have tried our level best to ensure that we only tamper and attend to only those that require urgent attention.  We are trying to move the control so that we are fully liberalised and this is what is covered in Section 4, when we talk about amending Section 4.  

Then we are talking about the whole appointment of the Managing Director.  I am sure this is still fresh in mind.  The majority of you remember the kind of problem we went through when we wanted to change people within the Ministry, because the Members of the Board of Directors did not have powers and the powers for appointing the Managing director were left with the Minister, that brought in the problem.  So, what we are doing here is to streamline areas like that.  

Then we have other areas, okay, which involve the price committee.  Here we had the Governor of the Central Bank as the Chairman, but we should instead involve people who are directly in day to day, because whether we like it or not, the Governor is such a busy person he will never be available to chair these committees.  So, we have to live in reality and ensure that the people who are directly performing should be the people to take on the responsibility.  So, we bring in the Central Bank at some stage to be represented within the price committee, but not necessary to share the price committee.  

Therefore, the object of the Bill is to amend the Uganda Coffee Development Authority Trust, 1991, in order to regulate even the Coffee sub-Sector and to establish an autonomous institution in which the industry will have greater influence.  The most significant change relate to the composition of the Board of Directors and the Price Policy committee, the appointment of the top executives of UCDA and the regulatory body function of UCDA.  Having mentioned all that, I feel that I would be proper that I give opportunity to go over the amendments and, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.  Thank you very much.

THE PRESIDENT:  I now propose the question that the Bill entitled ‘The Uganda Coffee Development authority (Amendment) Bill, 1994, be read the Second Time and I invite Members to contribute and at the same time, I invite hon. Ekemu to come and help me with this problem, having set the ball rolling, so that I go to do other things.

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  May I therefore call upon Members to contribute.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale):  Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the amendment.  To realise that it is necessary to streamline the activities of the Uganda Coffee Development authority in relation to the liberalised sector of coffee in the country.  I particularly welcome the idea of the Minister not being the one to appointing the Managing director because in organisations where the Minister appoints the Managing director, we have been having problems of conflicts between the Boards and the Minister and I particularly welcome that idea.  

While appreciating and supporting this Bill, I wish to propose that the idea of the monitoring of coffee proceeds and foreign exchange earnings, as stipulated in the Bank of Uganda Act, be strengthened especially given that coffee is a single earning commodity for our foreign exchange in this country and produce over 80 per cent of those earnings.  It is therefore, important that if we remove as it is proposed in Section 5, sub-section (k), that the UCDA does not participate in monitoring the foreign exchange repatriation, then that we should strengthen the Bank of Uganda Act and foreign Exchange Act so that the Bank of Uganda, actually strictly monitors this foreign exchange; especially given that the coffee sub-sector now is also entered into by any foreign companies which might be buyers in the local scene and at the same time, exporting themselves on the international scene because it is possible for an international company to come here, buy the coffee and store it, because storing in a Third World country is cheaper - may store for a long time and we shall not earn foreign exchange.  

That is why I feel strongly that the monitoring of the purchase should be included.  I feel that if the UCDA is going to monitor, then the Bank of Uganda’s monitoring capacity must be enhanced so that we do not come to a situation where somebody could easily afford to spend $ 50 to $ 100 million dollars, buy the coffee and keep it here waiting for the world market to move up and then he sells when at the same time, we have an obligation to pay our debts and meet our other international obligation.  

I feel that while UCDA’s powers are being reduced, we should be very careful in that we do not actually scrape them completely in ago and find that we cannot control whatever is coming out of coffee.  What I mean here, is that in Section 5, sub-Section (c), we are saying UCDA should register in accordance with guidelines issued by the Minister.  Why are we really removing the word licence?  I do agree it is a liberalised system, and we should have licences to allow people or to allow companies especially when they become so many, to be able to be licensed; because if you do not licence them and we just register them, we could run a risk of having companies that actually swindle the country and I am worried about that swindling because coffee contributes significantly to the welfare and foreign exchange earnings of this country.  

So, I feel strongly that UCDA should actually keep register, licensing not only registering whoever wants to export.  in the long-run, I wish that UCDA should ensure that if the Coffee Marketing Board is losing steam, then it should be advised as had been proposed in the initial Bill that CMB Limited should start selling shares to the companies that export.  Otherwise, we are going to have a situation we have in national assets not being fully utilised and yet, we need to utilise them because we already have the asset.  

With these few remarks, I beg to support the amendment and I will give my other contributions in the Committee Stage.  Thank you.

MR. NDEGE (Luuka County, Iganga):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the Bill because it is part of our move to liberalising this economy.  This is very important, the less bottlenecks we have the better for running and streamlining this economy.  But what is worrying me more, is the fact that, all this is to borrowing and in our last years meeting, the Minister was supposed to up-date us with all the borrowing he is supposed to make during this financial year, as a Committee of Finance representing this House.  

Now, as he goes we are in the dark; we do not know what he is going to borrow - how much he is going to borrow, what he is going to borrow for and he has not kept his part of the bargain.  Despite that I hope before he leaves, he will advise our Chairman or send him at least, the list of what he is going to do as a matter of courtesies so that the good relationship between the Ministry and this House is kept, and we do not go on borrowing in the dark and eventually we are responsible for really telling the farmers that we have committed you for more money and you have to pay.  

So, while I support the Bill, I do not think this is much really we should amend here.  It has been well studied.  I think the Minister before he leaves, should have the courtesy of telling the Committee of Finance on what he is supposed to do in Parliament.  Thank you very much.

MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi):  Mr. Chairman, I would like to make some observations on this amendment.  First, I would like to say it is good that we are going to flow liberalisation not competition.  I think I wish it would be extended to all fields.  But there is open competition and people are allowed the latitude to do whatever they want in a free atmosphere.  That one, I welcome and that is the reason I would like these amendments to go through.  But I am wondering, Mr. Chairman, on setting up these institutions, one reason why we moved away from the coffee Marketing Board was to reduce the extent of bureaucracy.  Now, we are going to end up with two sets of Boards.  One for Coffee Marketing Board for which we are going to pay money, and another one for UCDA.  In actual fact, we are multiplying the expenditure which we are going to incur in keeping these institutions.  

I would have sought the role of UCDA, and it would have been easily handled by the Ministry of Cooperatives and marketing.  In other institutions, because the monitoring part of the supervisory role is the responsibility of the Ministry of Industry and Trade.  So, I would have reduced the extent of funds now going to maintain two managing directors and also paraphernalia that go with those two institutions.  I would put the responsibility squarely to the Ministry of Cooperatives and Marketing to do this work because that is what they are there for.

Secondly, because of having UCDA, we have been - the Minister did not mention - that we are actually the taxing people in order to maintain these institutions.  That money is coming from the exports; they have to pay at the moment nearly one per cent of the export value and the impact of this goes to the farmer especially when the prices are going down, then we turn to the farmer goes down corresponding them because the Institution at the moment is good may be now it is being maintained by the availability of funds that we are borrowing from the World Bank.  But when that source dries up to keep these institutions going like UCDA will have to impose - which we did not actually pass in this House.  

So, I would like an assurance from the Minister he is replying as to where the money to maintain UCDA is going to come from.  I am looking at the expense being incurred when we are paying a full-fledged Ministry; civil servants who can do this role very easier.

The third one - if you look at the Statute for UCDA, there is a problem, they are supposed to do research and to monitor the growth of Coffee Industry yet we very well know that this work of research and other things related to development of Coffee Industry is properly handled by the Minister of Agriculture and we have already established NARO to this work.  So, what type of Research Organisation?  What type of set do we have under UCDA for which we are going to pay one per cent of the export value of our Coffee?  I would like the Minister to tell us also where that whether it is justified for an institution to be set when it is actually not having the structure or the institution to do that work.  The work of research is under NARO, the UCDA has no research facilities and even if it had, why should we duplicate the efforts that we have already established?  I am looking in terms of cost effectiveness of these institutions, and I am saying that it would be better if we left the research work with NARO and the Ministry of Agriculture.

Two, it would be better if we reduce the expenses and reduce taxation of sess all the way from the price going to the farmer and left the supervisory role and the complementary roles that the Ministry of Industry and Trade are supposed to be in their hands instead of having another set of organisation.

Now I turn to Private Bias, especially to echo the problems over pricing and invoicing, or under pricing.  We are now getting into a situation where foreigners are going to come to the firm-gate, and these foreigners are representatives of the very people who buy the coffee and process it.  The competition is good in the initial stages.  But I can see a problem where a roaster is at the same time the buyer of coffee at the firm-gate, and is going to create problems for us because already, if we are not agreeing with the changes Uganda confidential, already we know one institution which is controlling buying of coffee up to the tune of 75 per cent, it is a roaster.  The end user of our commodity what will happen when we get flooded with people of this nature.  The prices will end up in a curtail at the firm-gate, they will manipulate the price and we will find it very difficult to be able to get the prices that we want.  

Unless again we institute a control mechanism which will deter from doing so.  I am worried, Mr. Chairman, because we know it renews it with the General foods and Latin America.  General Foods in America control the price from the consumer end up to the firm-gate, and there were some of the revolutions and problems they have had in Latin America was because of that.  The Cuban Revolution is partly a manifestation of that ill dealing where you have the end user controlling the firm gate.  I want to get an assurance from the Minister that this is not going to be the situation and that the roasters are not going to set up companies and be able to manipulate the prices from this end up to the roasting stage.

There is a problem of quality control -(Interjection)- my imagination is not running why does the Attorney General say so.  I am really giving facts that I know have happened elsewhere and I just want a guarantee that these things will not happen.  There is a problem of quality control - as competition is going to increase, I would like to know who is going to be responsible for quality because in the coffee trade quality is going to be a matter of very great interest, and sensitivity to quality is going to be the one which is determining the volume of what we are going to get as a nation.  

Now, quality control in the old days was being supervised under the Coffee Marketing Board because they had the facilities to do so.  These other exporters who are coming in the 56 plus the Unions plus the CMB are they having the facilities to monitor the quality of coffee we are going to put on the market?  If not, then the role that we have hitherto played or being quoted on the New York Terminal is going to disappear, and if that happens and since coffee is so important to us in our export earnings, then we are going to have a problem.

In the Minister’s presentation I did not hear who is going to be responsible for the quality we are going to export.  Secondly, what happens to the assets at CMB that are so huge and so vast?  Who is going to use them?  We have been waiting for privatisation and the taking over of the percentage of the shares of CMB.  We have not seen it yet.  Because that is the only thing which we could use.  We are anxious to know when this is going to be in place.  Once it is in place, maybe would help us in the quality aspect that I am talking.  But if it is not, and others are going to set up duplication, then it is wastage of resources because we already have an asset that we should utilise fully.  I would like to know what the plans are in terms of quality control and the supervisory role of how much coffee we are going to put in the market.

The other aspect that I would like to touch on concerns the pricing.  It is good that the Minister says they are going to maintain a monitoring role and giving the guiding price.  I am wondering since the intention of bringing this Bill so suddenly was because we are going to the World Bank.  If the World Bank come around and says, no, that is interfering with the market forces’ what are we going to say?  

I want to know whether that latitude is also left to us because we know the World Bank attitude has been that you leave everything to market forces and when we do not have institutions which can monitor these things, then we are going to end up in an acute situation; and my fear is that the role of the Coffee Industry in this country is so important.  I would not like us to be seen ending in such a situation.  Is the Minister now sure that after getting the money the World Bank is not going to come round and say, ‘even that little element of giving prices you are not allowed to have.’  And what if that happens, what do we do then?  

First of all, we already see the problem - the problem is that the roasters are here, they are going to the firm-gate.  Two, they are controlling the outlets.  Three, if they control the price at the farm gate, then what rescue do we have?  We have any guarantees as to what is going to happen.  

If these questions are answered, then one would not find a problem in supporting the liberalisation of the Coffee Trade.  But I am about the certain things which I do not see in place yet and which I would like to see in place so that we are able to move in the right direction.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I want to congratulate you for sitting in that Chair.  It has been rumoured sometime that you would take it anyway.  So, I congratulate you.

I want to first of all to say that what I say about coffee is for the good of our country and some of us would want to see our Government doing the right things.  But it is not personalised.  So, I want to get that on record so that we know exactly what it is, rather than saying that, Wanendeya maybe has got some other sinister motives.  No, I do not have.  When we wanted coffee exports to be liberalised, we saw that the Coffee Marketing Board was not pursuing a price to farmers that was for their benefit.  You find that if just somebody in Coffee Marketing Board sold ten thousand tonnes of Coffee, and it the price difference is just one per cent that meant 10 dollars per tonne, that meant 100,000 dollars for just one deal to big Companies like General Foods or Nescafe and any other Coffee Roaster.  We therefore wanted Coffee Industry to be liberalised so that farmers who were not paid promptly would be paid quickly and, therefore, that was the motive.  

But when it comes to this, you find that the price where by farmers are being paid promptly and at a better price although the coffee prices in the World Market has gone down but still it has been rising slowly and this morning it started off at 48 about early last year and is not about 84 cents per kilogram.  

If we want to liberalise the way the Minister has brought the Motion and Bill, Coffee Farmers’ Welfare will never improve.  Prior to deliberalisation, coffee farmers were getting about 25 per cent of the price of coffee in the World Markets in New York, London and Hamburg.  If we, therefore, change this law without going into the implications, I am afraid that our lot is or the coffee farmers lot is even going to be worse.  

I, therefore, would prefer the Bill to go before a Select Committee or better still, I say this in law sincerity because we talk here, we can shout and say aaah! But, I know the coffee Marketing I agree up in coffee, I worked as Chief Accountant for Coffee Marketing Board, I know the prices very well and therefore, just shouting is not going to solve.  The World Bank which would want us to liberalise, I want to tell you that, the World Bank we thought there are liberalisations and sub-policies, have never been for the better of the developing countries.  Let nobody tell you any hullabaloo about it.  This idea of saying that we liberalise - I want to say that when in France, the markets between America and Europe - farmers were to liberalise farm products, the French farmers rioted.  

If we want the World Bank to tell us - to give us instructions, let them liberalise first farm products in Europe.  If they liberalise farm products in Europe, so that American farm products can be sold in Europe and vice versa or let the Japanese liberalise the American rice to be exported to Japan and vice-versa, then we will call it good liberalisation, but if you just tell Uganda to liberalise so that we can borrow without going into the implications - you find that the roasters are going to get a source.  That is involved literally at processing coffee.  They will be exporting it, they will be marketing it after roasting it and therefore, the prices of coffee that were improving on the world market will never go up to benefit the coffee farmers.  

I want you to think about that so that hon. Members will know the implications of what we are trying to do, because you find that Americans donated coffee production in Latin America, Brazil especially, and the type of coffee which we grow mainly the robusta - they are now trying to grow it in Indonesia so that they can get this coffee as a blend (the robusta being produced in Indonesia and in Thailand).  if we do the same thing, we are going to get even in harder problems that I can predict and we should never regret later on.  

I want to end by strongly recommending that we stand up or better still the committee on Economy can go into the implications of this law rather than just approving it.  I therefore, would support the Bill after it has been examined by that Committee.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  May I call upon the Minister to wind up his debate, please.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, first I wish t thank the hon. Members who have contributed on the Bill and I will try to answer some of the issues they have raised in the process and some of them as far as I can see are a bit not for this particular amendment that we are putting forward.  Some of them are related to other issues.  Take for example, issues related to how much you borrow from the World Bank and other sources.  This one is not directly connected with the Bill, but then I will slowly go over the points that have been raised starting from hon. Manzi.  

Hon. Manzi is talking about monitoring of our earnings from coffee.  We have of course removed that section where the UCDA was involved in direct monitoring but we are not removing Bank or Uganda from exercising that responsibility of monitoring whatever proceeds that come into the country after goods have been exported.  This is in relation to practically everything that we export from this country.  Whenever we issue export licences, copies are always made available to the Central Bank.  You know all about the CB3 forms and the rest.  So, you have got to account for whatever you have exported.  So, the Central Bank continues to retain that role of monitoring, following up all the proceeds - not only for coffee but also for all other items that are exported.  

Then we have the sale of shares by CMB Ltd.  This was also raised by hon. Manzi.  We are certainly sorting out or we are trying to get the CMB Ltd. to work out the overall position - its financial position in total so that they know what is worthy and then finally decide how it is going to be split so that people can buy share.  

You know very well hon. Members that you cannot just say I am selling shares to a company when you do not know what is worthy.  So, the initial duty now is for us to study, get to know what CMB is worthy and then finally we are going to sell the shares.  In fact, majority of the people who have licensed in the recent past would have preferred to buy shares in CMB Ltd. instead of them doing it alone as exporters.  If we had got over this exercise of valuing CMB Ltd. but this should be done soonest and we ensure that we advertise the shares.  People buy shares and even encourage those who are in the export business to withdraw and be shareholder in the CMB Ltd., which is larger, where you have less manpower.  Then we have hon. Ndege - I had already mentioned as I got up that he was questioning the hon. Minister of Finance about -(Interruption)

MR. PINTO:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, could the hon. Minister, while he is talking about the study going on and the eventual sale of shares to the interested parties considering the difficulties that these people may experience and the varsity investment we have in Coffee Marketing Board, could the Minister give us some indication of a time frame when this study might be completed and when the shares might be sold.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Thank you very much the hon. Member.  Now, I cannot and I am not prepared to commit myself and you turn me into a liar the next stage because unless I have carried out consultation as to how much has so far been done; because we have to have things clear and proper.  Otherwise, if I say to you - by end of the year, this would have been completed and if it is not complete, the next time I stand up here you are going to say last time you said this and the other.  

Now, as you are a Member of this House, I remain committed to the hon. Members to let you know the time frame when the whole exercise will be completed and we inform you here so that you can even let your people in your constituencies get involved in the purchase of the shares.  Then moving on to hon. Ndege - I had said already this is in relation to loans.  Certainly, if I may try to attempt to tackle this point on behalf of the Minister of Finance.  Whatever we are borrowing for is clearly stated because we cannot balance our budget.  In most cases, the monies that we want relate to structural adjustment credit and this money is already earmarked for various activities within the country and this is the money that we are following.  Overall borrowing - I am sure the Committee on the Economy has been doing a very wonderful job in following up how much we have borrowed and a time frame on payment or repayment of this money.  

Going to hon. Kanyomozi, can I appeal to you, Mr. Chairman, that it will always help this House if hon. Members when they raise issues, they at least sacrifice and keep in the House to listen to the reaction but it is extremely unfair if I am -(Applause)- having to react to an hon. Member’s remarks and he is just as if he wanted to say for the House or for the gallery, and then he has disappeared.  This is extremely unfair.  Now, coming to his points and I will answer them.  

He is talking about two votes being in existence.  It was in this very House that when we tabled the Bill to establish or to liberalise the coffee industry, that we clearly stated to the hon. Members that we were to set up a regulatory body and another trading body and that the two bodies were to run simultaneously.  This we agreed in this very House.  

If there is a consideration to review our position, then we can either through a private Members’ Motion consider what the hon. Member would like to see take place, but otherwise as of now, these bodies are properly catered for in our Statutes.  I would take for example, the UCDA plays the regulatory role.  Their responsibility is to regulate the export, the handling of coffee in this country - to export and at the same time it will ensure that they promote the coffee industry in this country.  This is exactly the role of UCDA and that is why we are here to see that we improve - we remove the bottlenecks so that they are bale to carry out that regulatory work that they are supposed to be doing.  The CMB Ltd. was created after -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order if the study for the sale of selling these shares is not out.  In addition is it in order for us to continue debating this Bill if the liberalisation policy of coffee and there was a study - a study was set up between the World Bank and the Government, is it in order for us to continue if we have not got this study in our hands, Mr. Chairman?    

MR. SSENDAULA:  Now, as to how UCDA is financed.  Mr. Chairman, UCDA is financed out of a sess which is in the Statute and which set up CDA under section 14, Clause 1(b) – and you will see sess of 1 per cent.  Result of that sess that UCDA gets its due for running its affairs.  

Regarding research, research is a very complicated and wide matter.  Why should UCDA be involved in such and yet there is NARO?  NARO handles biological research.  UCDA handles the direct economic research that involves the viability of the entire coffee crop which we cannot pass on to NARO, because NARO is there to see whether this plant is suitable or that is not suitable.  That is its role. But when there is the economic aspect that we have got to research into so that is why we are looking at research or having research as part of the activity.  

Private buyers are involved and again they are the same people who are roasters, etc., as pointed by hon. Kanyomozi.  We were recently aware of all the activities that are going on in this industry.  We are aware of the particular company that he wanted to mention which some company that had been mentioned in Uganda Confidential, but to guard against all the malpractice, that is why we have slow prices.  We follow up, and we ensure that coffee is surrendered at the right time on the market, it is tendered so that this particular company which is again involved with roasters does not take advantage, does not take for us a ride - though they can store coffee and only offer that coffee when the prices are in their favour while we have been following on the flow of coffee and ensure that they tender all the coffee or make all the coffee available at the right time.  

Regarding quality control, which the hon. Member said, if this is properly answered, he will support the amendments - quality control continues to be the responsibility of UCDA.  UCDA took over all the manpower and all the facilities of CMB to ensure that they follow quality control and in fact quality control now is much more strict than it has ever been before, because here is a body which is totally independent.  While CMB Ltd. used to be in the trade itself, they could possibly overlook the quality of their own coffee within their own set up but here is a body which is extremely independent and it looks at coffee whether from CMB Ltd. or from any private export and that monitoring starts from the farm, moves to the processing level and that is the team from the UCDA and we also look at the quality even at the export level.  

On prices - issues relating to price as a conditionality (the controlling of prices as a conditionality of the World Bank)- I can only say here that so far it has not been a conditionality and we shall continue to operate the low prices so long these flow prices make sense.  If they do not make sense, we will obviously have to adopt another method because we are in Trade.  This is business and the commodity we are trading in is globally traded in.  We have to listen to what is going on in the New York market.  We have to listen to what is going on in London Market, etc.  In that respect, we have to come up with a price which is favourable to our country because we know for sure that for some time coffee will continue to be our main stay as far as foreign exchange earnings are concerned. 

Now, as to the issues raised by hon. Wanendeya.  One thing I wish to appeal to him, that we are in a stage right now, we are in a stage of amending a Statute, which is already in place.  This is an amendment Bill to an existing Statute.  We liberalised this industry three years ago.  So, if he had any objection that time, he would have raised those objections on liberalisation, but the entire world is for liberalisation.  Everybody is in for liberalisation.  Let us open our markets.  Let us open our doors to markets.  This is what is happening all over.  Now, for him to say today that Uganda should now go back three years back when we are now talking of a farmer getting 70 per cent of the costal production price, that is very unfair, because what we used to recover -(Interruption)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Please allow the Minister to finish.  

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Chairman, if he could allow me to make my point, then I can give him the floor to make his information.  I did mention in my statement earlier that unlikely in the past when the farmer was getting only 30 per cent of his costal production, now with liberalisation, the farmer gets 70 per cent and if he wants us to take the farmer back - I do not know whether his voters in his area will accept this situation but I can allow him to make his.  Now that he is happy, he will be prepared to support my Bill. 

Having said all that, I wish to appeal to the hon. Members to support the amendment so that we can have fuller liberalisation of the Coffee Industry.  Coffee Industry is still important to this country and if there are bottlenecks in the Coffee Industry, naturally our economy will be paralysed.  The people are beginning to appreciate what is taking place and if we carry out improvements - the kind of improvements that I mentioned in my amendments, then the coffee Industry will flourish.  With those, I beg to move and call for your support. (Applause) 

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Bill entitled ‘The Uganda Coffee Development Authority’ be read a Second Time. 

(Question put and agreed to).

(Bill read a Second Time).
  
(Clause 1, agreed to).

Clause 2

MR. WANENDEYA:  Under Clause 2, the Minister, Mr. Chairman, said that the monitoring of prices is going to remain but he at the same time, when he says that no contract for sale of coffee is concluded at low price below the flow.  I am very apprehensive about this in the sense that we are going to open -(Interruption)

MR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member, Wanendeya, moving an amendment or just opening a debate again in a Committee Stage?  If he is moving an amendment he is proposed it boldly and not debate without an amendment.  I thank you Sir.  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I was wondering what you were moving to.  Hon. Wanendeya, are you moving an amendment?

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, first of all, I must say this, that we are doing things in a manner whereby we got the Bill yesterday and the Bill dated, there was a first Bill dated January 7th.  Mr. Chairman, we then got the Bill of 25th February. Now, which one are we going to -(Interruption)

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of order.  Is the hon. Member in order having failed to read the Order Paper and note that we are debating using the amendment of 4th February 1994.  Is he in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Wanendeya is out of order.

(Clause 2, agreed to).

(Clause 3, agreed to).

Clause 4

MR. KASAJJA:  Mr. Chairman, clause 4 sub-Clause 2, though I did not have time to debate, I want to move an amendment, this Clause 4 sub-Section 2, which refers to the Chairman of the Board -(Interjection)- okay, I am saying I want to move an amendment to clause 4 sub-Section 2 and this refers to the Chairman of the Board.  Mr. Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, he is moving one on 2, when in fact I have an amendment on 1(b).

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are on 1.

MR. KASAJJA:  Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN:  We are on Clause 4 generally.  Okay, let us start with 4(i) sub-section 1.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, Clause 4 sub-Section 1(b), Mr. Chairman, I think the time this Bill was being written, there was a Ministry responsible for Cooperatives and Marketing.  And, I think subsequently, a Ministry of Trade and Industry was created.  I presume that the trade element of the Ministry of Trade and Industry took over the responsibility for Cooperatives and Marketing.  I think, therefore, it will be in order for us to amend -(Interjection)- let me finish to amend (b), by replacing the Ministry responsible for Cooperatives and marketing by the phrase ‘Ministry for Trade and Industry.’  

MR. SSENDAULA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, what we have here is a representative of the Ministry responsible for Cooperative and Marketing.  Now, our Ministry stands on three directorates, one directorate is Cooperatives and Marketing, so, we are still responsible for Cooperatives and Marketing.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived).

MR. KASAJJA:  Mr. Chairman, my amendment is on Clause 4, sub-section 2.  This refers to the Chairman of the Board.  In reference to the Bill that we passed, which is now a law about the Cotton Development Statute.  There was a suggestion to this effect that the Chairman should be appointed among the Members themselves, and this House itself stood up and said, because of the flow of authority in case of conflict, in case of reporting to say the law making body which is the NRC now.  The Chairman cannot come here and report to us.  

So, we should have at least the Minister responsible for Cooperatives appointing the Chairman, so that if there is any conflict say among the members of the Board, then the Minister can come in and solve that conflict.  In any case, the problem in Cooperatives and Marketing has been on the appointment of the Managing Director, it has not been so much on the Chairman of the authority.  So, I would request that Members I think accept my amendment that the Minister do appoint the Chairman of this Board -(Interjection)- No, but this one is the Chairman of the Board shall be appointed, the one which I have -(Interruption)- if that is the case, then this one is a wrong one, I wish to withdraw it.  I should get the correct Amendment.

MR. NTIMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to draw your attention and that of the House, again to Clause 4 sub-Clause 1(c), which talks about a representative of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Which Clause hon. Member?

MR. NTIMBA:  Clause 4, sub-clause 1(c).  It talks about a representative of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning.  Since we are not sure that we are going to have such a Ministry called Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning for ever, I would like to move an amendment that we rephrase that sub-paragraph (c), to read as ‘representative of the Ministry responsible for Finance and Economic Planning’ just as much as we have said so in Clause 5, on page 8 of the Act.

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Yes, hon. Minister do you have any objection?

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  I accept that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 4 as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 5, agreed to).

(Clause 6, agreed to).

(Clause 7, agreed to).

(Clause 8, agreed to).

(Clause 9, agreed to).

(Clause 10, agreed to).

THE TITLE

(The Title agreed to).

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The Council resumed).  

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered and approved a Bill entitled: ‘The Uganda Coffee Development Authority (Amendment) Bill, 1994’, with one amendment I beg to report.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Report adopted).

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA COFFEE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1994

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Uganda Coffee Development Authority (Amendment) Bill, 1994’, be read for the Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.


(Question put and agreed to).

(Bill Passed).

MOTION TO SUSPEND THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE NRC

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, in accordance with Rule 55 sub-Rule (i) of the interim Rules of Procedure of the National Resistance Council of Uganda, I beg to move that I be permitted to proceed to the Second Reading of the Bill entitled: ‘The Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill 1994’, be read for the Second Time.  

The Bill is short, and it was circulated sometime to the Members and I am sure they are acquainted with the Amendment because there is only one amendment, and I wish to mention as I did timing of the Board presentation of several credits Government has negotiated with various donor agencies including the World Bank.  The Amendment Bill refers to an Amendment that was effected on the Cotton Development Bill of 1993 when it was being debated; and, this unfortunately rendered the Bill to be very difficult to implement.  

The Amendment we are referring to is related to the power given to the Minister with the approval of the cabinet by Statutory Instrument to acquire any ginnery in national interest subject to appropriate compensation or which ginnery would then be sold to another private sector.  Now, that in itself seemed to be watering down liberalisation of the Cotton Industry naturally we feel that that Clause should be removed for the smooth flow of the Cotton Industry.  For those reasons, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that I be permitted to proceed to the Second Reading of the Bill.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE COTTON DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1994

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Cotton Development Bill, 1994’, be read for the Second Time.  When the august House debated the Cotton Development Organisation Bill, 1993, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Trade and after the approval of the Cabinet by Statutory Instrument, to acquire any ginnery in the National interest subject to appropriate compensation which ginnery will then be sold to another operator.  

The Sectoral Committee explained, because the Amendment was being moved on behalf of the Sectoral Committee, so the Sectoral Committee explained the objective of this amendment, which was to facilitate the transfer of ginneries into the hands of credit operators with the over all purpose bottlenecks in the marketing of cotton.  I accepted the amendment because at the time that seemed to be an appropriate strategy for bringing about comprehensive liberalisation in the marketing and processing of cotton bearing in mind the that, cooperative unions enjoy a 100% of the ginning capacity in the country.  

It will be recalled that in a statement I made in this august House on 4th March 1993.  I deplored the refusal of some cotton unions to lease excess ginning capacity to the private sector that was kin play a meaningful role in the marketing of cotton.  I am glad to report that there has been a distinct change of attitude among cotton unions with regard to availing access ginning capacity to the private sector.  For example, Lango Co-operative Union has advertised in the papers offering its ginneries for leasing or joint venture arrangements.  It thus joins Masaba, Busoga, North Bukedi and Teso Co-operative Unions that have either sold or leased some of their ginneries to the private sector.

Secondly, prospective investors in the cotton industry have expressed concern over the power given to the Minister to compulsorily acquire ginneries as that Clause No. 5 does read, ‘It does not separate the ginneries to be compulsorily acquired that they are only for the Co-operatives’.  So, it leaves the whole door open that even in future even a private investor’s ginnery could be compulsorily acquired by the Government.  

It is, therefore, necessary that if we have to effectively liberalise the Cotton Industry that, that Clause that is in Clause 22, that is sub-Clause 5, be removed.  I hope and I am very, very positive that the hon. Members do appreciate that initially when the move to accommodate this Clause was made, it was made in good faith. It is not a question of wasting time but now we found that it is no longer relevant because it was initially targeted at getting the ginning capacity from the co-operative who are more less rejected to assess or to access the ginning capacity to those who wanted it.  But now we have found that the Co-operative Movement is very, very prepared to play the ball and we are certainly reciprocating this by amending, that is by entirely removing that Clause where the Minister would compulsorily acquire the ginning capacity.  

I feel that you will support me, because this is a one-paragraph amendment to have this removed and it is in the favour of the Co-operatives as it in the favour of all investors in the Cotton Industry.  Otherwise, if we do not remove it prospective investors in the Cotton Industry are a bit scared, they feel if they set up ginneries at one time Government could demand using this section of the law to compulsory acquire their facilities.  I pray for your support so that we can get this Amendment through, as fast as we can manage.  I beg to move.

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question that the Bill entitled: ‘The Cotton Development (Amendment) Statute 1994’, be read a Second Time, and I invite Members’ contributions.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to support the Minister who has moved this amendment only because he has been asked to do so by our partners, the IMF and World Bank.  The reason I say that I am supporting him, is that it seems that we have no option but to go along with the request of our partners in our economic development.  

This being the case, I have two points to make, which I think are pertinent to our future legislation.  I would suggest that in future where we are enacting laws that the IMF and the World Bank and any other partners, are interested to be in, we should perhaps show them the Draft Bill, so that we negotiate with them on those Clauses which they do not particularly like, so that when the Minister comes here we incorporate them in the law, so that we are not seen by the whole world that every time we make a law and IMF thought we have made a bad law we come here and enact another one again.  I think it is much better that we negotiate behind the scenes and we accept what they require and then enact a law which they accept rather than come here with series of amendments.  I think that is proper propriety in as far as the World politics is concerned.  That is one request I have had.  

Secondly, in accepting this amendment, I am aware that our constitution does grant the government of Uganda and its successors, what is known as the right of eminent domain.  In other words, the right of any Government to take over private property in public compensation is granted.  Therefore, it is really unfair for our partners to insist that even that Constitutional propriety which is granted to the Government should be affected in the manner.  

After all, I think that we should try the NRM Government not to act nilly-willy; it is a responsible Government and I am sure it would not have taken advantage of this proposal.  But a need may arise or indeed could have arisen where it is in the public interest to take private property provided those affected are compensated.  I, therefore, support this movement in the sense that it is related to the agreement we have made with the IMF and it is only limited to cotton and would affect the Constitutional provision which empower the Government to take over property in the public interest.  I beg to support.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to support the Amendment as proposed by hon. Minister but I wish also to concur totally with hon. Prof. Kanyeihamba when he says that we should legislate not because our partners who are outside our area is interested in it.  I have always stood up here, and my main complaint has always been legislating upon a law in January and then amending it in December, but this time we have brought it to April.  That shows how shallow we are in our area sometime but I am glad also that, this particular amendment that we are being asked to delete was an after thought.  In the Bill that created its statute, it was not actually put there.  

So, I think while we are doing this, in the interest of World Bank or IMF, I think there is no smoke without fire.  Maybe, this particular thing should appear to the Minister that maybe the World Bank has sensed corruption, because if you are acquiring compulsory in the public interest and then pushing it to another private operator, that means that may be you are expecting in between you will have cited a kick back of some percentage.  So, I think while this particular area should not have taken us all that long, but it also serves to remind us that in all our undertakings, we should take into consideration the repercussions that these other outside people may look into our systems.  I hope this serves to help us adhere to the leadership code of conduct.  With this, I beg to give him a go ahead.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the Minister’s proposed Amendment, and also add a voice of caution in fact in private I have already told him my views on this, and I was happy that hon. Kanyeihamba and the Reverend have echoed my fears.  This is obviously an embarrassment to the Government and to us that we pass a Bill, and when they go to negotiate they say who is going to appoint the Managing Director?  The Minister says, myself.  They say no, no go back and ask Parliament to say the Board will appoint the Managing director, and then he comes here.  Things we said here, things they refused to listen to, and when we are saying these things, it was as if it was a private business we were transacting, no.  We were serious, we were asking that we want to have our situation rectified; we want this system to be above corruption, and above the Board.  Now, we give them a deal, they go to negotiate, they come back who is embarrassed?  It is we, but more particularly, the Vote of no confidence they have; it is a sign that in future, please this is an appeal, our Ministers should listen to some of the things we say.  When you get the Hansard and you read these points were pointed out by all of us in the back-benches, but they were ignored -(Interruption)

MR. SIBO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, with your permission, I would like to inform the hon. Member speaking that as a matter of fact, I understand that this very provision was advised against by the technocrats before it came to this House, and indeed this House also on this Floor of the House, many Members spoke against this provision, and the Minister himself said that he wanted it, it was necessary in the interest of the country and this is the embarrassment we have landed ourselves into.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you very much hon. Sibo for that additional information, and it is a pity that the Minister is not the one here to move these Amendments, and now the Deputy Minister is here facing us; he should have been the one here to get the embarrassment.  Mr. Chairman, I hope this is not - because this is very expensive in the nation with a taxpayer; look, we have been summoned -(Interruption)

MR. NASASIRA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for my brother hon. Karuhanga to continue denying what he passed here in Parliament, because this Statute, it was passed by this Parliament, whether individual Members had their views about this clause and the Minister convinced Parliament and that at Committee Stage that Clause was put to vote and passed, I do no think he should now try to labour everything on the Minister.  Is he in order to continue labouring on this point, when this is collective responsibility of Parliaments?

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Member is lamenting, but I think he is going on - he is perfectly in order, continue.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I pray for the longevity for the Chairman -(Laughter)- in the Chair.  I think that the hon. Minister is also doing a good job in defending, this collective responsibility somebody had to say this, otherwise what would the Ministers be saying -(Laughter)- but the fact is a fact, and we were at Committee Stage, we raised these issues, we were told this is - you know, done already in World Bank - what - lies.  

Now, let me not labour this point any further, I think that the issue of which hon. Kanyeihamba raised of eminent domain, it does not really come in this, we do not have to be specific, anytime we want to apply ginnery the Constitution will give us power to do that, but let us remove these things and they get on.  I support the Amendment.
     
MR. MAYANJA MOHAMMED (Pallisa County, Pallisa):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I rise to support the Bill.  I would like to testify that right now, businessmen, cooperators and farmers in Uganda have awakened to the realities of business demands.  As a matter of fact, I am a cotton ginner and even before the Minister sensitized the cooperative unions to let their facilities to the private buyers, these people were cooperating with us and they were giving us their facilities.  So, it did not require the force of law to compel these people to lease their ginneries to the private buyers.  Monac is benefiting from facilities of Lango Cooperative Union, four private buyers are benefiting from facilities of North Bukedi, a certain Asian is ginning cotton in - using Busoga Cooperative Union facilities and in other areas, other unions are doing the same thing.  

Having said that, I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Cooperatives and Marketing and Trade and Industry for that matter to enforce or to guarantee the implementation of the liberalisation Bill that we passed sometime early this year.  Whereas we passed that Bill right now there has not been much done to cause liberalisation of the crop, and to ensure that there is no abuse of the policy of liberalisation.  Because as we speak, farmers are supposed to be planting cotton right now, but the seeds available to the farmers are not adequate.  

In 1992, we in Pallisa planted about 1,000 tonnes of cottonseed, but as we speak, farmers are supposed to be planting cotton right now, but seeds available to farmers are not adequate.  And in 1992, we planted about 1,000 tons of cotton seed, but as we speak now, the Ministry has allocated us only 160 tonnes from 1,000 to 160. Now if the Liberalisation Bill was supposed to promote increased cotton production, I do not know how practicable this will be, given the meagre amounts of seed available to the nation.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor that if we liberalise and privatise the production of cotton, how are we going to integrate the system of whereby the Government gets the seed and give it to the private sector for the private sector to grow cotton and not to have system of how the private sector itself, growing cotton and extracting the seed and growing it again.  How are we going to integrate this liberalisation where we are going to have private sector being a dependent variable on Government.

MR. MAYANJA MOHAMMED:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The parent Ministry, that is there are about three responsible Ministries and Organisations that is the Ministry of Trade -(Interruption)

MR. SIBO:  Point of order.  Is hon. Karuhanga in order to read Newspapers in this House?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is not in order.

MR. MAYANJA MOHAMMED:  Mr. Chairman, having passed the Liberalisation Bill, Government through its parent Ministries, that is the Ministry of Agriculture which is responsible for production, the Agricultural Secretariat of Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Trade and Commerce and also using the Legal Provision contained in the Cotton Development Statute, Clause II, are supposed to integrate and to ensure the availability of dressed cotton seeds for the farmer.  The implementation is like this, once a private cotton buyer has been licensed, he gins the cotton and surrenders the cottonseeds that are his property by the way, for the purchase by the Bank of Uganda, Agricultural Secretariat, okay?  Bank of Uganda in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Trade and Industry, but unfortunately, this coordination has been lacking, there has been no enforcement at all; private buyers have been left to gin cotton and later on crush the seeds to get oil, which is very, very dangerous, okay, it is okay, because we get oil, but at least, we should reserve something for the farmers to plant.  

Consequently, I would like to appeal to the Ministry as a matter of agency to think of importing some cotton seeds from Tanzania, there are cottonseeds in Tanzania, so that by the time the Western Region goes into cotton planting, that is around May, July we have enough cotton seeds in the country.

Lastly, I would like to make this observation, there is no way we can improve cotton production in Uganda and then expects this cotton to be merely exported in its row form as lint.  The proceeds from such an enterprise will not be adequate for developing country like Uganda.  First of all, we have World Cotton producers and we are no longer created as world producers of cotton.  We have countries like China and other countries in Eastern Asia who are just pouring a lot of cotton on the world market and if we are to export cotton in its raw farm, we shall not be able to compete favourably with that cotton which is produced with the least costs of production.  

The only solution to our cotton dilemma in Uganda is to capitalise further the textile industries.  I would like to appeal to the Ministry and to Government as such to think of ways of capitalising and improving the management in our textile industries that are the primary users of the cotton produced in Uganda.  It is only by doing that the farmer will be able to be paid something adequate in order to motivate him to grow more cotton.  With those few observations, Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much.  

THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Chairman, I just want to make two points.  The first one relates to the sovereignty of Uganda, the supremacy of this Parliament in legislation.  An impression may have been created that the hon. Minister here is seeking this amendment to the Act because the World Bank demands it.  I want to say that this Government and I hope any other Uganda Government will never succumb to being self-forced into legislating on anything at all by a body outside.  

This sort of amendment is in our interest, because if we have a harmer hanging over the head of an investor, potential investor that anytime the Government - the Minister may think it - he or she is going to take the ginnery from that investor to pass it to the private investor, naturally the potential investor is like to say no, to Uganda, I am not going to invest there, so it is our interest to ensure that investments go in private sector in this particular case, and if it is not in our interest, therefore, we cannot as a Government come here and say, we are going to pass this amendment.  

And on the last point made by hon. Member here, about capitalizing the textiles industries, already you may have noticed, we have called for such capitalization, we have called for people to invest in them and already ten have been called for, they have been placed with us, we shall soon see how best we go about, but we hope that Ugandans in particular will also come forward and take shares in this industry.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. LATIGO OLAL (Kyoga County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It was about this time on the 14th of January 1994, when this Amendment was passed.  I talked on two sections here, which I do not like, and by way of supporting this Amendment, I am appealing to the hon. Members who come from the Cotton growing areas, that we were very few people here and we were harassed. I made an Amendment seeking to establish in presentation of Members of the cotton growing regions, it was rejected, and I am saying this Amendment is half way, I would like wee the Members of the cotton growing areas to sit down and seek another amendment on Section 8 on the Board.  Because you cannot have an academician representing a producer in the way this Ministry represents - this Ministry represents - we got tired of it.  

When we are talking about Bukedi, we are talking about Busoga, we are talking about Luwero, we are talking about Kasese, Lango, Acholi, West Nile, representation and those are the producers, but we are saying Ministry, Ministry!  So, this one hon. Deputy Minister, I think you will amend this next time.  For the Amendment at stake, when I also opposed it, because, when we talked to the Minister of Cooperatives, sometime before this Bill came in, in Lango, when he met the Lango Cooperative Primary Societies, it became apparent that the Minister always talked about acquiring ginneries, acquiring ginneries!

So we thought he had intrinsic ideas of trying to buy all the ginneries that were in Lango, and I think this was appropriate.  I think this was more or less correct, the attitude we thought in him was correct, because this has become wrong nationally and even internationally.  If you want to liberalise then again you want to nationalise, this amendment that was brought and that was passed was nationalisation of ginneries, it was not liberalisation, and we told him and he refused!  So, next time, I do not want to be-labour on what hon. Members have said as being ashamed of being in rather shortsighted in the way of running a Ministry, but I think next time when we talk about liberalisation. liberalisation is ought to be in the interest of the nation, not nationalisation against the interest of the nation that appeared here.  I support the amendment and I ask for more amendment, Sir.  Mr. Chairman, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I wish to go on record to thank the hon. Members who have contributed during the debate on this Amendment.  I have already been more or less assisted by the hon. Minister for Finance in answering partly what was raised by hon. Kanyeihamba, but I wish, I would add my voice on the issue of sovereignty this country.  

I think the Chairman and President of this nation did mention at the opening of this session, this issue of the World Bank and so on, that we had pressure from the World Bank etc, but we have also got to be considering that from the contributions which have been made by hon. Members, it is obvious that this particular part of law was not very popular even with the Members of Parliament.  

So notwithstanding, you know, the pressure from the World Bank, there was also the natural dislike of the entire Clause to be accommodated in our law.  It would one, it would scare would be investors, two, it had a very different message that it carried to the people the ginneries, so it is just that, and in that respect, I still call for your support so that we can get it over and get it out of our Statute.  

Regarding and I will move first, the seeds in Pallisa particularly, and seeds in general, we are in the know of what type of cotton it has to plant at the same using the offices of the Ministry of Agriculture, we are also aware of the quantities of seeds to be dispatched or distributed in each cotton growing district.  I cannot say outright that the figure that given by the hon. Member of the seeds requirement in his district was not totally correct but I must say the estimate that has been passed on to us by the Minister of Agriculture is 250 metric tonnes and not 1,000 metric tonnes.  

So, I do not have to go on checking him and saying he is wrong here or what but I want to assure him along with the other hon. Members from the cotton growing districts that we are very much aware of the needs of seeds and we can assure you here that we have made provisions for these seeds.  There is no need for us to go to Tanzania to buy seeds.  I must mention here that in the past seeds used to be distributed and a lot used to go to West.  Whenever you heard these dumped at the Gombolola Headquarters only few people turned up to pick up these seeds.  We hope this anomaly will be corrected when we liberalise fully the industry because people will start feeling the cost of seeds and ensure that they are used properly.  

So, the requirements we know and we are making provisions that seeds are available during the planting time.  We know most places they are staring now - they have started now and others will gradually be coming on but we shall give them seeds.

Going to the issue relating to the usage of cotton; we certainly agree that the mere export lint is not enough for this nation.  We know we are competing with a lot of people and we are very keen to get investors to get involved in the textile industry so that they can effectively use cotton.  We can add value to out cotton.  We are looking into cotton yarn as we are looking into textiles because most of what we are using now is all imported and yet we produce cotton in this country.  We are looking at people who are keen to take over textile mills that are in existence in the country.

Finally, hon. Latigo talked about Clause to be talking of nationalisation.  I think this issue has been effectively covered and all that we need is good working relations between the hon. Members and the Ministry - we call for this if we have to effectively promote cotton.  Now that we are moving to get this Amendment made, we are very sure that we shall get this Corporation. If there is need to amend this law at a later stage, this is all open.  The country is very democratic, hon. Members are also free if they feel there is a need for an amendment to bring it in the House as private members.  With those remarks, I wish to appeal to support from hon. Members to get this amendment approved.  Thank you.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Bill read a Second Time). 

  
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE COTTON DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1994

(The Ag. Chairman, Mr. Ekemu, in the Chair).

(Clause 1, agreed to).

(Clause 2, agreed to).

TITLE

(The Title agreed to).

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).


BILLS
REPORT STAGE

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled ‘The Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill, 1994’, and passed it without amendment.  I beg to report.


MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move 

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill, 1994’, be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Bill read a Third Time and passed)..

ADJOURNMENT

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members on that note, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.30 p.m. when you will come to debate the Motion a copy of which have now been circulated to the hon. Members.

(The Council rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 12th April, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

