Wednesday, 7 April 2010

Parliament met at 2.29 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. Once again I want to appeal to you to give time to parliamentary work. As I indicated to you, we should have prorogued Parliament by the end of this month but because of urgent business on our table, we may have to proceed up to mid May but it might be useless to extend the time if Members are not in the House. So, I appeal to you that for this period, you give us your time and then later you can go to your constituencies for the known reasons. 

I have received a letter from Buyende District Local Government and it is addressed to me. It is an appreciation and it reads as follows:

“On my own behalf and that of the entire community of Budiope, we wish to express our sincere gratitude to you, Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker and to all hon. Members of the House for granting Buyende a district status.

This gesture showed us that the entire House was with our late Member of Parliament, hon. Henry Balikowa, in his drive towards acquiring a district status for Budiope County. The unanimous vote by all Members of Parliament to create Buyende District made our dreams come true.

May the Good Lord continue to give you guidance and wisdom to steer the House.

Yours faithfully, Kanaku Michael, Interim District Chairperson, Buyende District.” (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

(I) STATEMENT ON MEDIA REPORTS ON JET FIGHTERS

2.33
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The copies of the statement I am going to make should be here any time. One of the boys helping us has gone to check for them but it is a brief statement. So, I request that I move on as you wait for the copies. I think they brought some copies for the Speaker and the Prime Minister. 

I take the Floor to respond to reports in the Russia and Uganda press to the effect that Uganda had committed future petroleum supplies in exchange for jet fighters.

In this statement, I reproduce the story in the Voice of Russia so that hon. Members of Parliament see for themselves the story in black and white rather than going by the twisted reporting in the local press. And I quote a relevant section in the Voice of Russia: “Rosoboronexport has concluded a deal on supplying 16 Sukhoi SU-30 MK1 Jet Fighters to Algeria. According to a Moscow military-diplomatic source, another agreement is planned to be signed with Uganda, which is going to buy six Russian SU-30 MK2 Fighters.

The two deals cost accounts for US $1.2 billion. Rosoboronexport and Algeria agreed on the contract back in 2006. Since Uganda is short of real money to pay for the planes, Russian LUKOIL is negotiating its potential participation in developing large oil fields in Uganda, implying a possible swapping.”

Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I would like to assure you that there has not been and there will not be such negotiation, that is, negotiation to swap oil fields for military supplies. Government has clearly stated that oil money, once obtained, will be used strategically and in a transparent manner. There is no way that the NRM Government could commit in advance the petroleum national resource in the manner described by the Russian media.

Given the seriousness of the story, the Government has contacted the Russian authorities demanding retraction of the falsehood in their press.

Let me also take this opportunity to state again and inform Parliament that Uganda purchases military equipment from several countries under classified arrangements, as is normal with security matters all over the world.

In the case of Uganda, however, classified purchases are regularly audited by the Auditor-General to ensure appropriate accountability. This is also known by our Public Accounts Committee.

In concluding this brief statement, therefore, I requested for this opportunity so that the people of Uganda are disabused of the press’ misleading reporting. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for the statement. 

2.38
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this very timely statement. Just taking the impression from the local press, the country can really be put on panic because as you all know, honourable colleagues, the issues of oil in the country have constituted a common debate and for a story like this one to come out in the papers, bearing in mind the timing, it would have been definitely of great concern to all of us if the minister had not, in a very timely manner, come up to reassure the honourable colleagues and the House. 

In many African countries where oil is in the process of being either explored or produced, politics has been one of those issues that usually come into jeopardy once issues of this kind come into light. I am happy that the minister through this statement is really assuring us and the country at large that there is no such a deal and that there is no intention to pursue any sort of swapping. Mr Speaker, it is our prayer that should our oil begin to flow, this is not one of the priority areas where we would imagine that the oil money should be funding. 

So, I really rise to thank the minister very much for this response and the reassurance he has given to the country. Thank you.

2.40
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to that of my colleague to thank the hon. Minister. He is always timely; whenever there is such a thing the minister comes to clarify. 

However, other than just making those people retract that statement, we need to know their motives. The minister said he has contacted the Russian authorities so that they retract but we need to know their motives. I believe it did not just come out from the air. What could have been their motive? Hon. Minister, I think you need to go deeper than that. 

My colleague has just said that with oil we need to be very clear because even here in the House, we are not very clear on this issue. So, I urge the relevant ministry to always update this House and the citizens so that we do not get these misgivings. Thank you.

2.41
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy to hear from the hon. Minister of Defence trying to allay our fears about the jets swapping with our oil and he has stated that it has not been and it will never be so. 

But with the history of newspapers in Uganda and the history of the NRM Government, it is very clear that when such phenomena occur, it is denied but in the long run it matures and found to be true. Now, if today the honourable minister is assuring this country that they do not intend to buy jets and yet we have been talking about our military capability – to improve it – can we improve it without jets? Because Uganda is known for protecting beyond its borders; beyond the territorial integrity of its people, so may the minister really clarify; what steps will be taken with regard to this Russian newspaper and the one in Uganda for allegedly stating that we intend to do that? And before you came out with this statement, did you consult the newspapers? And what did you learn from these newspapers as to how they got the information? 

As shadow minister of defence and security, I would not mind if you told us the truth and if we have the ability to purchase the jets – and you come and deny on the Floor and then later we realise that jets have been bought! We want to move on the basis of the truth; we do not want to be led by lies and this is a serious problem with the current administration. [Hon. Member: “Are you sure?”] I am sure and I even have evidence so do not worry. This is very important –(Interruption)

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of order. Is it in order for the honourable member to say the present administration is based on lies? Can he substantiate that? 

THE SPEAKER: Did you say the present administration is based on lies?
 
MR ANGIRO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, you remember when there was war in Rwanda, Uganda denied that they were assisting Rwandese to go back. It was later claimed that we were there to take them back; and who did not hear this statement? And even in the Democratic Republic of Congo –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you speculating or you have facts that you can bring out? This statement is about a certain issue that cropped up. Do you have the facts to counter this? 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Even with regard to the report I was giving, we read about them in the papers and this too has come from the papers. So, I am trying to say that let it be honest; that this statement will later on not be contradicted by us buying jets from Russia using this method, which has been alleged in the papers. Those are my observations.

As I stated, we wanted assurance, now that we have been told that nothing of this nature will take place. Thank you.

2.47
MR MICHAEL NYEKO (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for boldly coming out to make this statement because when some of us read about the intended purchase of these planes, some of us got disturbed.

I take the minister’s statement as he has given it but I find a contradiction in the statement which was given by Kulayigye, the Army Spokesperson. He said that if Government can get money, they will go ahead with the purchase of these planes. It is in today’s papers. 

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because by all standards, I do not think the priority of Uganda now is to buy fighter planes. Some years back - yes, because there was war but now we expect the expenditure of the Ministry of Defence to go down and not to be increased with purchases of planes, which are actually rarely used in wars. The planes that were purchased in 2002 to fight the war in Northern Uganda, I do not think that they were even used more than ten times. Most of the time, it were the foot-patrol soldiers who continued to pursue the rebels to the end.

I would expect, instead of the Ministry of Defence trying to acquire these sophisticated weapons, to improve the welfare of soldiers. Instead of spending money on the purchase of these planes can we have the welfare of our soldiers, who have over the years been suffering in the bushes of Northern Uganda, improved? That should be the priority.

This amount of money, Shs 654 billion, if it were spent we would have taken on Government very seriously; we would have demanded the resignation of the President because it would have been a total wastage –(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to seek clarification from the Member holding the Floor, whether he is in agreement with this report or not. Otherwise, the basis upon which we are debating is so misplaced. It is as if you have concrete evidence that this money is going to be spent; that Government has a policy to purchase these planes and that everything is already concluded or even that the cheque is already released. I do not understand that, my friend, Michael, kindly help me.

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, people have different levels of understanding. (Laughter) I gave a background that much as the hon. Minister gave us a good statement, the Army Spokesman; Lt Col Kulayigye said that in case money is availed, they are going to buy the planes. It is in the newspapers and that is why I am saying that those would be highly misplaced purchases.

Finally, whether something was being purchased or not, given the fact that currently the army is engaged in massive recruitment countrywide, can the Minister of Defence help us understand whether there is some threat of war somewhere that Government has envisaged? Is there something of that kind? Thank you so much.

2.52
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his response. I, however, want to make these few observations. 

Like my colleague has just mentioned, we know that the Spokesperson of the UPDF, Lt Col Kulayigye, made a statement and the minister has now delivered this statement to us. We are now wondering was there such a planned transaction?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you were present when this statement was being made. If you look at its back, the second paragraph reads: “Let me once again take this opportunity to inform Parliament that Uganda purchases military equipment from several countries under classified arrangement as is normal with security matters all over the world.” He is not saying they cannot buy fighter planes. The statement only came in respect of using the oil money to purchase the planes. That is what he is talking about. 

And I would like to inform you that at one time there was no auditing of classified expenditures; but as of now, there is an arrangement that was agreed on of auditing classified expenditures. I would like to inform you that about two weeks ago, the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee completed his analysis of this audit, which does not go to all Members of that committee; it is only done by the chairman and hon. Mafabi knows that. The Speaker also knows this is being done.

MR EKEMU: Mr Speaker, I have taken your message, but what I am saying is that the minister’s statement should have been in tandem with that of Lt Col Kulayigye because which statement is the country going to take? There is no smoke without fire. 

Also, if this was a planned purchase, as brought out by the Russian media, my concern is about the amount of money that usually goes into these kinds of purchases. These are purchases that require huge resources, which are resources of the taxpayers of this country and I thought that is what we are looking at. The statement is just an eye-opener to what could be behind the scenes.

Whether the minister is coming out to uprightly deny - in fact this is what this statement is about – my concern is that, from the statement, we are committing in advance, as you have seen here, our national resources in a manner that was described by that media –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you very much, hon. Ekemu. The information I want to give is that parliaments in more civilised settings are expected to watch over their governments on particularly the military expenditure. I will give an example. Under the SADC arrangement, there is a protocol that enjoins all the parliaments under SADC to ensure their governments are constantly watched over so that they do not overshoot on military expenditure and also that they do not engage in arms threats that can cause problems in the Great Lakes and the SADC regions. 

What we are doing here, whether the minister wanted to buy or not buy, is to send caution to our Government that we are not interested in you spending lots of money as if there is an arms threat in the Great Lakes Region or as if Uganda is this powerful country whose priorities are MIGs and jet fighters, when Uganda’s children cannot go to school. That is the information I had to give.

MR EKEMU: Thank you for that information. So, hon. Minister, your statement as it is, is simply bringing out those other issues that I think are of concern to the people of this country. I would like to point out that what you call classified expenditure usually goes with colossal sums of money, which is our taxpayers’ money. And we see that here is another agreement that is planned to be signed. I thought you should have come out more clearly because in this House, we have known of agreements related to oil that have never been brought here, despite our demand to know about them. So, those kinds of agreements usually hide taxpayers’ money. 

My point is that much as you have brought this statement, there is a lot that is still under the carpet.

3.00
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe that the Voice of Russia is the official mouthpiece of the Government of the Russian Federation. I also know that the Government of Russia is represented in Uganda by the Russian Embassy.

I would, therefore, like to know from the minister whether our Government protested to the Russian Ambassador in Uganda. And if they did, what were the issues that entailed the discussions between the Government of Uganda and the Ambassador of Russia in this country?

I would also like to know from the minister whether – rather, instead of our Government contacting the Russian Government to retract this statement, it has also asked the Russian Government to apologise for this falsehood aired by the Russian media. This is very important because as you can see, the reactions that are coming out as a result of a story that our local media picked from the Russian media house are creating a lot of anxiety.

My view is that the Russian Government should not only be asked to retract the statement, but to also apologise, if it is true that what Voice of Russia aired is not the true story between the Government of Uganda and that of Russia –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much. The information I would like to give is that probably you may be interested in knowing the legal status of that Russian radio station – I mean Voice of Russia - whether it is a Government property or a private limited liability. Not until we have established its legal status can we collectively start asking the Russian Government to apologise. Otherwise, its ownership could be like that of KFM, which if it made an outrageous statement, you would not push Government of Uganda to apologise on its behalf. We need additional information on the legal status of the Voice of Russia from the minister. Thank you.

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I have no objection to Government getting more weapons in defence of our country. I thank you.

3.04
MR JACK WAMANGA (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is very rare that the Russian press publishes something on Africa and in particular, on Uganda. I spent a number of years in Russia, but never did I see any article on Uganda. Now that the press in Russia has come up with some story on Uganda, then there must be something –(Laughter)– because the issue of oil is very touchy to this country.

There has been a lot of outcry concerning the oil deals. If the government had come up openly to let the people of Uganda know more about this oil, there would not be a lot of talk about this article.

According to the statement made by Lt Col Kulayigye, there is something about old planes going for service and not buying new ones. I expected the minister possibly to say something about that. But also the connection between Algeria and Uganda leaves a lot of questions. Therefore, there must be something behind this article. 

Of course the Government of Uganda asking the Russian Federation to retract this statement – of course this is a communist country and the Government of Russia will bark at the radio station. The story will be retracted, but as I said earlier, there must be something behind that story. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.06
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for delivering a formal response, because what we have been reading and hearing from the media including what the Army spokesman and other people said; could not be taken as formal communication. I thank him for finally coming on the Floor of Parliament to announce the position of Government on this issue.

If I understood this statement very well, it is about denying the linkage between negotiating away oil for weapons. But, Mr Minister, I only have one concern; that every country has its own threat analysis. There are very many experts who can analyse any threats that may be affecting a country like Uganda. It will be on the basis of that analysis that a responsive government will come out to say it thinks the defence capability of the country needs to be taken to another level.

As we speak, I don’t think Uganda is in a very dangerous and threatening position that requires sophistication of the air and I would really like to ask the minister to let Ugandans know if there is any threat and where those threats are coming from. Is it over the Nile? Is it from our neighbours? Is it from the islands? Is it an arms race? What is it? 

On top of that, we are moving towards the East African Community; we are signing agreements and defence pacts so that we can do our work together as a region. So, where is this threat coming from? 

Before I support anything - because these are public funds and we all pay taxes - I only wish that hon. Maj. Guma could also be formal enough in this matter. He is a trained military officer and if he is responding on any matter, he should be formal enough to get the guts and stand up and raise the issue; but not just mumbling. (Laughter)

We are all concerned about the way money is spent, but we are also concerned about our own security. If there is any unique situation that requires Uganda to acquire this kind of sophistication of the air, please let us know so that we can support you. I thank you. 

3.09
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Looking at this statement, there are two issues that arise. One; is whether Uganda is in the process of purchasing six Russian SU-30-MK-2 fighters. Two; is whether in that process of purchase, it intends to swap its oil fields for these six fighter planes. Those are the two issues from this statement and from what has been said in the press. 

When you look at the statement critically, one issue is denied - that is the swapping - but the purchase actually is not denied. And further looking at this statement, from the paragraph that says, “…Uganda takes the opportunity to inform Parliament that they purchase this military equipment from several countries under the classified arrangement as is normal with security matters all over the world.” 

The world has moved on and anybody who thinks that a third world country like Uganda will purchase any equipment and is not known is lying to himself. Just go to the Internet; you will just get all this equipment that some of these countries have. In fact, on this very microphone that I am standing, one colleague who used to sit in this very place who this day is just opposite me used to inform us and he used to tell us even the source. There is nothing classified about this, hon. Minister. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I am sure you also know the Member, like the whole House knows him. So, for some of these things, we just lie to ourselves. What is most important is for us as Parliament and as the organ of state that is charged with policy matters of this country, to actually know some of these things. 

I would propose - and I heard the Speaker say that there is some arrangement; really, that makes us very uncomfortable if there is some arrangement that is not known to our Rules of Procedure. What we need to know is that under our Rules of Procedure, we should have it entrenched that matters considered classified are being considered by this committee under our Rules of Procedure. It is not just an arrangement, because when you look at the Constitution, it only provides for classified accounts being audited by the Auditor-General, and when it comes to us, we need to provide and entrench it in our Rules of Procedure. 

In fact, when you look at other state legislatures that are a little bit more developed than us, they have already provided for those committees; either senate committees or parliamentary committees, which are charged with the responsibility of auditing the classified expenditures. So, my prayer today is that we need, under our Rules of Procedure, to clearly have a committee or a sub-committee that will look at this classified expenditure. What we do not want is to have some ad hoc arrangement. 

On the first –(Interjections)– you see, it is not a shouting match. Anybody can tell us – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, as I told you before, for many years classified expenditure was not being audited by the Auditor-General. There was, in the other Parliament, a meeting where it was agreed that classified expenditure should also be audited. The first such report was examined by the late Okullo Epak, and I remember during his burial, I had to mention it that he had pioneered this game and had produced a report. 

The next report, which we received after the audit, was handled by the chairperson of PAC, because the agreement was that the chairperson of PAC does it, and he has recently handed to me his work. Other members sitting on this committee are also from the Public Accounts Committee.

MR KATUNTU: I think there is some classified problem here – 

THE SPEAKER: They say when the curtains are drawn, you leave the stage. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that clarification, but really, we thought this arrangement should be entrenched under our rules. That has been my point and I don’t see any contradiction with what the Chair is saying. We need to have it entrenched in our rules and define it, and once we have put it in place, we shall have faith in what our committee entrenched in the rules is doing.

Lastly, yes we can go ahead and buy these jet fighters using oil money or not, but do we need this sort of fleet as a country? Some time back, the whole world was in some sort of arms race. Experience has taught us that it is useless for us as a world to go into this useless race.

It causes more instability for us as countries, instead of putting our resources to developing our economy; to enhance productivity and improve the livelihood of our people; we are instead involved in a stupid arms race. Countries are now wasting resources to dismantle their arms. 

The American Government is now coming up with another policy of dismantling their nuclear arsenal. They just signed a treaty the other day because they had been engaged in a race that now renders the world more insecure than secure.

Let us not have this cry of African countries - let us not become a victim of the oil curse. We should use resources for the betterment of our people and not to indulge ourselves in an arms race. We are going to make this region more insecure by having arms which we may never use.

THE SPEAKER: I think this should end this debate; we have spent over an hour which is against our rules.

3.22
MAJ. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): I think there is some misinformation and my colleagues need to be informed and educated. For a government or a state to purchase arms for defence of a country, it does not require that a security threat must first knock at the door. You do not have to first wait for the security threat to really gather storm and then you make the purchases. 

If there is some level of security threat; threats are categorised depending on the magnitude of the threat. And if there is some threat, a sensible government does not have to go on publicizing it in the media, but it has to prepare first. It takes sufficient preparation for the State to be in charge. If there is a threat, Members of Parliament will be informed at an appropriate time when your effort is required, not when some threat is still in its formative stage.

Hon. Katuntu is not right to say that developed societies are dismantling their arms; they are destroying obsolete technology. For example, we are also burning some of the rifles and you must have seen it on TV. 

You cannot have a state that is not defended by the necessary arsenal. The NRM Government was elected and if it does not cater for the welfare of its citizens, it will be elected out of power. Why are you worried? 

I request honourable members to agree with Government and if there are purchases, it is proper and fitting. They cannot be using the oil because it is still in the ground. Do you expect a sensible person to mortgage something that is in the ground? Those are rumours and hearsay.

3.33
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): I want to thank the minister for coming up so quickly to clarify on what was reported in the Russian media. I want Members of Parliament to remember that there have been some mistakes previously committed in the purchase of military equipment, and that culminated into what you said, hon. Speaker, the need for auditing of classified expenditure, which at times was being abused just because it was classified.

I also want to thank the minister for at least when this happened - abuse of classified expenditure - he was not the Minister of Defence. This is something new which is emerging in the Ministry of Defence, that when issues of this nature come up, then the authorities responsible come to the House to make an explanation. This is positive and it should be encouraged so that transparency in governance can increase.

We want to thank the honourable minister for doing this, but we also want to ask him to use his moderating effect when he is in Cabinet to prevail over his colleagues to ensure that all information about other sectors becomes available so that Members of Parliament can access it. 

One of the biggest challenges that we have is that even when we are talking about the oil, we have not received the information that we require. The other thing that surprises me is that somebody was questioning why Government is recruiting people into the Army. Members should know that even UPDF retires. There is continuous recruitment and retirement. So, as people retire, the Government must recruit more forces in order to occupy those positions that remain vacant. That is something that we should not even be questioning because we keep approving money for pension of UPDF and we approve it because UPDF is retiring.

The biggest challenge is that there has been a lot of buying and selling of shares in the oil sector. You find one company buying another, and you do not know the implications.
 
As Members of the Parliament of Uganda, if we went to our constituencies, or if one went to a media house to participate in a talk show, we do not know what to say. Nobody has even come up to explain why there is a fuel shortage and yet there is a fuel crisis in the country and the prices are escalating. 

These are challenges and we ask the Minister of Defence to use his goodwill, which he has used to bring this good information, to prevail over his colleagues in Cabinet so that information is provided to Members of Parliament to enable them defend Government positions with information. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Does the minister want to make some comments?

3.27
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you. I will be very brief. First, I thank colleagues for the response that has been made to the brief statement that I gave to the House. The objective of this statement as I stated, was to allay any fears in the country that oil was being exchanged for arms and I think that point is firmly made. I hope that when colleagues interact with the people they represent, they will pass on the same message.

Hon. Reagan Okumu has made a principled point, which I would like to refer to; that it is important that we constantly analyse. We should keep vigilant about possible threats that could face our country, and in doing so, when we discover that there is a problem, we should take appropriate action. 

But I would like to add the following points to what he has said; that the analysis of threats should be done at different points like in the Army, Intelligence, the ministry, at the level of the President and also in Parliament, because we have a committee responsible for foreign affairs and another responsible for security. These two should also constantly be vigilant so that together we can see what is going on and we protect our country. At the end of the day, the responsibility to ensure that there is protection of the country lies in the Commander–in-Chief with the intuition that he works with. I think that point should not be lost, colleagues.  

Hon. Onzima asked a clear question because in my statement I did not make it clear. He asked about our contact with the Government of Russia - was it through our ambassador there or through the ambassador here? If it has not been clear, let me state again that the Ambassador of Russia to Uganda was invited and this matter was put to him that we are not happy with the way the press in his country had come out with this statement with a lot of falsehoods. He undertook to communicate this message to his country. I think we will take it from there when we get a response.

Finally, hon. Dombo helped me to make this point because hon. Ocula in taking the Floor said there was massive recruitment - this is very unfair. What we are recruiting are just 3,000 Ugandans into the Army with a few officer cadets. Hon. Dombo has just said that the Army, like any other institution, goes through a process of attrition – people retire, people die but the country must be defended at a certain level and so we keep replacing to keep the Army strength at a certain level.

Once again, I thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the gallery today we have pupils and teachers from Katikamu SDA Senior Secondary School in Katikamu South constituency. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Are you the ones? Please, stand up. You are welcome.     

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. In light of what has been discussed – what the minister has presented, it is touching another sector concerned with oil. Colleagues’ submission is that what the minister has done is to give us information, which is a way forward and from the submission from hon. Dombo who was the Chairperson of the Natural Resources Committee on which I sit, we had problems of non disclosure of the details of the power sharing agreement on oil. 

Would it be prudent that at such a moment that we need enough information surrounding what the minister has presented and the non disclosure of the details of the power sharing agreement –(Interjections)- that when you directed some time back –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I need your protection. 

You once directed the minister in this House to bring that document and lay it in Parliament. To date, it has not been brought to Parliament for the information of the members of this honourable House. Wouldn’t it be prudent that we also have the disclosure - the details of that oil agreement brought to this Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: Whereas there are merits in what you have raised, at this time we are dealing with a particular subject. That was the statement of the minister –(Laughter)- and as I said, there are merits in the observation. I appeal to the appropriate committee handling this subject of oil to pursue it and if it has a problem, let them bring it to the full House.

(II) STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE ON JOB DISTRIBUTION

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): I want to beg for your indulgence that the Public Service is very dynamic and as we were completing the statement, there was a crucial issue that emerged and we feel that we have to incorporate it in the statement. Therefore, I request that we present the statement next Wednesday –(Interjections)- that is my request. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall clearly record it that she has undertaken to make that statement by Wednesday and not Thursday or Friday. So, we shall start with your statement on Wednesday next week.

MRS SEZI: I thank you. 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF AMBER HOUSE

3.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Reagan Okumu): Mr Speaker, I have two reports to present but they are closely linked. I am seeking your indulgence to allow me present all of them because they are all about rent, properties and management; we shall debate them at once. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard the request from the chairperson. He wants to present the two reports; one about Amber House and another one about Uganda Property Holdings. Can we agree to proceed that way?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, but in the way you did yesterday. It was a superb presentation.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by presenting the report of the Standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises about the performance of Uganda Property Holdings -(Interjections)- they are distributing the report.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe they are still distributing the report.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I have both of them so the order does not matter because I am the presenter -(Interjections)- the first report is on the management of Amber House Limited.

In a letter dated 23 August 2007, the Chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources brought to the attention of the members of the Standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises a company fully owned by Government that is charged with the responsibility of collecting rent from Amber House. 

The name of the company was reported as Amber House Limited, but whose directors, incorporation and day-to-day management could not be traced by the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources while considering the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development Policy Statement. 

Members can read the methodology used by the committee. Let us go to the findings on page 3.

Findings:

Location

Amber House is located at the junction of Speke Road and Kampala Road on Plot 29, and 31-33, Kampala Road, and on Plots No.1 and 3 Speke Road. Amber House building is essentially accessed from Speke Road, Kampala Road and Pilkington Road.

The land occupied by Amber House is 1.56 acres. 

It was leased to Amber House Limited on 01 October 1954 for a period of 99 years. Thereafter, the building was constructed and occupied in 1958.

Ownership

Amber House Limited, which owns Amber House building, is a limited liability company, which was registered on 14 January, 1954 by the then, Uganda Electricity Board (UEB), Lint Marketing Board (LMB) and Coffee Marketing Board (CMB). Each of these mentioned entities had shares in the company. 

Following the divestiture of Government companies in 1995, UEB remained the sole proprietor of Amber House.

In this regard, the committee noted that following the power sector reform and the unbundling and divestiture of UEB; UEB wound up business and its shares were transferred to Government. Amber House Limited (AHL) is now owned by Government through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The said shares were transferred to the Ministry of Finance on 15 September 2005, at a current value of Shs 5 billion.

Business

The core business of the company is to let out office and car parking space. It has rentable space of 6,109 square metres. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development headquarters occupies 2,968.95 square metres, while the rest is rented out to the two successor companies of UEB; Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited (UEGCL) and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited. It also rented out to private companies, which pay rent through AHL’s agent who is the property manager, Bageine and Company Limited. Bageine and Company Limited was contracted by Amber House Limited to manage the building.

The Board

Members can read the names of the board members on page 5. The committee noted that the current board was appointed on 26 July 2006. It is composed of the following members: Hon. Steven Bamwanga, Chairman; Mr James Serufusa, Managing Director; Hon. Henry Mutefu, Director; Mr Moses Murengezi, Director; Mr Nicholas Ecimu, Director; Ms Janet Nakuti, Director; and Ms Joselyn Kissa, Director.

Observations 

The committee observed that the Ministry of Energy spends about Shs 48 million per month as rent that includes water, electricity, security, cleaning corridors etc and wondered why it could not opt to purchase the building.

In response, the committee was informed that the ministry showed interest in acquiring Amber House when UEB was winding up, but  the then Minister of Finance, in a letter ref. RAD 154/308/01 dated 13 February, 2003 (copy attached herewith as appendix),  advised that Government properties are not owned by individual ministries.

Rent Collections 

The committee observed that ever since the incorporation and establishment of Amber House Ltd, no revenues have ever been remitted to the Consolidated Fund. Members, therefore, queried the justification for the existence and establishment of Amber House Limited.

In response, the management of Amber House Ltd explained that legally, the company is not under any obligation to remit money to the Consolidated Fund. The committee was informed that instead, Amber House used to pay dividends to shareholders.

However, the committee was informed that considering the prime location of the property, management was in the process of re-developing and re-modeling the complex so that it could fetch more revenue. The architectural design was presented to the committee. 

The committee was assured that upon completion of the complex, management of Amber House Limited would consider remitting part of the revenue to the Consolidated Fund, while the balance would be used to maintain the complex. 

Management of Government Properties

The committee observed that Amber House should have been handed over to Uganda Property Holdings Limited a government body mandated to manage all properties on behalf of Government. In response, the committee was informed that Government (Cabinet) at one time attempted to have all Government properties both abroad and in the country managed by one body, either under the Ministry of Finance or Ministry of Foreign Affairs, but the matter was never resolved. Subsequently, the committee noted that there is no explanation as to why Government should have scattered entities managing public properties. 

The committee observed that Government properties are scattered all over ministries and urged the Executive to look for the best way to manage its properties. 

Property Management

The committee observed that upon dissolution of Coffee Marketing Board and Lint Marketing Board, shares were transferred to UEB, which took control of Amber House and managed it in-house. However, on 01 September 2002, a contract for letting and management of Amber House was signed between M/S Amber House and M/S Bagaine and Company Limited. The initial contract was a six-year period, but was later renewed annually.

The committee further observed that M/S Bagaine and Company was first appointed by UEB since the latter did not posses expertise to manage a building like Amber House. 

It was further noted that prior to the divestiture of UEB, M/S Bagaine and Company Limited was managing the property. The committee was also informed that the concept of property management is not synonymous with rent collection as most people believe. It was clarified that property management involved repairs and maintenance of the building on a daily basis, provision and supervision of security, cleaning services, services of installations including lifts, pipe lines, plumbing and electricity. It also includes periodic rent review, preparation for tenants agreements, advice on the performance of the property vis-à-vis similar properties. 

After interacting with the directors of Amber House Limited and the Ministry of Energy officials, the committee observed that M/S Bagaine and Company Limited is inefficient although the company continues to be paid four percent of the total revenue collected. 

The company even misled the committee that the Ministry of Energy does not pay its rent obligations even when clear evidence of payment was made. Evidence of monthly payment was presented and is attached to this report.

Recommendations

The committee makes the following recommendations:

1.	The committee established that the company legally exists and that it is a public company handling transaction on behalf of Government. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Auditor-General should carry out a special audit of the transactions of this company. 

2.	The committee is aware that many ministries own and run their own buildings for example Works, Foreign Affairs, Agriculture et cetera. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources can also be given an opportunity to own Amber House. 

3.	The committee observes that Amber House has no right to lease the property. It should, therefore, be restrained from going through with the venture of giving away Government proprieties for loans. 

Conclusion

On the basis of the findings, Parliament has got information that the company exists. Once it is a legal entity, it should expeditiously be audited by the Auditor-General. I beg to report.

Mr Speaker, the next one is a report of the Standing Committee of Commissions Statutory Authorities, State Enterprises on the performance of Uganda Property Holdings.

The introduction is clear, but for record purposes, let me repeat so that other Members may know the roles of this committee. Yesterday some people were raising issues that were not linked with the procedures that they have. 

Article 93 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and rule 194(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda mandates the Standing Committee of Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises to:

a)	Examine the reports and audited accounts of statutory authorities, co-operations and public enterprises in the context of their autonomy and efficiency.

b)	Ascertain whether their operations are being managed in accordance with the required competence, and where applicable in accordance with sound business principles and prudent commercial practices.

c)	The committee does examine the audited accounts of Uganda Property Holdings and examined its commercial practices and operations. Members can read the methodology.

Background to the establishment of Uganda Property Holdings

Uganda Property Holdings was established by a Cabinet discussion on 27 May 1998. The decision entailed that Uganda Property Holdings be established to take over all Government real estate properties within Uganda and abroad. 

Uganda Property Holdings was registered on 03 November 1998 under the Companies Act, Cap. 110 as a limited liability company wholly owned by the Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of State in Charge of Privatisation.

Mandate of Uganda Property Holdings

As a Government company, Uganda Property Holdings was mandated to hold, manage, protect and improve on the value of all Government assets formerly belonging to Coffee Marketing Board, Lint Marketing Board, Produce Marketing Board and Trans Ocean Uganda Ltd.  

Members can read the objectives of Uganda Property Holdings, they are there. The mission of Uganda Property Holdings is on page 3; it is to effectively manage and expand Government estate properties. 

Its vision is to fully oversee and manage all foreign owned Government properties.

Findings of the committee

The committee visited Uganda Property Holdings’ properties both in Mombasa, London and in Kampala. Background to the visit; the committee visit was initiated after a complaint by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that the status of Government properties abroad was very poor because Uganda Property Holdings had mismanaged them and as such there was a need to transfer all properties owned by Government outside Uganda to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for property management.

The committee, therefore, among other things, had the intention to find out the state in which the said property was by assessing its state of repair and management and also to assess the availability of Government investments abroad. 

Mr Speaker, let me go to page 4, 2.1.2 state of the properties; beginning with one of the properties we visited, in Bugolobi.

a)	Main building formerly owned by Coffee Marketing Board: This part of the property has been sub-leased to Uganda Coffee Export Centre Ltd at a rental cost of Shs 56 million per year for five years. Uganda Property Holdings made an agreement with Uganda Coffee Exports Centre Ltd to extend the five years to a lease of 49 years on condition that the latter invests Shs 6 billion to improve on the property. The building is five storied and all the equipment that was formerly used by Coffee Marketing Board at these premises was sold off. The committee noted that the building comprises of silos that were meant for coffee storage and as such cannot be converted into office space. Much of the building is vacant and requires refurbishment. 

b)	Property formerly occupied by Apparels Tri-Star: LAP Textiles Limited, a Libyan company, is part of the LAICO consortium. This company now occupies the premises that were formerly occupied by the Apparel Tri-Star and has got a sub-lease for 49 years. The committee was informed that at the time of its closure, Apparel Tri-Star had not paid rent to Uganda Property Holdings for six and a half years that it was in occupation. 

LAP textile limited has occupied the said property since 01 November 2007 although Uganda Property Holdings officially handed over the property to the textile company in September 2008. Like Apparel Tri-Star, LAP Textiles has not paid any rent to Uganda Property Holdings since it took over occupation of the premises. The committee was informed that this is because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not yet finalised the agreement for its terms of payment and negotiations are still on-going. 

The committee was further informed that LAP Textile was introduced to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by Apparel Tri-star. LAP Textile Limited employs 200 workers and has a potential of employing up to 600 workers. Most of the facilities, sewing machines, labour and other equipment previously used by Apparel Tri-Star lie idle at the premises.

Observations

1.	Although Uganda Property Holdings did not get any rent paid from Apparel Tri-Star, it had constructed a new structure at the premises to facilitate the operations of Apparel Tri-Star.

2.	LAP Textiles, a foreign company does not pay any rent to Uganda Property Holdings while Uganda Coffee Export Centre Limited, which is a local company pays Shs 56 million per year for the other half of the property on the same premise.

Recommendation

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should finalise the payment schedule for LAP Textiles for the property occupied including arrears.

On page 6 is the list of properties that we own in Mombasa; they are 22, it goes up to page 7 and the rest the Members can read for themselves. 

On page 8, there are properties in London, going on to page 9; there are four properties in London that we own. 

On page 9, other properties managed by Uganda Property Holdings from 3.1; these are properties in the country, it goes up to page 10, and it covers the entire page 10. So, we can go to page 11.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed as follows:

1. 	Payment of Dividends

Uganda Property Holdings has only declared dividends of Shs 100 million in 2010 having operated since 1998 without declaring any such dividends. 

The Minister of State for Finance informed the committee that at the time of the set up, it took over several buildings of CMB, LMB and Trans-Ocean Uganda Limited which were dilapidated yet it was not yet given seed capital to commence renovations of the buildings. Uganda Property Holdings has been raising funds to renovate the properties from rent and it has taken all this time.

2. 	Existing Management Structure

Uganda Property Holdings, a company managing several properties whose value is in billions of shillings, is currently manned by as few as five employees. This number includes the employees at the headquarters as well as those in the Mombasa office. 

3.	Rental Value of Properties

The rental value for Uganda Property Holdings properties in Mombasa has been stagnant for a number of years despite changes in the market trends.

4.	Property Gutted by Fire
The company property that was gutted by fire in Mombasa valued at Shs 2,217,499,414 was compensated by payment of only Shs 572,873,443.

5. 	Procurement of Glen Tree Limited

The committee is not satisfied with the circumstances surrounding the procurement of Glen Tree, a private company that is managing the company property in London.

6.	Rent owed by Tri-Star

The company in January 2003 leased out premises to Apparel Tri-Star and to date there is an accumulated rental debt of Shs 3,161,160,000 relating to unpaid rent from Apparel Tri-Star.

7.	Property Management

The committee was able to compare the properties managed by Uganda Property Holdings Limited with those managed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs abroad. The committee established that the properties managed by Uganda Property Holdings are in a much better state of repair compared to those properties under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs where in one case, we found 88 Ugandans at our foreign mission in London.

8.	Management of the Airstrip

Whereas Government directed Uganda Property Holdings to manage the Kololo Airstrip and that Uganda Property Holdings earns some revenue from that airstrip for its maintenance, national celebrations are held by the State with no pay to Uganda Property Holdings. 
    
9.	Properties managed by Uganda Property Holdings

Although Uganda Property Holdings was mandated to take over all the properties of the defunct Coffee Marketing Board, Lint Marketing Board, Produce Marketing Board and Trans-ocean Uganda Limited, the only properties in its hands are four in Uganda, 22 in Mombasa and four in London.

10.	Property Leases

Most of the properties in Mombasa have running leases ranging from between 15 and 38 years. There are, however, three properties with 999 year leases and three others with freehold tenure. Nine hundred, ninety nine, not 99 years -(Interjections)- this is not a typing error, this is the reality. It is 999 years which we should be very grateful about because then we can own it for as long as that.

11.	 Properties not handed over to Uganda Property Holdings

There were a number of properties that were not handed over to Uganda Property Holdings but to Enterprise Development Project (EDP), a World Bank funded project established in 1993. The Project expired but the status of the assets that were handed to it was not reported. The committee is concerned about the decision to hand over only part of the property over to Uganda Property Holdings and the other to a short-lived project and wonders where the other assets ended up.

Recommendations
  	
The committee recommends as follows:
1) 	That the Chief Government Valuer should establish the actual current ground value of all Uganda Property Holdings properties together with their rental income at the current market price. 

	The Auditor-General should thereafter audit all what the tenants will pay as rent.

2) 	The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Trust should carry out a procurement audit to establish the circumstances surrounding the procurement of Glen Tree, the company hired by Uganda Property Holdings to manage its properties in the United Kingdom.

3) 	Given that the mandate of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is mainly diplomacy, it cannot be a good property manager and so the property abroad cannot be transferred to it. Uganda Property Holdings should continue operating as the property managers and remain under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for political direction.

4) 	Uganda Property Holdings should strive to acquire and construct more properties for the Government of Uganda beyond Nairobi and London.

5) 	Uganda Property Holdings should declare and remit dividends to the treasury and seek permission to use what they need to enhance their development projects.

6) 	Farmers’ House should be transferred to Uganda Property Holdings for both ownership and management and Government should remit the accumulated rent for the occupation.

7) 	Uganda Property Holdings should not engage in mere management of properties like the case of the Kololo Airstrip, it should own them so as to be in position to plan for their improvement.

8) 	Uganda Property Holdings should upgrade all the leases to freehold tenure or to longer leases of over 50 years so as to have long term plans implemented on the property. 

9) 	All the property that was handed over to EDP, Enterprise Development Programme and was not sold should be handed over to Uganda Property Holdings for management.

Audited Accounts

In accordance with Article 163(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Auditor-General -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman, before you go to audited accounts, do you think Article 239 of the Constitution has any relevance to what you have been talking about? 

MR OKUMU: I have not got you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Do you think Article 239 has any relevance to what you have been reading out? Can you read it? Please, read it for the House.

MR OKUMU: Article 239, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: Article 239.

MR OKUMU: “Functions of the Uganda Land Commission: The Uganda Land Commission shall hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda in accordance with the provision of this Constitution and shall have other functions as may be prescribed by Parliament.”

Mr Speaker, I was at the end of it all going to lay on Table what the committee found out to be the land titles that are not in the name of Uganda Land - 

THE SPEAKER: No, but you have been talking about holding and managing. I am just referring you to the supreme law of the country, namely, the Constitution. Don’t you see that it is the Land Commission that should own all Government property in Uganda, including ministry premises?

MR OKUMU: That is true because that is the responsibility of Uganda Land Commission although the management, of course, like in this case - 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. These other companies you are reading should only be agents of the Uganda Land Commission. But finish reading your report because I thought you were going on to the audited accounts. You had finished the other one and I wanted to draw your attention to that. 

MR OKUMU: The audited accounts. In accordance with Article 163(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Auditor-General audited the accounts of Uganda Property Holdings and submitted his report to Parliament for consideration. Parliament received the reports from June 2000 to June 2007. However, from June 2000 to June 2004, the Auditor-General did not qualify the accounts of Uganda Property Holdings. This means that Uganda Property Holdings accounts for the five years give a true and fair state of affairs in compliance with the Companies Act. 

Uganda Property Holdings Accounts for the period ended 2005 together with the opinion of the Auditor-General. 

Inappropriate Accounting Method

Revaluation Reserves:

The Auditor-General reported that six assets worth Shs 19,086,636,067 belonging to the Government privatised companies was transferred to the company in 2004 as a way of capitalisation. In addition, the company incurred capital expenditure totalling to Shs 1,187,887,894 in 2005 in respect of repairs and building. These transactions have been recorded in the financial statement as revaluation reserves. This practice is contrary to the provision of international accounting standards as no revaluations took place.

Observations

The committee observed that Uganda Property Holdings have been renovated. However, their real value has not been ascertained.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the revaluation of Uganda Property Holdings should be carried out by the Government Valuer. 

Uganda Property Holdings Accounts for period ending 2006

On page 16 there is an addendum on the accounts of 2006 which I hope Members have been able to get. What I want Members to observe here is that as we go forward to 2007 there are a number of items that were carried forward especially on Apparel Tri-Star and we finally made a conclusion at the end of it. 

The addendum on the report of the Standing Committee on Commissions and Statutory Authorities accounts for the period ending June 2006, which I hope has been given to Members. It reads as follows: 

Unsupported Expenditure on the AGOA Project: This was a query raised by the Auditor-General. 

Management Response

The management of Uganda Property Holdings informed the committee that the expenditure of Shs 246,580,492 to various contractors for the work carried out on the AGOA project was directed from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They provided to the committee the contractors’ documents for the payments made. The Uganda Property Holdings failed to produce any documents that created or binds their relationship with the AGOA project. 

Observation

The committee reviewed the documents and found that there was no justification for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to have directed Uganda Property Holdings to make payments to the AGOA project. There was no memorandum of understanding between Uganda Property Holdings and the AGOA project. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should desist from directing state corporations to make payments in situations where legally binding instruments do not exist.

Sub-leases with Apparel Tri-Star Ltd

The Auditor-General reported that UPHL sub-leased plots 1-7 Kalitunsi road, Bugolobi, to an apparel company for annual ground rent of Shs 20 million effective 31 December 2004. Payment of ground rent had, however, not been effected by 30 June 2006.  There is, therefore uncertainty, surrounding the recoverability of ground rent from the lessee.

The Managing Director of UPHL informed the committee that UPHL with board approval leased out Plots 1- 7, Kalitunsi Road to M/S Apparels Tri Star Ltd at an annual rent of Shs 20 million. This was paid for the first year commencing 01 January 2005. At the time of the audit, invoices had been made for Apparels Tri-Star Limited to pay but payment was not forthcoming. The UPHL requested its Board to cancel the lease and cancellation was effected on 21 May 2007. This sub-lease had not been registered on UPHL’s lease at the Registrar of Titles.

The payments on AGOA were balances to contractors on contracts undertaken on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee was informed that UPHL had earlier been instructed by the Minister of Finance and the Director Privatisation to undertake the jobs for the success of the AGOA project.

Un-supported expenditure on the AGOA project: I have already read that. It is on the addendum, Sir. 

UPHL Accounts for the Period Ended June 2007 Together With the Opinion Thereon of the Auditor-General 
	
The Auditor-General reported that included in the financial statements is an amount of Shs 3,161,160,000 relating to unpaid rent from Apparel Tri-Star limited. It was noted that UPHL has not signed a tenancy agreement with Apparel Tri-Star since January 2003. There is, therefore, uncertainty surrounding the recovery of this debt.

Position by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

The Minister of State, Ministry of Finance confirmed that M/s Apparels Tri-Star was facilitated to set up a clothes factory at the Bugolobi premises under Uganda Property Holdings, and they did not pay rent for the entire period of occupation. Government took over the assets and passed them over to LAP Textiles Limited where Government owns 35 percent shares. He stated that the liabilities would be paid by Government in due course. 

Observations

1.	The committee was not convinced that the minister’s explanation about the circumstances surrounding the introduction of LAP by Tri-Star to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the subsequent taking over of liabilities of Tri-star by the Ministry of Finance. 

2.	The committee noted that Government is enforcing Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) without policy guidelines and a legal framework. 

Recommendations

1.	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should prioritise payment of longstanding rent arrears incurred by Tri-Star in the budget for the next financial year 2010/2011.
2.	Government should come up with a comprehensive policy on the running of Public Private Partnerships within two months.

Conclusion

Although Uganda Property Holdings Limited was set up to own, manage, protect and improve all the government assets formerly belonging to Coffee Marketing Board, Lint Marketing Board, Produce Marketing Board and Trans Ocean Uganda Limited, some of the said properties are not in its control. 

Uganda Property Holdings has also been encumbered by longstanding dates accruing from rent of its premises by Apparel Tri-Star. This matter ought to be put to rest and all the outstanding monies be recovered from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Uganda Property Holdings should further be run in accordance with the laws governing finance and procurement in order to effectively manage Uganda Government properties within the country and abroad. 

Given the experience of Apparel Tri-Star where Government lost billions of shillings and the uncertainty of LAP Textile, where Government has invested, the committee recommends that the government stops other Public-Private Partnerships until a legal and policy framework is in place. 

The committee finally recommends that the Auditor-General carries out a comprehensive audit on all the Public-Private Partnerships that Government has carried out, to ascertain value-for-money and report back to Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to lay on Table, copies of land titles for these properties in Mombasa and London - evidence for the monies remitted to the Consolidated Fund – dividends of Shs 100 million by Uganda Property Holdings Limited. With all this, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and the members of the committee. But, hon. Members, again join me to welcome pupils and teachers of Divine College who are in the gallery. Please, can you stand up for recognition? (Applause) 

Hon. Members, Article 2 of the Constitution provides that: “This Constitution is the supreme law of Uganda and shall have binding force on all authorities and persons throughout Uganda.” 

Article 239 provides for the functions of the Uganda Land Commission, which states: “The Uganda Land Commission shall hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution ….” 

What you have heard from the report is Government property and how it is managed by various companies following a decision of Cabinet.  

I do not know whether when Cabinet was making that decision, it addressed the functions of the Uganda Land Commission, because the Land Commission owns this Parliament and it owns all premises owned by ministries. But it seems this was never addressed. So, I do not know whether we should proceed debating these reports without giving due consideration to the constitutional provision?

4.21
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, now that you are raising that important constitutional issue, I would suggest that you give us time as Government to look at the report and look at the things we are raising, and then we shall be able to discuss the contents of the report after considering that issue that you are raising. Well, you can get it in terms of time; you can give us maybe a week so that we can have the opinion of the Cabinet and that of the Attorney-General, and then we can come and have a meaningful debate after answering that question. 

4.22
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, having listened to the presentation of this report, it has very far reaching implications in the management of properties in this country. It ought to be carefully studied by the Members, and not only Cabinet, but the Members should take time off to study this more. 

I, for example, note that the committee does not make any reference to the Articles and Memorandum of Association of this company. No reference was made; I do not know whether they are available. I assume they were available. But I do not know whether the Members looked at them and saw whether this company has even been following its own Articles and Memorandum of Association. So, in light of that, I think not only Cabinet needs time, but even other Members of Parliament need time to internalise this report and be able to debate it intelligently. 

4.22
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think there was a gross error from the onset. In addition to the Memorandum and Articles of Association, we also needed to have a statement of capital of the directors of that company; we needed to have returns of the directors of that company. In fact being a public limited liability company, we even needed to have the prospectus of the company. Now we are being told that Uganda Property Holdings is a five-man-show holding property worth all those billions. I think all these documents have to be looked at so that we get to the depth of how the whole thing was set up in the first place. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I take note of the concerns of honourable members and the request of the minister. But I just want to give information to my colleague here that the shareholders of these companies are only two: The Minister of Finance, and the Minister of State for Finance in charge of Privatisation. (Laughter) That is what has been presented; that the Minister of Finance and the Minister of State for Finance in charge of Investment; those are the only shareholders of this company, Sir.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for that information. Under the circumstances, I beg to buy the idea that we stay debate on this report at least for the Uganda Properties Holdings Limited until we get in depth - in fact, I wish the committee had also stated that information in its main report. We need to have a bit of time to go into how the whole thing was set up so that we can have a meaningful debate, at least for the second report on Uganda Property Holdings Limited.

THE SPEAKER: No, even the first one.

4.26
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am talking in reference to the first report that was presented. First of all, I had the opportunity to be the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources, and when this information came to my attention as chairperson, I discovered that there was a lot behind the scenes, which was beyond my mandate. 

The nature of the problem looked like this was a government state enterprise, and it is with this background that I wrote to the chairperson, hon. Odit, to say, “Would you like to pick interest and find out a bit more concerning what is happening with Amber House Holdings?” 

When you read this and the recommendations, you discover that we do not have a uniform law in Uganda or at least practice on how we are dealing with Government properties, and also the way we are managing and dealing with the outcome of the proceeds. For instance, I would have been very glad if in the process of reporting, the committee showed us the list of the tenants of the first Amber House. We don’t know who the tenants were and what amount of money is at stake. How much money are we talking about?

Thirdly, there is an issue of falsification, which was implied in the report, that the property manager openly deceived the committee that he receives rent from Government when the contrary is true.

All this information would have made us, as a Parliament, come up with stronger recommendations than what has been provided. So, I don’t know whether we could give the committee more time for them to provide further information.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think that if these companies were audited, the Auditor-General would know the tenants and how much is collected? Do you need the committee to do that work? Has it got the professionalism to do that work?

MR DOMBO: Yes, this is a recommendation, but you will see that - in the first place, why is it that it is not being audited?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the issue is that we should first determine who the owner is. Having determined that, then you will be talking about these companies as the ones accounting to the owner. Apparently, the Constitution was never referred to. Now you have to find out and then decide.

4.28
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also agree with my colleagues that we really need enough time to internalise the report. I am making a humble request to Government. As they are preparing, I would request that in addition to the information already pointed out - I see here in the report that the Cabinet decision was taken on 27 May 1998, well after these companies we are talking about had already been privatised.

If we could get a legal audit, which was carried out then and before this company, Uganda Properties Holdings Limited took over; if we could have that legal audit amongst the documents, it would furnish us with enough information about the status of this company, its ownership, liabilities and assets as of that time and what could have informed the decision of the Cabinet to circumvent the Constitution and then establish this company.

Could they also tell us the legal capacity of these two ministries, because here in the report they are talking about the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and then the minister? Were they given Powers of Attorney to own these shares on behalf of Government? Why wasn’t it necessary for Cabinet to bring a Bill here? If you wanted to establish a statutory body, why wasn’t it necessary for Cabinet to come up with a Bill to Parliament to establish a statutory body? Why was it necessary for them to incorporate a company?

My colleagues here have already talked about the status of these two companies. Here in the report, we see a limited liability company. Actually, my colleague here was talking about a prospectus. We don’t know whether it is a public or private limited liability company. So, we needed all this information and it will help us to take an appropriate decision and forge the way forward. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Let me submit just on the technicalities. In fact the only country I know where Uganda Property Holdings has failed to transfer Government of Uganda property into private hands is Brussels. Because the law in that country that relates to land says you cannot transfer Government property into Odonga Otto’s hands because no one has information to all those secrets - 

For example, in London, we are aware that other than the properties which Uganda Property Holdings Limited is managing now, President Amin acquired several other properties - about 15 - and Uganda Property Holdings Limited. Those properties have now gone into private hands and only a few are being managed on behalf of Uganda. So, it is only in Brussels where Uganda Property Holdings Limited failed to have that residence of the ambassador transferred into private hands.

So, this company, Uganda Property Holdings Limited, is a very interesting human being. It has a face and capacity to transfer Ugandan property into private hands. We tried to do a search on its status and found that there are also other companies, which own shares under the main company. 

The clarification I am seeking is, if Uganda Property Holdings Limited is a private limited company, why doesn’t it then comply with the provisions of the PPDA so that the process of managing Uganda’s property is bidded for? And if it is a parastatal, then why was it not created under the necessary laws so that it can be listed? So, this Uganda Property Holdings Limited is just a human being and there are many human beings. I just wanted to bring that little aspect before this House and I am surprised that the committee could not even establish which actual human being is Uganda Property Holdings Limited.

4.34
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the chair for raising this issue. Once property is registered in the names of any company, that property belongs to that company and not the shareholders. If Uganda Property Holdings Limited owns property, then those properties are for this company and not for the shareholders who happen to be the ministers, I imagine on behalf of the Government or the people of Uganda.

So, I have a problem. The land, which is vested under Article 239 of the Constitution, is that which is owned by Government, but once it is now registered in the names of Uganda Property Holdings Limited, then it is not owned by Government but owned by this company. I look at it as the law. 

Secondly, the most important part is - 

THE SPEAKER: These properties were owned by Government, but Government decided to have a company to manage the property. I am saying that once they were owned by the government, they immediately became properties being held by the Uganda Land Commission. The Uganda Land Commission can appoint companies to do it as its agents. So, what we are trying to say is, was this addressed? It might have been an oversight and if it were an oversight, what do we do? And I think that is what the honourable members are saying and we need time to go and consider all these issues so that when we come to debate, we are comprehensive. We should deal with all issues and try to solve problems that arose and correct the error so that the correct position is taken. As I have told you, this Parliament, because it is a government property, is owned by the Uganda Land Commission. 

MR KATUNTU: That is correct and ordinarily that is what the title says, “Uganda Land Commission” and in brackets they put the user department. But if they were established for purposes of management, then they could not have transferred the ownership into the name of the company. They would have established a management arrangement; either a memorandum of understanding or a contract to manage these properties which then could be in the names of the Uganda Land Commission on behalf of Government. That is what it should have been – 

THE SPEAKER: But you see, when you look at page 2 of the report, it says, “… as a government company was mandated to co-own, manage …” it is clear; this was the purpose of this company.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and that is the biggest point I am trying to make. To imagine that UPHL could own would be in contravention of the Constitution. What UPHL can only do is to manage, protect and maybe improve on the value, but not to own. That would certainly be in contravention of Article 239 of the Constitution, except if Government had legally transferred it through the Uganda Land Commission. 

THE SPEAKER: And is it only the Uganda Land Commission that can transfer? 

MR KATUNTU: Yes, through your area LC. But I would like to be assisted on this one. Unfortunately, the Attorney-General is not here. Can Cabinet establish a public enterprise –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. I have been patiently waiting. We thought that we had agreed that every Member of Parliament and Cabinet go and look through the report and then we discuss it. But it seems my friends are opening a Pandora box and we are discussing the report unknowingly. So, is it procedurally right to continue insisting? 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, we are not discussing this report. I think, eventually Government is going to respond. It is prudent in my view for Government to actually know what we are thinking such that when they come to answer or clarify, they should be able to provide some of these answers. That is what we are trying to do; because these are more of questions than contributions or answers. 

The report raises questions more than answers to the issues. So, what we are trying to do, my honourable colleague, is to let Government know that actually it needs to answer these issues that we are raising. So, can Cabinet establish a company or a state enterprise without an Act of Parliament, because the Attorney-General or the Leader of Government Business should be able to inform us now? If it was an error, then they can see how to correct it. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think in view of the request by the Leader of Government Business, we suspend the debate of these two reports for two weeks so that Government can study them and take position. Maybe we may really narrow the differences when they come back, having thoroughly considered the issues. Yes, hon. Odit, do you want to say something?

4.41
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I fully agree with you but I want to correct an error which was being presented in the House by hon. Dombo. Our mandate at that time was very clear, that we should investigate and prove whether or not a company called Amber House Limited did exist, which we did. 

The unfortunate thing was that the Ministry of Finance had all along been remitting money to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to rent the premises within Amber House Limited, and this money could not be traced anywhere, and that was the very reason we were saying yes, if it is a public company, the Auditor-General should be able to express interest and audit the company. So, that was clearly what we expected. After the decision of Parliament, the Auditor-General should now take on and investigate and audit the status of Amber House. That was our mandate.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in view of the contributions made on the subject, and this having been the last item today on the Order Paper, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. prompt, to continue with the business. 

(The House rose at 4.42 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 8 April 2010, at 2.30 p.m.)
