Wednesday 4th March, 20001

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order
                                     
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGH AFFAIRS (REGIONAL COOPERATION)(Mr. Amama Mbabazi): Mr. Speaker, it was reported in The New Vision of yesterday, the 3rd of April, that hon. Winnie Byanyima a Member of this august House accused President Museveni and the Government of Uganda of arming and training the Interahamwe to fight Kagame of Rwanda; Congolese rebel groups to attack the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and the Sudan Peoples’ Liberation army to attack the Sudan. If the report is true, and I have asked for a video recording of it from Nairobi, it has arrived but unfortunately it has not got into my possession. When it does, I will lay it here before Parliament. But if this report is true, it is very unfortunate, if such a reckless and irresponsible statement can come from a Member of this House. I want to state categorically that there is no truth whatsoever in that statement. 

Uganda’s effort in bringing peace and reconciliation in the region, in the Great Lakes region, generally is very well known and documented. The Interahamwe does not only constitute a regional threat but also have an unforgettable record of committing heinous crimes against humanity. To suggest that Ugandan is now training them to fight Rwanda is surely to make a mockery of the victims of the 1994 genocide.  The same group has also carried out massacres of the people of Uganda in Mpondwe and Bwera areas of Kasese district.  

Indeed the evil act of Bwindi, in March 1999, when some foreign guests, plus a ugandan game park ranger were killed by the Interahamwe; serves as a reminder that their evil programme is still in place. The Movement Government therefore, led by President Yoweri Museveni cannot in anyway aid and or abate or be associated with an organisation with such obnoxious record. 

 It is very well known that Uganda always intervened on the side of Rwanda to defend herself against the Interahamwe. The Interahamwe genocide is theirs. One of the reasons indeed why Uganda entered the Congo war was to prevent this very group from continuing with the genocide activities. The statement attributed to Mrs. Winnie Besigye therefore, is a malicious lie that I condemn with the contempt it deserves. As I have had occasion to say elsewhere, contrary to these allegations, the Uganda Government prohibits and actively discourages any anti-Rwanda Government activity by Rwanda nationals on Ugandan soil or even in areas controlled by Uganda backed groups in the Democratic Republic of Congo. 

 It is equally not true that the Government of Uganda is arming rebel groups in the Congo and in the Sudan.  Uganda together with other countries in the region, through the Inter- Governmental authority on development, IGAD, is working for the peaceful settlement of the conflict between Southern Sudan. As this Parliament knows very well, Uganda is one of the four-member mediation team set up by IGAD to mediate between the SPLA and the Government of Sudan. Indeed I returned only last week from a meeting in Rome Italy where the IGAD had a joint meeting with European Union Members, who are friends of IGAD to discuss this very issue.  

The Government of Sudan itself therefore, has full confidence in the neutrality of the Government of Uganda on the question of civil war in Southern Sudan to the extent that they accept us as a mediator. Moreover, the SPLA was in existence even before the NRM came to Government. Although the Uganda Government sympathises with the cause of the SPLA and we say so openly even to the Sudan Government itself, Uganda does not give any material or physical support to the SPLA. SPLA has its own sources of financing the war against the Khartoum Government.

On the Democratic Republic of Congo, Uganda is totally and irrevocably committed to the Lusaka peace Agreement, which we think provides the most viable basis of settling the conflict. Mr. Speaker, only yesterday the First Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs hon. E. Kategaya, was in Kinshasa leading a Ugandan delegation that delivered to President Kabila a special message from President Museveni; and I am glad to report to this House, and I am sure hon. Kategaya will give a fuller report that the meeting went off very well, very amicably and they discussed with the Congolese President how best the conflict can be resolved within the framework of the Lusaka Accord.  We shall continue to work together with all peace-loving parties to see that the Agreement is implemented.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member was quoted as saying that President Museveni rigged massively in the just concluded Presidential election. You all know of course that the people of Uganda spoke through the March 12th Presidential election. There is a court petition that has been lodged; and on the petition our view is that it is an attempt to achieve through courts what the petitioner failed to achieve directly from the people through the electoral process. It is an attempt to overturn through courts the decision of over 5 million Ugandans.

 We have made that statement very clearly in our defence in court. But of course Mr. Speaker, we all know that since the matter is before the supreme court, I will not comment much on it because I would be in danger of breaching the rule of subjudice which stops active discussion of a matter before court.  I thank you.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR. KAMUSAALA (Jinja Municipality, East): I thank you Mr. Speaker. The question is directed to the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Privatisation). According to the final report of the select committee on privatisation dated October, 1999, the dispute between the Madhvani Group of Companies and the Government of Uganda, over who should pay the former workers of East African Steel Corporation was resolved after Government accepted to settle the 416 former workers’ terminal benefits amounting to 1,138,746,125/= only. Can the hon. Minister inform this House; what arrangements has the Government made to pay the former workers their terminal benefits; and, when the payments will begin?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Manzi Tumubweinee): Thank you Mr. Speaker. The question as posed is true this was one of the issues discussed in the select committee report of the privatisation in 1999. The former employees of the East African Steel Corporation Limited sued Muljibhai Madhvani and company limited and Steel Corporation of East Africa, in civil suit number 640 of 1994. The case is about under-payment of terminal benefits according to staff regulations. 

 Of the 420 employees, the majority of them collected their package immediately while the balance of 45 members of staff refused to collect their package. The 45 who had refused then, filed the court application, 22 of them have later accepted the original package and collected their cheques while the remaining 23 have not.  The case however, is still pending in court between the 23 and Muljibhai Madhvani and company limited. 

After the recommendation of the Parliamentary select committee that Government should settle the dispute, the Privatisation Unit got in touch with the general secretary of Uganda Mines, Metal and Allied Workers Union Mr. Vincent Ojiambo. It was agreed that he collects all relevant information to support workers’ complaints and to provide terms and conditions of service and regulations that actually, entitle them to be paid more than had been paid and information concerning the computations and actual amounts paid out to them. 

 The general secretary is in the process of finalising compilation of the information required and as soon as this is done – and we are waiting for him eagerly – the information will be sent to the Auditor General’s office for verification and reconciliation. If the reconciliation is finalised by the Auditor General, as is Government procedure, Privatisation Unit will immediately call upon the representatives and all the workers and pay them their dues. Therefore, payment starts as soon as information is availed and reconciliation is achieved.  I thank you.

MR. MWANDHA: I just want to seek guidance from you Mr. Speaker, with regard to the fate of my three questions, which were not answered yesterday. I thought they would be on the Order Paper today, but obviously they are not on the Order Paper.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: They will be on the Order Paper when we have ascertained that the Minister is available, so that we do not run into the same problem like we did yesterday.  Hon. Minister, you want to expound?  Fine.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Kagonyera):  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much indeed and I thank hon. Mwandha for raising this question again.  Yesterday, I promised this House that I was going to investigate and find out why the relevant Ministers were not here to answer the question put by the Member.  Therefore, I went dutifully to find out why they were not here. Now the information I have up to date that I have not yet ascertained, is to the effect Mr. Speaker that hon. Janat Mukwaya consulted with the Clerk of the House on Monday and they did agree that the question would be on the Order Paper for Thursday and that is the time the Minister of Gender will be ready to answer the question. 

Therefore as to whether the Ministers will be ready, it is already agreed that actually that question ought to appear on the Order Paper for Thursday. The appearance therefore on yesterday’s Order Paper was a mistake. I thank you.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we proceed, I would like the Clerk at Table to ascertain whether we have the necessary quorum. Right, we are only 59 in the House. So we cannot proceed. I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended at 2.50p.m for 15 minutes due to lack of quorum)

(On resumption at 3.15p.m,the Speaker presiding)

THE SPEAKER: We are still short of a quorum. I will give you five minutes.

(After five minutes)

THE SPEAKER: Now we have a quorum.

Clause 27.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Rwabita): Mr. Chairman, before Clause 27 I want to recommit the definition of Urban Authority, because that one will clear the way. In our report on page 2, of the amendment of the committee’s report, we had defined ‘Urban Authority’ – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, I think, you are seeking to recommit the Clause, which we have already pronounced ourselves on, and you cannot do it at this stage. We did not simply stand it over, we passed it; so, you will have to move a motion to have it recommitted. You proceed with what you have.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, now we move to Clause 27. We have circulated a paper as an agreed position between the committee and Local Government – I think everybody has got it; it was on the tables, where we intend to amend Clause 27 in section 95 of the principal Act in this way.  So, the one in the Amendment Bill is replaced by this amendment, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Chairman, section 95 of the principal Act is amended one that,” there shall be a tender board for each city and Municipal Council”.  Number two that, “a City Council Tender Board –(Interruption). 

THE CHAIRMAN: Mr. Chairperson, what you are seeking to amend is Clause 27 of the Bill which amends section 95; but your focus is that you are changing Clause 27 from your original position?

MR. RWABITA:  Yes, this paper replaces the whole of Clause 27; this was agreed position of the committee and the Minister of Local Government. Now, number one is that, “there shall be a tender board for each City and Municipal Council”.  Two, “a City Council Tender Board shall consist of seven members including the chairperson and, at least, one third shall be women.  Three, “a Municipal Council Tender Board shall consist of five members including the chairperson and, at least, one third shall be women”.  Number four; “each city or municipal division shall nominate one person for appointment as a member of the city or municipal council tender board”.  Number five, “says that for the avoidance of doubt city division, municipal division and town councils shall not establish tender board but shall use the services of their city, municipal or district tender board respectively as the case may be”.  Number six – and this is a consequential provision which talks of all the expenses to be paid from consolidated fund. 

 All the expenses of the City and Municipal Council Tender Board, including salaries and emoluments of the Members, shall be charged from the consolidated fund –(Interjections)- yes, it is consequential, because if you take Clause 26 which says that,” all the expenses of the District Tender Board including salaries and emoluments of the members, shall be charged on the consolidated fund”. So, this is a consequential amendment. All statutory bodies will get money from the consolidated funds; so, that is just for the sake of emphasis. 

Then seven, the provision of section 92 in the principal Act and 93 and 94 shall apply to the city and municipal council tender board, with such modification as may be necessary, except that the quorum shall be three members, in case of municipal council tender board. Otherwise, in the city council they are seven according to the instructions of the city tender board.  

Mr. Chairman, if you allow me to give a justification of all these  - the committee and the Local Government think that for proper planning and accountability, there should be only one tender board in the city which is also a district.  Mr. Chairman, a single tender board for Kampala District will create harmony in the administration and running of the district just, as there is only one District Service Commission and one Local Government Public Accounts Committee serving the divisions as well.  Kampala City Council should have one accounting officer who is a Town Clerk; hence have one district tender board. 

 Mr. Chairman however, the committee recommends that by statutory instrument, the Minister should amend schedules of the principal Local Governments Act 1997 and the Local Government Financial and Accounting regulations, taking into account any new development and experiences.  For example, it should be able to raise the threshold of the award of goods, works and services outside Tender Board Authority.  

Two, it should allow divisions – even sub-counties, procure goods, works and services outside tender board authority up to a certain threshold.  Because this will quicken some of the smaller activities in these lower Local Government.  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you will recall that this position regarding the appointment of tender board takes into account the concerns, which were expressed by the hon. Babu. Was it not your argument that the municipal divisions and municipalities should send someone to sit on the City tender board?  Was that not your argument?

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, that was the position of the Minister of Local Government. He brought that proposal and that proposal did divert from the Government position, which is in here, which is number 27 and when you brought that and we were still debating it, you said, “look now these are divergent, could you go please and get a new position?” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Right.

CAPT. BABU: The new position, which has been got, completely differs from what is in 27 and they have added in something new and they have removed what we had wanted. So this is where we are having problems now otherwise, I have no problem with the first one. My argument was totally different and they have not included my argument and I told them in the Committee that I would fight my case on the Floor.

THE CHAIRMAN: You had a meeting only that you did not agree. That is different but certainly your concerns were attended to although not to the extent that you have wished.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Manzi Tumubweinee): Mr. Chairman, I do not think I am very clear about item number 6, “all expenses of City and Municipal Council tender board including salaries and emoluments of the Members shall be charged on the consolidated fund.”  My understanding of charging on the consolidated fund means that, you have a direct access to the funds without necessarily passing through any other third party.

But our relationship with the local Governments is that, we either send unconditional grants or conditional grants and they use them according to what we have agreed; because if you make them a charge on the consolidated fund, you are saying they are going to be independent bodies whose budget actually necessarily cannot be debated by the Ministry, but must directly go to the consolidated fund and that is completely different from the meaning I understand, that we are supposed to do as Government.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Now let us do this. Let us go systematically one by one.  What you do not subscribe to then you will express yourself.  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Bill refers to Clause 27 and also refers to section 95 of the principal Act.  Now, the original Bill under Clause 27 sought to amend sub-Clause one of the principal Act.  It appears that, this amendment seems to be taking care of all the other amendments.  Is this the position of the Minister?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Or which other amendments?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: This amendment, which has been proposed by the Chairperson, seems to be taking into account the entire provision under the principal Act, section 95.  Is this the import of this amendment?  That is the clarification I am seeking.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Chairman has proposed an amendment.  Why do you not debate it?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman we are going to debate it, but we would waste a lot of time if we are debating issues, which are not relevant. That is why I am seeking clarification as to whether or not this amendment proposed by the Chairperson, is amending the entire section 95?  Otherwise, some of the issues related under sub-Clause one, which is proposed in the Bill then we have other three sections under section 95, sub-section two, three and four.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are quite right. Clause 27 was only amending sub-Clause one.  If you look at (b) sub-Clause two is also amended and then three and four are also attended to.  So, your question is whether the amendment by the Committee, is now dealing with all those.  You are asking the Chairman.

MRS. ZZIWA:  I am seeking clarification from your Chair, Mr. Chairman. I want to find out, because some of us are not agreeing to the position of the Committee and we expressed our views and they have not been catered for.  When you move that, we go amendment-by-amendment or Clause-by-Clause, as per the Chairperson’s amendment, how are we then going to move to the objection of the amendment of the Chairperson, because it is actually very different from either the amendment or the principal Act?  I want to be clarified, hon. Chairman.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Chairman, on this amendment, which has been put across by the Chairperson, I am seeking clarification, to the effect the amendment carried here for example on Clause 27(2), “a city.” In our Constitution and in the Local Government Act, a city is not a Government. It is the district, which is the Government. Now, the question here is the local Government. If you make an insertion here of a city, which is not in the Constitution, are we not going to flaw contrary to the provisions of the Constitution by this insertion?

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know. I was suggesting that we have a general debate then we go through this, one by one business.  Will that satisfy you? So that the concerns of the hon. Zziwa can be attended to because she wants to raise certain objections first of all in general form before we go to Clause by Clause.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, if you just allow me to make one little observation, first whether it is quite in order for the General to be in the position he is, on your left if you made the observation.

The question is, you asked whether hon. Babu - this was the position that they had tried to advance? My understanding was that this would have been a result of a harmonised position.  It appears not to be, because it has been disowned and therefore the Chairperson should tell us how did he reach at this position which is very different from what is in the principal Act and what was brought here in order to harmonise our position. So that, if we try to debate this you may find that it is completely irrelevant. I think the Chairperson ought to tell us the origins of these provisions, which seem to be very different from the Principal Act and from the views expressed in order to bring about change.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but I thought the idea was to amend the Principal Act. The Principal Act is certainly different but it is being amended, that is the position; that is my understanding when someone says if you look up there section 95 of the Principal Act, they are talking of amending it definitely it must have been different in order to warrant any amendment. The question now you are quite right in saying yesterday this item was stood over in order to come up with a harmonised position. You are quite right in wondering how the Chairperson reached this position, when one of those who went to contribute to harmonise is now speaking differently.  Let us hear from the Chairperson. But definitely, we are trying to change the Principal Act, in particular section 95.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman you are right, we are changing section 95.  Secondly yesterday –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, before you respond, there is another clarification –(Interruption).

MR. RUZINDANA:  Procedure Mr. Chairman. Since we are told that there is an alternative position to the one we are being given by the Chairman, would it not have been neater if we had that other position also in writing?  It would have been a lot clearly, if we had that other one also in writing so that we know what the disagreements were all about rather then listening to them in general debate. Can they reduce these differences in writing either in a minority report or something like that, so that we know what the whole thing is about?

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, we moved an amendment last time and when you told us that we should harmonise our position, we agreed to go and harmonise our position and we held the amendment back.  We do have the copy of that amendment it is around and I am going to ask them to circulate it. We held it back because we expected to reach a position. But since you have allowed us to have a small debate we will explain.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, we will stand this over and go to the next section while you sought yourselves out.

MRS. ZZIWA: It is a very important issue for Kampala, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Just a moment, Madam.  

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I beg your indulgence for a clarification. This is really a motion of amendment and the principle behind this motion may be totally different from the principle in the other amendment, we are expecting. I personally do not agree with this amendment at all in its entirety unless certain basic principles are explained to me.  And if we had had two different motions then we would go about it the other way, we would start with one that differs furthest from the original Clause and we go step by step.  The alternative would be, that we go through a general debate on this motion if it is acceptable, if it is passed then we are through; if it is rejected, then we go back to something else because as it is now, we stand over it we do not know what is coming next that is why I was –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okulo Epak, thank you for your concerns expressed in that manner. You see we looked at this particular provision last time and there was, I think a problem as to the composition of the tender board and the proliferation of tender boards those were the two issues.  The composition, I think they introduced in the element of gender balance, then there was the question of should we have tender board doted here and there those are the two issues. And when they were raised we did not want to go into those details at that time because we wanted to catch up with other provisions. So, we asked the people concerned, I remember very well that they should go, sit down and harmonise their positions. it is possible that we were not able to harmonise their position.  Now, when that happens what do we do?  I think it is here that we should be able to decide the issue.  

Now, originally I wanted to proceed the way you had suggested, but I looked around it was as if people preferred to harmonise rather than us going into a general debate. I do not mind going to the general debate because it is from there that we will be able to take decision on the amendment, this is an amendment.  Now, if somebody else has got another amendment he should say so.

That would in my opinion amend that one of the Committee and we really proceed. But before we do that, before you come up with an amendment to amend this amendment, which amends the Principal Act, we can have a general debate and generate ideas. I think that is what you stand for, are you objectionable to that?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Chairman, the only difference on this amendment, is as to whether we should have tender boards for divisions in the city or one for the city. It actually affects one unit in the country at present, which is Kampala city. In the Schedule there are, Schedule one, which is functions for the city and Schedule two, which is functions for the divisions.  

The divisions in Kampala, actually some of them are bigger than districts, and they have the capacity to maintain and look after their own Tender Boards. Even their budget is bigger in some areas than a group of districts. I do not therefore see why we cannot really look at it from that point of view, and see whether in Kampala which is a City, we have a Division Tender Boards; but the Municipalities remain as they are, having one Tender Board, because of the size and a complicity of the Divisions within the city.

So, Mr. Chairman, if you took item by item, you look at No. 1, No. 2, No. 3; and those concerned begin explaining why we think there should be a separate Tender Board. I am sure we could resolve this without going to another sub-committee.  I thank you.  

MRS. ZZIWA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I fully agree with hon. Manzi except that if we go, I think we differ in principle with the amendment brought forth by the Committee. That is why I feel that when we start going Section by Section of the amendment as brought by the Committee then we shall not have the opportunity to present the differing view. So that is why I suggest that we could have the opportunity to present our amended or our amendment, which differs furthest.
  
THE CHAIRMAN:  Now, let us do this, debate this issue, if anybody has an amendment to move, move it.  That is the procedure. On the amendment, we are debating the Committee's amendment. The Committee has brought an amendment that is what has triggered off our minds, let us talk about it.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support the amendment of the Committee as amended in today's motion. Mr. Chairman, it is important that a city like Kampala, which in any case is the only city with five Divisions, some of these Divisions are different in sizes, in capacity to handle both civil works and all other infrastructure development. Some of these Divisions also differ in terms of human resource capacity or employment.  So, this being the case, to harmonise the differences in these Divisions for the purpose of having a Tender Board, it is good to have a Central Tender Board for the city where by the City Divisions will then nominate members to serve on the Tender Board. I think this is rational, and this would save resources both human, financial and material.

The second point, Mr. Chairman, is that when you look at Municipal Council, the Municipal Councils according to this amendment under amendment 3, “a Municipal Council Tender Board shall consist of five members including the chairperson and at least one third of the membership shall be women”.  This proposal is good but my concern is with regard to the number. One third of five is actually one. You cannot have one and a half of women, one third of five. So one third of five arithmetically, will be one point something. So one point six, seven; I do not know how we shall start measuring, you know, either from top and you stop somewhere or from bottom and you stop somewhere. So this membership, we could adjust it to have may be the membership to be six for that matter and the chairman could have a casting vote.

Now under Item 5 of this proposed amendment, it may appear that this proposal is being sought to handle a prevailing crisis, between the Central Division of Kampala City Council and may be the Local Government.  I would like to advise that, it will not be fair for us to legislate on the wrangles of our leaders whether at district level, at city level or at Parliamentary level.  So, I am rather concerned about this aspect. I do not know if the Minister has any explanation. With these remarks, Mr. Chairman, I would like to support this amendment and based on the Principle Act Section 95, will all be amended from sub-section one to subsection 4, and this, I think has been taken care of under Clause 27 which was proposed from a, b, c and d.  If this is the proposal, then I support this amendment with those remarks.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. ZZIWA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to differ and I beg not to support the motion as presented by the Committee, because the principle behind decentralisation will have been defeated if in the amendment as presented, the aspect of the city division, is omitted.  

Mr. Chairman, you realise that in the process of this debate like the previous speaker, hon. Okumu Ringa has brought forth, it is eluded that there are wrangles between central division of Kampala and the centre, which is the city centre of hon. Mayor Sebaana Kizito. I want to rise up to putting into account these wrangles because if the duties and the roles were specifically spelt out, these wrangles would not have existed.  

I want to base on the very principle of decentralisation which, is a basis of devolving powers to lower local Governments also supporting the fact that with devolved powers, there is increased efficiency and effectiveness and submit to this House, hon. Chairman, what has happened in the previous or may be what is happening  with Kampala City with its five Divisions. There are duties or roles as prescribed in the Local Government Act in the Schedules of the City Divisions as contrary to those of the district or city. When it comes to these roles or these duties wishing to be done by the City Divisions, they submit their requests in form of tenders to the centre, to the City Tender Board. What has been prevalent is that the centre has always been over loaded.  In fact, in the case of the small works, you find that it takes about six to Eight months for the City Tender Board to be able to attend to some of these needed works, to be done or dealt with, for instance in the Central Division.  

I can quote circumstances where for instance, collection of garbage took about six or seven months without the centre deciding or being able to preside over these small works. So in that particular respect, you find that there is too much work at the centre and subsequently, the Divisions will end up waiting nearly for six or seven months without being able to have these works done.

When I look at some of the other Divisions, other than Central Division, let me take for instance Nakawa.  Nakawa is a first growing Division with many industries, with many residents who wish to have services particularly those services, which should be done by the Division. What happens for instance, if particular factory wishes to have the opportunity to take its own garbage, it will have to submit to the Division and the Division will have to submit to the centre and in the process, it may take almost one year before this issue is resolved and the work will not be attended to. I want also to submit that – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, I would like you to come to your concluding remarks.

MRS. ZZIWA: I wanted to move an amendment to this Clause which is more commensurate with the Principal Act to say that, “ there shall be a Tender Board for every Urban Authority”, knowing very well that after agreeing in Section 3 of the amendment Bill, that one means that City Division and Municipal are all referred to as an Urban Authority. That will take care of any City Division which may be in position to handle its affairs at the Tender Board level with the – (Interruption).

DR. P. BYARUHANGA. Thank you very much hon. colleague for giving way. Mr. Chairman, the spirit behind the amendment raised by the Committee Chairman and our earlier harmonisation in our meeting with colleagues, took into consideration, first, the status of the definition of Urban Authority and during that meeting we agreed, all of us, that we should recommit this earlier definition of Urban Authority to refer in the case of Kampala the City. 
  
Consequently, Mr. Chairman, that is why earlier on in his presentation, the chairman had raised the issue of that recommital, first but you advised that we conclude with those which had stayed over, but the heart of this, is that, if we also defined Divisions as Urban Authorities, now we shall have a multiplication and duplication of functions. 

With Kampala City Council Urban Authority, then the Division Urban Authorities, we shall have fundamentally departed from the main functions described in the Schedule, particularly Schedule 2.  So, the agreement then was, that we shall have to look at the Schedules, because, Mr. Chairman, when you look at the Schedules, there are substantial functions there. That cannot be carried out at the level of Divisions by the nature of their magnitude in terms of infrastructure, such as street lighting, construction and others.  

So, the spirit behind this as much as hon. Margaret Zziwa is correct that we decongest the Tender Board at the level of City, which is equivalent to the District, the Urban Authority and which we are intending to recommit to this Committee, is that, making these other Divisions all of them, defining them as urban authorities will complicate even the functions described in the respective Schedules. That is the information I wanted to give.

MRS. ZZIWA:  I appreciate the information hon. Minister, but there is now one fundamental factor, the fact that these Schedules are not yet revisited, makes it very, very difficult for me now to know which roles or which duties are for a Division and which roles are for the centre. Because when you look at that Schedule 2 part (v) those roles of traffic lights, are for the centre. 

I would appreciate when the City Tender Board will go ahead to advertise and deal with the tenders for the streets lights. But then, when it comes to things like spraying vector control for instance, I would not see how for instance, the centre would have priority of this over maybe street lighting, to start sitting and discussing, being able to find time to be able to decide on who should be awarded the tender of vector control in Makindye Division for that matter and yet, our people for instance, some of these services are quite nearer to them and they visibly feel them more than some of these other centrally assigned roles. 

That is why I am calling on the hon. Minister not to look at the city just as of now. We are looking at the City for instance in ten, twenty, thirty years; when even some of the Divisions which are thought that maybe now, they do not actually require a Tender Board, but in about ten or twenty years, when we are actually legislating, we should consider. When we think that this decentralisation will be fully operational, it will be those very Divisions who will actually demand or will have the opportunity to have most of their services attended to.

MR. NDEGE:  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman. We are dealing with an expanding situation like in the city.  I was in Johannesburg and tried to find out how their city operates. What they did, they divided Johannesburg in Municipalities and each Municipality controls its own functions. So, you find the city Johannesburg and Pretoria are almost together. So if really we say, we cannot release – there will be no expansion. We are also talking about just simple things like street repairs, you know putting bulbs and things like that.  We cannot give this function to the big City.  And we have said look, there are functions of a City and there are functions of divisions. 

So if there are functions of a division, let the division cater and have its own tender board. Let us not complicate issues. Let us develop because we have only one City in Kampala. But there are other countries, which have thousands and thousands of cities, and they keep expanding. So let us not just be looking at Kampala City and looking at only one mayor and one tender board.  I think the divisions should be given tender boards, so that they can cater for simple things, potholes, and repairs of streets and provisions of other essential services, which cannot be done at a City level. Thank you.

MRS. ZZIWA: I thank the hon. Ndege.  I want to conclude, Mr.Chairman.  I want also to bring out the fact that when these works are tendered at the centre, there is a tendency of these tenders not paying any allegiance to the divisions, which divisions are responsible for supervising them. What actually happens, these tenderers will just go and start doing work. And when for instance the divisions try to intervene and finding out how or what kind of particulars were actually agreed upon, they are not even given the opportunity to get a copy of the contract for that matter. So they do not have any allegiance to the divisions.  

Yet under the Local Government Act it is the responsibility of the division to be able to supervise, to be able to monitor, to be able to follow up with all the works within their area of jurisdiction. And of course if I do not want to be biased, I have to look at the fact that since the contractor has been awarded the contract at the centre, he will be more compelled to serving the interests of the centre. That is why I want to –(Interruption)- I will take it and I make a motion Mr. Chairman.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Point of information. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member I am going to restrict your contribution because you are going into 25.

MR. TUMUBWEINEE:  Can I give information?  The information I want to give Mr. Chairman is that, I think what is bogging us down is to realise that cities actually expand and they are very different. If you go to London, there is greater London Council and there is Metropolitan area. If you go to City of Texas, you have got 14 cities all under one city and each is separate.  

The information I want to give her is that, if you really go to the Local Government Act, the Principal Law, page 126, you have functions for a City. And if you go to page 128, you have functions for the division. I think the division is saying, the functions you have given me to perform, let me be responsible for them and get people to do them.  However, the amendment is saying no, I have given you these functions, but I still want to get people to do them for you.  And I think that is where the fundamental difference is. 

Page 128 is listing what can be done by the division in its own within its own budget. And if you have given me my budget, and you have given me the works to do within that budget, then you are telling me you must also determine who should do the work. I think that is where the fundamental issue is. I do not see why my honourable colleague and the Chairperson are so hard on that one that, you cannot have a tender board for the division only to perform the duties that are assigned to the division?  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Zziwa, can you conclude your submission?

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Information 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Zziwa, can you conclude your remarks?  

MRS. ZZIWA:  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will give the hon. Member opportunity to debate the issue.

MRS. ZZIWA: Mr. Chairman with that added clarification which I think is really supportive, I beg to move an amendment which is amending Clause 27 to read as follows: “there shall be a tender board for each Urban Authority.”  The B and C and D, by replacing the phrase “municipal or town council” with a phrase “Urban Authority.” This one will cater for the city divisions in my particular interest. And this is in conformity with section (3) which was approved, and which I do not agree with to be recommitted. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, we are mixing issues. The question of Urban Authority is different from the tender board. So hon. Margaret is trying to bring in the Urban Authority for the city division. But Mr. Chairman I had asked you to re-committee definition of Urban Authority first.  And this should have been clear ­–(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: No, honourable chairperson, there is a procedure for re-committal. We do not do re-commit here. You have to move a motion.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I oppose her amendment because of Urban Authorities.

THE CHAIRMAN: All right. All the amendment he is saying basically is that, instead of talking about tender board for municipal, division and so on, you call them tender board for Urban Authorities.  Is that correct?

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Chairman the clarification I want to seek from the Member of Parliament for Kampala is how different her amendment is from the original provision in 95 (i), which says, “There shall be an Urban Tender Board for each urban council.” Because she is moving that, we replace the word “council” with “authority.” I think that is the essence of her amendment. I do not know whether it is different.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, not only council but also the word “proceeding council”. She wants the whole thing to be rounded up as “Urban Authority” instead of municipal council or City Council.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Chairman, I am reading a provision in the Local Government Act. According to the motion moved by the honourable Member of Parliament for Kampala, the only difference is that she wants the word “Authority” instead of council. So the clarification I wanted to get is whether in her view authority and council are different so that we can proceed with that.
  
MRS. ZZIWA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I should have been more comfortable with the old 95 in the Principal Act.  But they happen to have amended Section 3 to define an Urban Authority. So in the new amendment there is Urban Authority, there is no urban council. That is why now I am moving in the new amendment to have it as Urban Authority other than urban council. I think my clarification is clear.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I do not know whether the clarification which the chairperson was making, that after here he was intending to move a motion to re-committee that provision to change a definition. Would that meet what the hon. Zziwa is pursuing- (Interjection)- Will it be to her advantage suppose it is passed?

MR. RWABITA: No, it would not be because in our definition of authority, we talk of authority for planning for a city, for planning a municipality, for planning for the town council. Those are the three areas we call Urban Authority. Then the division is within Kampala Urban Authority. It cannot be another authority. That will be duplicating authorities within the city- (Interjection)- Yes.

MR. MUKULA: Mr. Chairman, in my contribution to this amendment, I would like to assert a very clear position.  This amendment of the Section 95 of the Principal Act, the principal body, the rhythm, the main rhythm of this amendment is in (5) because, the argument here is the wrangles that are obtaining in Kampala City. Mr. Chairman, the problem is, the tender of Kampala City, particularly the Tax Park and I do not want to touch any other part but touch on the real issue. The issue of the allocation of the tender of Kampala Tax Park has been awarded, re-awarded, cancelled and so on and so forth.  That is where the problem is and that is where the import of (5) is –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Which amendment?

MR. MUKULA: Mr. Chairman, I will come in and propose the amendment- (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Mukula, I think you know that we have two amendments on the Floor. The amendment by the Committee and now there is another amendment which seems to be, by the text of it seems to be closer to the original provision of the Bill. So I would like to suggest that we deal with the chairperson’s amendment and –(Interruption).

MR. MUKULA: Mr. Chairman, I do agree with you because I am now dealing with the chairperson's amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I did not know that.

MR. KAGGWA:  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  The procedure point I am raising, is that I am finding a problem to deal with the matter that involves interpretation of the Law which is under consideration without the advise of the Attorney General.  I would therefore, want to know whether we are competent enough to start juggling these legal matters without the competent person to advise us accordingly.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now hon. Kaggwa, there is no way I can drag the Attorney General here. The Attorney General is supposed to be here to answer matters, which are of legal nature and if he is not here, I do not think – what do you propose?

MR. KAGGWA:  Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much, to that end I propose – because I do not have empirical evidence to show that the legal authority was consulted in this matter. Because when you talk of the schedule, the functions and what is being demanded on the face of it there is a legal basis. I would be more comfortable if the authorised person, under 119 of the Constitution is here to authenticate it. So I would propose that this matter goes back, they consult the Attorney General, we come back here with a conclusive legal advice. I thank you.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank you very much. I would like to start off –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: The question is whether the Attorney General was consulted.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, in the committee there was a problem with the provisions of the Constitution No.190 and 197, which are the two legal basis on which Local Governments are run. Number 190 and 197, we were told very clearly by the Attorney General’s Chambers that there was no conflict. Finance and Local Governments, page 126 in the small Constitution version, Article No.190 clearly states that; “District councils shall prepare comprehensive and integrated development plans incorporating the plans of lower level local governments for submission to the National Planning Authority.”  

And Article No.197 reads that; “Urban Authorities shall have autonomy over their financial and planning matters in relation to the district councils as Parliament may, by law provide.”  Those were the two major laws, Articles that had to be defined by the Attorney General and he said there was no conflict.  

If I am allowed I wanted to go on the Debate, as you allowed me. I oppose the amendment, which has been brought, on the basis that –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Which one?

CAPT BABU: The one by the chairperson, the latest one.  Mr. Chairman, if you read in our Constitution in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy in Roman (ii) it reads that;  “the democratic principles” (iii) reads; “the state shall be guided by principles” –(Interruption).

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Chairman, I rise on a point of order. I was on the Floor of the House debating. Is it in order for the hon. colleague to proceed with the Debate and hijack my submission, Mr. Chairman?  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, he was giving information. You see, I understood. I gave him the opportunity because a question was asked whether the Attorney General was consulted and he signalled to me that he has that information. That is why I gave him the Floor. He is informing the House on that point not to debate. That the Attorney General was consulted on these two Articles of the Constitution, which have some relevance to this Debate and he said there was no conflict. Proceed - (Interjection)- No, no you have given the information.

CAPT. MUKULA: Much obliged, Mr. Chairman. As I was on the Floor, I was giving a background to the problem in Kampala City for that matter, because I have been a councillor in Kampala City, I have been a chairman of L.C.111 Nakawa Division and I am now a Member of Parliament of a Municipality. Now the problems you are talking about are not obtaining in the municipality, but this amendment particularly hinges and touches on the city and because the city for that matter as described by the Local Act is a district. It has got certain problems that I thought we would be able to bring out. Now in order for us to get the gist of the matter, the background of this whole momentum, I thought it would only be proper for the hon. House to understand the background.

Possibly I am to read between lines of this amendment; now I would like us to understand very clearly that in Kampala City, the tender in the city has not been transparent. The other Divisions appear to have been hijacked their powers, by the centre.  So in essence, you will find that when tender are being awarded those Divisions that have generated money when it comes to the award of the tenders, the district has the upper hand and displaces the political will of the Divisions. 

Now Mr. Chairman, I have raised the question and a point in question that the Divisions and for that matter Kampala Central has a problem. You have money being generated from the Taxi Parks; but Kampala Central does not give the tender it is the district, which awards it. Now there are political forces that are in play at the district to influence the award of these tenders, and that is why it is important for us to understand that if we were to decentralise, then we must ensure that you create. The purpose of decentralisation is to bring services nearer to the people. 

 There was a time when we had the National Central Tender Board. The Airport at one time had a problem when for example a bulb on a running light burnt three or four bulbs, you would find that to replace these four bulbs, you would have to refer this whole purchase to the Central Tender Board. Now because of taking services nearer to the people and pointing efficiency within the organs of the state, the Civil Aviation Authority can replace these bulbs and create efficiency in the delivery of service to this country.

I am now saying that this amendment as stands will only go counter to the functions that we are all trying to achieve. What are the functions?  To try to create efficiency and take services nearer to our people.  Now, the City we are talking about is not shrinking nor is it remaining constant it is expanding. The services are getting more demanding. So it is important that we in creation of the Tender Committees in this City ensure that they decentralise to create efficiency and to take services nearer to the people. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are giving information. Yes you are giving information, because clarification was being sought.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Chairman, I was seeking clarification from the Member who was holding the Floor. I do not know whether he has already vacated the Floor?  But if he is still on, my clarification is this; I understand from other sources that he represents a Municipality and in that Municipality there are divisions just like there are divisions in Kampala. 

The clarification I am seeking from him is if we establish the principle of a division in Kampala having a Tender Board, would it be proper for us to also go and establish Tender Boards in all other urban divisions in Kampala and elsewhere? Or are we merely talking of an issue related to the size of Kampala and the size of the money which is collected, which if so to me would be an administrative matter not a matter of principle requiring a statutory amendment? I wanted him to clarify that matter for me.

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr. Chairman, I thank my colleague the hon. Member of Parliament for Terego.  And I would like to move as follows: For this purpose City divisions form Municipal divisions, because the City divisions are bigger in size, bigger in population, wider in terms of revenue and they have got more demanding services. But for this purpose, I would like to say that any other City or any other Municipal authority that eventually qualifies for the status of a City could now be able to have the same application of the law being subjected to it.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukyamuzi, do you know where we are?  The amendment by the Committee.

MR. LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman. I stand to support the Committee’s amendment. I happen to be one of the Members of Parliament directly representing a division by the name of Lubaga South and Lubaga tallies very well with Makindye, Kawempe and Nakawa. So, Mr. Chairman, I have taken the trouble to do some research by directly talking to the people answerable to what we are discussing this afternoon. And the crack of the matter is; I discover that in our decentralisation arrangement, the main unit we are trying to be proud of is the district, in this case Kampala City Council. 

What have we done to improve on the building of that institution? Because my impression here is that decentralisation should not end up in segmentation. We should try to build a unit with pride, in this regard Kampala District Council. So the consultation I have made is that Lubaga division for example, would directly support this amendment because it says according to the problems existing in the division, the stage of running an independent Tender Board is still far away.  There are so many problems directly facing the division and even as I speak now, they have difficulties in collecting garbage, which is an additional to the environmental calamities I have always been fighting.  

To be very specific I would like to propose that the divisions send their representatives to the District Tender Board.  One of the reasons why we have been complaining about the unique case of Kampala Central, is that the Equalisation Grant, which we should have been speaking about with pride in the sensation of Federalism if we had attained Federalism, has not operated.  It is not working.

It is not new that units of a unique nature like Kampala, like New York do exist. They exist and in the case of Uganda where unique cases like Kampala division exists, you have the solution of the Equalisation Grant, which can cater for the smaller units. But have we established that the Equalisation Grants are working?  They are not working. If the Equalisation Grants were working, we would not be landing in this problem.  I have discovered for example that in the case of Kampala division, most of the roads are already done by the City Council. They see a lot of money in front of them and they wonder what to do with that money and they think that time has come for them to run their own division.  Otherwise in the case of UTODA, UTODA is a common service – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you come to your conclusion?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  let me talk about UTODA.  The number of services in the district, which are sorted out by Tender at the district centre namely, services related to transport, you find that UTODA is in every division of Kampala.  So if it is in every division of Kampala, why should Lubaga run its own Tender Board when the UTODA services are everywhere in the district?  I have consulted my Mayor, His Lordship Sebaana Kizito and he too sanctions this amendment.  With those few remarks I strongly urge the member to support the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. I gave you a lot of time. Now hon. Babu was the next on the queue and then hon. Okulo Epak.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Babu can you please be brief.

CAPT. BABU:  Yes Mr. Chairman, I am going to try and be brief. I wanted us to start from the Constitution, National objectives, Directive Principles of state policy, on page 2, Political Objective and Democratic principles.

CAPT. BABU: Yes, I am going to try and be brief. I wanted us to start from the Constitution, National objectives, directive principles of state policy, on page 2, political objective and democratic principles.  In number three, it says, “The State shall be guided by principle of decentralisation and devolution of Government functions and powers- I want to underline this,  ‘Governments, functions and powers’- to the people at appropriate levels where they can best manage and direct their own affairs”.

Without a nomenclature, Section 95 of the Principal Act clearly states before it was amended that, “there shall be an Urban Tender Board for the rich Urban Council”.  But not to read the others, when you go to No.4 of that very Section, it says, “Notwithstanding the Provisions of Sub-section 1, an Urban Council may, by resolution, opt not to establish its own Tender Board and request for the services of the District Tender Board”.   Mr. Chairman, this gives the option that hon. Lukyamuzi was talking about; that if Lubaga does not want a Tender Board, the district can do that for them.  

We think that from a conceptual point of view, and with the devolutions of power and functions, we still feel that you give us the functions at the division, which collect up to shs.14b/= a year and sends 50 per cent to the district and remains with shs.7b/= to budget. You are not giving us an option to tender for the services they have given us in the schedule.

Mr. Chairman, the Principal Act, on page 126, clearly stipulates the schedules given to the city and they are very clear, and on 128, it gives you the schedule that is done at the division. All we are saying is that the schedule that is humbly given to the City division should be allowed to give their own tenders, that is, the functions. All we are asking for is the power to carry out those functions, and one of those powers, is the Tender Board.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Chairman, I did not want to interrupt the hon. Member, but the point I want a clarification on from him is very important. He has talked about the schedules, which devolve functions to various lower Governments including the City divisions.  I also know that the same schedule devolves functions to the rural Sub-counties, which you refer to as LC.3.  Would it therefore, be correct to create Tender Boards for the same divisions because they also collect revenue?

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Member.  Here we are dealing with only urban authorities. I would like to apologise to my Friend. 95 deals strictly with all urban authorities and the one before that deals with districts and sub-counties; we have left them as they are and we are now talking about urban authorities – a different preserve. But there it is! It is slightly bigger; it collects more money, has more budgets, has more services to offer and therefore, requires that they control the services that they give out.

There was a question, why is it that we are not just supporting what is in 95 – the Principal Act? It is because in the definitions when we started to debate this, urban authority definition was introduced, and we removed urban councils. During that debate, we moved an amendment and included a City division as opposed to any other divisions. It is that one that the hon. Minister would like to recommit. But until it is recommitted, it stands and therefore, our amendments will be based on that until it is re-amended.  

So, if we were to look at the present 95, I was saying to bring in the urban authority and remove the urban council was a mistake, because that basically removed the urban councils which are basically from town councils, through to municipalities divisions, through to divisions of city all the way to the City.  What they wanted to do, Mr. Chairman, was to create a model that the city will be equivalent to a district and that would be the only authority – I have no objection with that. My objection is to wipe away a city division and not to call it an urban council. Whilst I know very well, that internationally metropolises are composed of Municipalities and Barrows; Barrows are equivalent to a division.

Mr. Chairman, as long as we have the present decentralisation, and we say we are going to develop powers down and functions, we have got to accompany those functions with powers. I am saying that the cities divisions collect a lot of money and they send this money to the City Council, and then City Council has more work than others.  

The main reason why we would like to have smaller tender boards is because there is congestion at the City Tender Board; there is inefficiency, there is lack of accountability and transparency. So we are saying, allow the City divisions, which are powerful entities bigger than most districts and some Municipalities to also be able to give out these tenders on their schedules only.  We are not saying they should go to a preserve.  Somebody was talking about transport and communication, if that is the reason I would like to amend the Schedule as I stand up here -

THE CHAIRMAN: You wind up, please!

CAPT. BABU: That we include on the Kampala City Council – the district – we give them transport and communication on the Schedule, and we leave the other Schedule with the division, so that they can have the urban councils. 
 
I would like to end by saying that for goodness' sake, let us go to decentralisation of power again. We are in a phase of decentralisation. 

I am imploring you that my Council, which I represent here, has requested and passed a Resolution. They have even gone to Court to prove a point. All they are trying to do is to circumnavigate what the Court rulings were.  I would like to request very strongly that this House supports us to have a Tender Board at that level. The urban authority definition can change I have no problem.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Members, I think we have heard enough from him.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you Mr. Chairman. Let me start by giving a historical background. Before the greater Kampala City was created, all these what we are calling, divisions were independent Municipalities under the Kabaka’s Government. So, what has ideally happened is that we have amalgamated them to form the greater Kampala Metropolitan City and changed the nomenclature from the Municipalities to divisions. So, historical function of these was that they were Municipalities.

Secondly, we are dealing with the issue of devolution of power and decentralisation of functions. We are decentralising functions, we are not delegating responsibilities and the authority of doing this is with Parliament. Now, to try to usurp the decentralisation of functions given to divisions or any other local Government at all by Parliament and bringing it back to another Government, say a district or a city council for that matter or a municipal council for that matter is to pretend to give with one hand and take away with the other hand, which is contradictory.  It is contradictory in legal terms and it is contradictory in terms of responsibilities.

The amendment brought by the committee makes the situation even much more horrible particularly in their justification. When the committee says that the intention is to make Kampala City Council Town Clerk the accounting officer, I do not know where they get that power?  Kampala district and City Council is as much a local Government as a division is and the Clerk there remains the accounting officer and their accounts are audited separately.  How will the Town Clerk account for finances of a division, which is audited and spent differently?   Having awarded the tender who is going to sign the certificates and spend the money, which is otherwise in the budget of a divisional council?  Would the Town Clerk have the power to descend there and sign certificates and authorise payment to those tenders?  This is absurd.

That is why hon. Med Kaggwa was saying 'there is a legal situation here'.  We cannot at this time want to differ the legal status of any local Government without providing very clearly the criteria under which we would like to make the departure.  Whether we like it or not, all this local Governments right from district to sub county, they are local Governments, they can be sued and they can sue, they are independent corporate bodies. 

 Now if you are going to have to withdraw some of their powers for purposes of convenience or not to allow them to exercise certain powers, then you must define the criteria very clearly under which and when they will not be allowed to exercise those powers and show clearly when they will be allowed to exercise those powers. What we are doing here is partial and contrary to the spirit and - (Interjection) - I will give a second, to the spirit and principle of devolution and decentralisation

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga. Philip): Thank you very much hon. Okulo Epak for giving way and the last point he has referred to has convinced me that Mr. Chairman, we stay over this Clause.  Because when you look at the principal Act 5(b) of the Local Government, "A division shall be equivalent to a sub county and shall exercise all relevant functions and powers conferred upon a sub county".  And what hon. Okulo Epak is saying now, if we move to vary the powers of a division which is equivalent to a sub county we are setting a precedent. We must therefore have an overall global view for all the functions of these sub counties, all the local Governments throughout the country. It is for that purpose that I am requesting that we stay over this particular issue and have more consultations and also have more discussions with the Attorney General. I thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman I was going to end up by moving in exactly the same direction. So I concur with the hon. Minister and I presume his chairperson automatically concurs too that, we stand over this matter and do more consultations particularly with the office of the Attorney General because we are dealing with corporate bodies with powers. It is only the question of scale. If along this scale you want to create diversions, then you must define the criteria clearly and specify when and how you will give them out as the time comes.  So I think we stand over this I wanted to suggest that finally, so that we do not labour this.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us do this we shall give the Minister, the Chairperson and other stakeholders, including the Attorney General to deal with this matter and we would like to complete or dispose it off tomorrow.  

Clause 39.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, Clauses 39 to 41 are concerned with elections of administrative units. We discussed this thing at length and the biggest problem was the cost of elections of LC I and LC II councils.  However, we came to a middle point where the committee even consulted with the electoral commission that it would be much cheaper if we just elected a chairperson of LC I and the chairperson of LC II by secret vote and then that chairperson nominates his Cabinet from the council and for the council to approve. If he gives a wrong person, the council has got a right to say that ‘No I think that person is not right to be on your executive’ and then they can change.  The LC II it will be easy because it will be the council Members from LC Is who will chose their chairperson, who again nominate the council.  

Mr. Chairman, we find this will be the cheapest but some people say it is expensive.  It is not.  You may not need to print pictures and ballot papers as long as it is secret you can use the normal paper and those who do not know how to write they can be helped to tick some names and we put them in a box and count them and at the end of the day we have elected a chairperson by secret vote.

Mr. Chairman, the Committee recommends that 39(a) "the elections of the village and parish chairpersons shall be by secret ballot".  And then 3(b) follows that: "the members of the executive committee at the village and parish level shall be nominated by the respective chairperson for approval by their councils." 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, Clause 40 is amended by deleting section 162 of the principal Act and replacing 163 by deleting sub-section 2 – 8.This section 162 talks of election by lining up and now it is no longer holds water because we are going to use a secret ballot it is consequential.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  What is 2, I do not understand in (2) – 8 what is that?

MR. RWABITA:  In 162 we shall keep only one. One says, “the presiding officer shall call for nominations for the offices of the council executive committee in the case of a village and parish and chairperson and vice chairperson in the case of a vacancy to be filled.  So that one stays but the rest of 162 is repealed or deleted from 2 to 8 because these ones are talking of lining up.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Chairman, under Clause 40 which reads,” Clause 40 is amended by deleting section 162 of the Principal Act and replacing section 163 by deleting sub-sections 2 to 8.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it 2 to 8 or 2 and 8? I think it is 2 to 8.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: 2 to 8 that is the way I understand it from 2 to 8. Now the Principal Act I have on page 106 would mean we are retaining sub-section 1 of section 163, which reads, ”The quorum for a council at any meeting for election shall be one third.”  Is that the correct section we are dealing with?  That is the clarification I am seeking from the chairperson and the Minister. Thank you Mr. Chairman.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, in section 162 and 163 the only thing that I see that becomes consequential and is to be amended is electing the whole executive and then lining up. The rest is the normal procedure of elections at LC 1. I wanted to request the chairman and the Minister that if they remove that issue not the whole executive to be elected and to remove the lining up, the rest is the normal procedure of elections. I was wondering if we repeal 162 and 163 what would then happen?  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, we are repealing 162 because it talks of lining up and nomination and what have you.  But 163 we keep one, which says, “The quorum of a council at a meeting for election shall be one third”. So that one we are keeping. The rest again talk about an election where the electorate are going to queue, because there is the officer lining up in three, four it is also which candidate and there is portrait results, all this is relevant if only we were going to line up. So they are not relevant at all. The Electoral Commission will put modification on how they can do it.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. Now he has corrected it because he had read 162 or 163 so I am happy because he has corrected it.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, Clause 41 is amended by deleting sub-section (a) and then new provision shall be as follows; Section 164 of the principal Act is amended by deleting sub-section 3 and 4 only.  It is consequential because they again talk of the lining up system, it is just consequential, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 4, as amended agreed to.

Clause 42.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, for the same reason Clause 42 is deleted.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Philip Byaruhanga): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Philip Byaruhanga): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered Clauses 39 to 42 and passed them with some amendments and has stayed over Clause 27.  I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Philip. Byaruhanga):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: That concludes today’s business and we shall hopefully conclude consideration of this Bill tomorrow. I would like to urge the Minister, the chairperson and other stakeholders including the Attorney General, to come up with a harmonised position on the question of Clause 27. The House is adjourned until 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.5 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5th April, 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)

