Tuesday, 8 April 2003

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

 PRAYERS

 (The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I want to first of all welcome the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister who has been away for quite some time – (Applause) - but apparently, he looks fit. 

Honourable Members, in the stranger’s gallery we have our children, students from Gombe Senior Secondary School in Mpigi District. You are welcome.

Honourable Members, today the Business Committee sat in the morning to plot for the handling of the pending business before the end of the current meeting of the Second Session. At the beginning of this meeting, I had indicated to you that the committee had tentatively decided that Parliament would be prorogued after the first week of May. But we have considered the pending business, which is a lot. And here, I want to thank the committees because in the last week they were able to produce many reports, which have overwhelmed me. 

Because of this, and taking into account the fact that the first week or the other, we lost many days because of other engagements that took you away from the House, we have decided that we extend the sitting by one week. Therefore, Parliament will be prorogued around 15 May to enable us complete this urgent business pending before us.

I want to give you notice as to the kind of business, and when we shall handle it so that it goes on record, and you do not have the excuse of not turning up when the business is to be handled. We have also decided that we should assign duration for dealing with particular business instead of being open-ended to the prejudice of other items on the Order Paper.

There is the issue of ministerial statements, because in our Rules we said they would attract debate. But we have realised that the kind of debate we have been getting as a result of ministerial statements has also been open-ended.  Sometimes we spend three hours debating a ministerial statement, which has just taken five minutes or 10 minutes. As an interim measure, we shall be debating a ministerial statement for not more than 20 minutes so that we can deal with other items on the Order Paper. 

Because of the tight programme we have, although we normally sit on Tuesday to Thursday, I request that for the remaining period we even sit on Monday and Friday mornings.  That is the only way we will able to deal with the business. I appeal to you.

Therefore, tomorrow we will start with the Land Amendment Bill, which will take two days, followed by the Public Finance and Accountability Bill, 2002 on Thursday and Monday, then the University and other Tertiary Institution’s Amendment Bill on 15 April. 

The Uganda Tea Authority Decree Bill, and the Uganda Tea Grower’s Co-operation Bill will be on the same day, 16 April. The National Youth Council Amendment Bill, 17 April, the Financial Institution’s Bill 2002, will be on 22 and 23 April, the Foreign Exchange Bill will be on Thursday, 24 April. The Forestry and Tree Planting Bill, 2002, will be on 25th while the Mining Bill will be on 28 April. 

The Petroleum Supply Bill will be on 29 April, the National Council for Disability Bill, 30 April, the Loan Request for Poverty Eradication, the Loan Request for livestock and the Loan request for Apex II Project will be on the same day, 2 May. On 5 May, there will be the Loan request for Rural Micro Finance Project, and also a Report on Supplementary Schedule I and II and the report of the Committee Natural Resources on use and sharing of waters on River Nile. This is a business, which has been pending for some time. 

Then on 6 May, the report of the Committee on Social Services on a new policy on decentralised selection of government sponsored students in public university. This is a very important matter; it should be prepared for.  Also, we shall deal with the motion for a resolution of Parliament to establish Gulu University. But you have seen there is something about this today.  

Then 7 May - report on Public Accounts Committee, Auditor General’s Report for the year ended 30 June 1998, and a similar report for the year ended 30 June 1999. Then there will be a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to abolish graduated tax, on 8 May. There is a motion for Parliament to convene a meeting in Gulu that will follow, and the interim Report on Local and Accounts Committee.

But of course there are other matters pending namely, the questions. We have a number of questions, which you asked in the past that have not been answered. We are trying to work out the most efficient way of handling them. They will be handled, and we intend to put about five questions to a minister to answer in one day and then following day. We shall be able to deal with these questions before Parliament is prorogued. That is the information.

MS BEATRICE BYENKYA: Mr Speaker, I just wish to draw your attention - As far as my Committee is concerned, you had slated the Local Government Finance Commission Bill for 24 April, together with the Foreign Exchange. I did not hear you read it.

THE SPEAKER: I accept that. That is a correction. Include that in your records.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I notice that you have programmed the Disability Council Bill to appear, I think, about the 30th. I request that if possible, you could bring it a little forward because on 30th or around there, three of us, including the Minister of State for Disability, may be going to attend an Africa Consultative meeting on the Africa Decade for Disability. We would have preferred to be here when the bill is being discussed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think you can adjust this programme.  

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, you have read all those things. Unfortunately we do not have a clear copy – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You will get it.

MR WAMBUZI: The point on which I am seeking clarification from you, Mr Speaker, is, are we going to be given all the necessary documentation, particularly some of the bills and some of these things so that we move faster? Because it is becoming a package of action, and we need to be given the material, which we need to use in debating efficiently, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I imagine that you have copies of the Bills, because a bill is not read until copies have been distributed to the members. You have the Bills. What you do not have are the reports. But as I have said, the committees have worked very hard and reports are ready.  They will be distributed to you so that you have the tools to handle the debate. 

MS ALICE ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to know whether we will be looking at the Election Violence Report in the course of this sitting, and then the probe on Kampala City Council. You remember, Mr Speaker, sometime back we had started on "Election Violence" and then we deferred it.  So, I was wondering whether we would not prioritise it now?  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The issue came up and I was asked to contact the chairperson of the committee. As you remember, we were not able to deal with this particular report because the chairperson informed us that there were some matters that were sub judice, and we decided not to continue with it. But once he informs us about this, then we shall see how to handle it before Parliament is prorogued. Thank you very much.

MRS ATIM OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the debate on Uganda Commercial Bank, hon. Sam Kutesa alleged that some years back, I, as the then chairperson of Uganda Development Bank, gave some animals to the former President of Uganda, Dr Milton Obote, and that he had evidence to prove that that deal was a deal of corruption. He promised that he would bring that evidence to this House within two weeks. It is now almost a month and a few days. I would like to know from you, Mr Speaker, when hon. Kutesa will produce his evidence to the House concerning that allegation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The answer is that I was not privy to what the hon. Minister stated. Therefore, I cannot know where he is going to get his evidence. But the point, which you have made, which is within my competence, is to request him to fulfil the promise he made to the House. That I will do.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter.  If he has no evidence, and we all have every reason to believe he had no evidence, can he honourably withdraw that statement, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, as I have said, I am not privy to this source of information. The best I can do is to ask him to make a statement or produce evidence. Only then can an appropriate decision be made on the matter.

MR AWORI: I am seeking your guidance on an issue you have just mentioned as a proposal of meeting from Monday to Friday. I was just wondering if you would permit a formal motion for a resolution of Parliament to change our Rules of Procedure, Rule 12(1). It is a procedural motion that Parliament shall meet on Mondays – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you have a motion on that. But my request was just as an interim measure. Yours is for a long term, which is being handled by the Committee concerned with the rules. But this is for an interim period.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, there is a pending statement from Government on a motion which was moved by hon. Amuriat on the deployment of protective force to the districts neighbouring Karamoja that was supposed to come within one week; that was on 26th. The motion was passed in your absence, on the 19th. The report of the government should have been placed before this House within a week, on the 26th.  Unfortunately, Parliament was adjourned for some political activities, and so we went away. I am just wondering, because this was a motion of urgent public importance.  People are dying, people are being displaced, and people are starving. I really expected that that report should have been placed before the House latest today. 

Secondly, I had a motion for school fees, admissions and education in Karamoja. I understand it came last week. I want to apologise to the House that because of the problem of insecurity in Otuke, I had to go there very urgently. I thought I would be back around Wednesday last week but the situation intensified. I am happy we had the First Deputy Prime Minister in Lira together with Gen. Salim Saleh. There is now great hope that things may be improved. So I request, with your permission, Mr Speaker, that these two items be treated and be included as the matters to be finished before we are prorogued. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I imagine the first one - is that not the statement which the hon. Minister of State for Defence made here? There was a statement, which was made by hon. Nankabirwa; but it was not in writing. She said she is going to commit it in writing and give more details. I think that is what you are talking about in as far as the first one is concerned.  

As for the second one, the Clerk will definitely communicate to you about the fate of your motion. If you have any problem, then you will be able to see him. But we have also considered it.

Honourable members, also, we have realised that sometimes the questions you put concern matters which are already pending in the committees. We are looking into ways of synchronising this so that we do not have matters being handled by the committees and then a question being framed on the same issue before the committees have reported.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Law is a continuous process and not static.  In light of what you have just related to us in connection with the programme which we are going to follow, I would like to know whether today’s developments which includes a motion seeking to fight the polythene papers will also get consideration.

THE SPEAKER: I certainly agree with you that it is a continuous process, and we shall handle business as it comes to us.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your esteemed guidance.  Last week, we had a privilege and a great pleasure – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, this question of guidance and so forth should stop.  This opportunity is only given to you to deal with very urgent matters.  If it is another matter that you think I should handle, you can come to me so that we can give you an opportunity to present it. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO ESTABLISH GULU UNIVERSITY UNDER THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS ACT 2001

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a motion for a resolution of Parliament to establish Gulu University under the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister is that business not given a date?  Is it urgent business?  Is it connected with the matter that is going on with the committee?  Does it depend on the amendment of the Universities Act?  

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  In your outline of business, you mentioned both the amendment to the principal Act, which is pending in the committee, and you also mentioned this matter.  These two matters are separate, and one does not depend on the other.  

The amendment to the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions’ Act seeks to create a University at Kyambogo out of three existing institutions: The Institute of Teacher Education, Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo and Uganda National Institute for Special Education (UNISE).  These had separate legal frameworks, and Government took the decision to merge them into one university.  This merger had not been provided for in the original Act. This is why the amendment became necessary. 

On the other hand, Gulu University is a new institution altogether, and it does not depend on how the business of the merger at Kyambogo proceeds.  Section 22(1) of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions’ Act simply states that the minister may, by statutory instrument, on the recommendation of the National Council and by resolution of Parliament, establish a public University.  This matter is urgent: First, it is a commitment on the part of Government to establish a University at Gulu; it has been pending for many years.

Two weeks ago, Sir, I had to respond to a supplementary question from hon. Omara Atubo. What was the problem?  Was it incompetence, ineptitude or what?  The matter is so urgent that I would request that it is handled in the normal manner without making it dependent on what happens to the amendment for creating a university at Kyambogo out of three existing institutions.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Okay, then under those circumstances the appropriate Committee on Social Services should handle and then report appropriately.

MS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for laying the motion for a resolution to Parliament to establish Gulu University.  I want to get clarification for proper guidance of this House from the minister. 

I am aware that this morning we have been in a meeting to chart out business, which will influence our business in the committee.  I want to learn from the minister, by way of clarification. After we have debated the amendment on the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, which is establishing the merger of the three institutions; UNISE, ITEK and UPK, whether under Section 22, he will not be required as a minister - Section 22 of the Principal Act (the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions)- to formally come to this House and move a resolution to establish Kyambogo University after we have provided for the merger.  After that guidance, I think I will be in a better position to guide the business of my committee.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Hyuha, Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services, for her intervention.  Mr Speaker, you indicated in your communication from the Chair that it would be a good thing, when a matter is pending before Committee of Parliament, maybe to find some way of synchronising so that the same matter is not taken up when it is still being discussed.  

As far as I am concerned, the amendment is still with the Social Services Committee.  I volunteer to answer any question the committee may have when we are still in committee.  If we disagree there, we may come to the floor of Parliament.  To date we have not yet disagreed on how to proceed, and I would beg that you excuse me from handling this matter now.  If it arises in the committee and we fail to resolve it, well, we may have to come to the Floor.  But for the time being, I would really appeal to the chairperson of the committee that we sort ourselves out there to begin with.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, I think it is clear.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS ON THE BUS PARK WRANGLES

(Debate continued)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I rise to express my full support for the report of this committee on the bus park wrangles.  But before I tackle a number of items within this report, allow me, Mr Speaker, to congratulate the chairperson of this committee, his Vice and the entire committee for producing before the Floor of this House an outstanding report.   

I call it an outstanding report because, first of all, it is a report that is written editorially in clear language and in a very sound manner.  I also say that the report is sound because when you read it, you do not see in that report individuals who are members of the committee, unlike some of the reports that we have, which we have not debated, where when you read the report, you actually see that the members who were put to write that report seem to have been fighting amongst themselves.

I also say that this report is an outstanding report because of the investigative depth and courage with which they addressed all the key issues.  I wish this Parliament would adopt the standard of this report as expected of all committees and groups appointed.

Before I go further, Mr Speaker, I would also want to note as a scientist that looking at the list of committee members, three individuals did not sign and the three individuals happen to come from the same place.  I do not know whether  - because it is statistically significant for me - I do not know whether they did not concur with the report or they avoided being associated with the report or they would want the Parliament to take a free hand without associating the report to them.

Now coming to the report itself, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for pointing out key issues.  The first issue is the issue of influence peddling.  This report clearly brings out the extent to which people who hold public office have abused those responsibilities, some of which border criminality.  

In respect to people linked with State House and the Office of the President, I think it is important that the perpetual interference by individuals like Fox Odoi and Kakooza Mutale, who are mentioned in the affairs that do not directly relate to their work, should be addressed. 

In considering the recommendations of this report, I think this Parliament should make it categorically clear that for the rule of law and constitutionalism to prevail, people whose jobs are to do other things should never use the powerful Office of the presidency to influence matters.  

The report also brings out the failure and reluctance of the CID, and more importantly, of the office of the IGG.  The members said that the IGG declined to appear before it.  The only unfortunate thing is that they did not ask the IGG to prepare a written submission on this matter, so that even if he did not appear, he would have a specific view and position on this.  

Again, I get very worried because if the CID who are responsible for investigating crimes, and the IGG that is supposed to oversee all these matters are reluctant to protect the aggrieved parties, where do they turn?  Because in matters of crime, the CID is supposed to investigate and allow Government to prosecute. The IGG should be more or less the final arbiter, and if these two bodies cannot help, then we must actually find ways of ensuring that the interest of people who may be aggrieved can be protected.

Then the other important thing that came out of this report is the incompetence of Kampala City Tender Board.  I do not know whether it is incompetence arising from lack of technical capability or incompetence arising from influence peddling or just a manifestation of the problems we have.  But it was exceedingly unfortunate that the tendering process through which the Kampala park was taken, was so glaringly faulty, and yet there seemed to be no voice within KCC, or no voice out of KCC to say enough is enough and let us correct this!  

I even hear that subsequent to this Kampala Bus Park, a major tender issue related to the markets also arose, and in this we also see the end of influence peddling. So I really urge this Parliament to also pronounce itself on this.  But where incompetence is based on weaknesses of the structure, the political position of the district tender board where they are appointed by the districts and they are answerable to the districts, if that position is the one that allows influence peddling, then the district tender boards should be de-linked from the district so that they can operate with the direct linkage to the Central Tender Board. I think every Member of Parliament has a problem in his or her constituency where tenders have been awarded on the basis of greed and favouritism.

Fourthly, there were serious issues that are of clearly criminal nature, and it was exceedingly surprising that even up to the time of preparing this report, I read in the paper where some individuals linked to this crisis were being prosecuted, and the criminal issue was centred around how UBOA Central got its tender award, forged documents about their linkage with SKANSKA and false claims  

Beside that, the committee tells us that even when the tender process had been proven to be wrong and almost criminal, the people who got the tender based on wrong procedure actually now own the bus park, and they are operating it and nobody seems to be doing anything about it. Therefore, the individuals linked to UBOA, particularly people like Ceaser Tokoma and G. Nangumya who were mentioned in the report, and the biggest one of them all, Muhangi - really this matter should be followed very seriously.  

Finally, I would like to end by saying that let this Parliament fully endorses the recommendations and the content of this report, but they should further go and clearly state that the IGG and the Office of the CID should do something about this report and Parliament should ask the minister concerned, within a specified period of one to three months, to report to this House what the CID and the Office of the IGG would have done.  

Secondly, as I said before, there has to be a comprehensive review of the roles of the tender board.  I agree with the President who, during the Movement Conference, said that some of these people should be held criminally responsible for what they do as members of the tender board.  I believe that Parliament should liaise with the minister concerned so that the defects that allow tender boards to operate with impunity are addressed through the law. And that establishment of individual and group responsibility for whatever happens.  

Finally, allow me once again to really congratulate the committee.  I was told that when this report came out, some of them were even accosted with: “Why do you people embarrass Government like this?” Government, please, this is not meant to embarrass you. If every time people presented facts to you like this and you translate them into remedial action, this country would move many steps forward.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

MS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I want to stand in support of the report submitted by the relevant Committee, but my concern is on the issue that was emphasised in the report, that the authority of UBOA had gone to NSSF to borrow some money.  I want to warn – it is a warning because this money for NSSF is not for anybody to borrow but it is money kept to help workers in their old age, when they are incapacitated.  We have had a bitter experience where some big shots of the Government had continually gone on borrowing this money and they never refunded this money.  It is a big concern to the workers of this country, and please, I want to warn everybody who wants to do this to take care.

Secondly, I also analysed this report, and I found that there are some witnesses who did not have the guts of coming to the committee to give evidence.  Is it possible to give some special protection to witnesses who have relevant information that can help this country to get out of this kind of confusion, more so when we are talking about corruption and other things?  For example, this very tender seems to have a lot of ambiguity and some hidden agenda, if you analyse this report.  It is very absurd if there is no protection to the witnesses that would come and give us relevant information.  I call upon this House to put some remedy to help such people so that they can come and help us out of this problem.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the recommendations of the report of the committee.  I will address myself to certain issues arising from this report.  My previous colleagues raised this issue of influence peddling; it has become a problem in the private sector.  We see people now going to State House, more or less to induce the President to make a commitment to a matter which definitely belongs to the private sector.  I see within this document two or three members of State House making commitments and pledges on behalf of the Government without even checking with the line ministry.  

Number one, when a presidential advisor writes or commits himself, using State House letterhead, to a private organisation saying, “subject to one, two, three, we commit ourselves irrevocably to advance or guarantee in the amount of four or five million dollars”, to me it is abuse of office. And not only that, it has far-reaching implications that there is rot or corruption in State House.  To commit public funds requires the authority of this august House.  When somebody uses his proximity to the Head of State to make such a commitment, definitely it has to be condemned by this House.  

Another point is the role of this August House in society: We are the highest legislative organ of the State.  Our primary duty is to make laws. We do not have constitutionally what we call ‘judicial powers’; committees may but we do not have the powers to interpret the law on behalf of anybody. Our role is to make the law.  

Number three, Mr Speaker, when you look at this report, which we have been debating for the past two or four weeks, really it is a matter of arbitration. It is not so much a matter for legislative debate. It is really a matter of arbitration between two contending parties. 

What I am happy about is that during the course of that contention, a lot in terms of rot has been exposed. Now we are aware that the Fox Odois of this world, on behalf of the President, can actually interfere in matters of the private sector. Mr Speaker, we are very clear on the role of this House. We are very clear on how one can commit the state in a private sector.

Mr Speaker, it is very clear in our laws that Government cannot guarantee a loan for an individual. If I am wrong, anybody on the Front Bench can correct me. Government is not authorised to guarantee private loans. Why is Kakooza Mutale committing the presidency to guaranteeing a loan, or providing as much as 5 million dollars? To me, it is stretching one’s duties and privileges too far, which is, more or less, in another language, abuse of office.

Mr Speaker, finally, taking into consideration what you told us in the Communication from the Chair, we have got a very heavy legislative programme in front of us before recess. This report has been with us for some time, and we do not have a lot more time to go over it.  

So, Mr Speaker, with your permission, I would like to move a motion that this House adopts the recommendations of this report. In other words, we are opening debate on the recommendations rather than the substance of the report; or, if only to be used as a matter of reference. Otherwise, Mr Speaker, re-opening the whole report for debate, and given what you told us, I do not know -(Interruption). 

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, is hon. Aggrey Awori in order to first debate and then immediately close the path? Is he really in order to do this?

MR SPEAKER: Well, he has made his own contribution. Continue with the contribution. Have you finished? 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. He interrupted me with his point of order, but I would like to end by saying, with your permission, I would have recommended that this House adopt the recommendations of the committee. 

MR TOM KAYONGO (Lubaga North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the recommendations of the committee. On the Committee of Local Government, we also interacted with KCC on another subject, but of course the tendering system came up. 

I think it is an appalling situation in KCC. They do not have experienced people to work as professionals. The chairperson at that time was acting, and he had spent two to three years in that acting capacity. So, that creates a problem. The man does not know whether he is going to sit in the chair, or the next day he will be sacked.  He does not have security of tenure of the office. When you get such poor results from that tendering committee, it is no wonder.

Mr Speaker, I do not know how we are proceeding in this country, because KCC was trying to tender the Constitutional Square, and you know the story. You have read about the story, about somebody who was trying to tender it. I imagine if that tender had gone through, we would probably have ended up with a big lake created in the city centre, and the work would have stopped because someone cannot actually develop it.  

The person who won this tender of Baganda Bus Park had an ambitious plan. In the annex of this report, there is an ambitious plan of development attached here. It says, “Proposed Kampala Bus Terminal Project”. This project will never take off under the circumstances, which this tender was given!  

When you study all the wrangles and you read the report, you come to one conclusion, that the officials of city council were only interested in petty binyebwa, corruption. Otherwise, they would never have given this tender to one individual.  All other people who purport to be members of this company are not there. 

Eventually, we end up with one person, when you read the report. I do not know whether in our laws it is permitted to have a limited company with one person - (Interruption)  

MR BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member holding the Floor that actually work began, and it is going on, on the so-called ambitious plan. Some of us who pass near that place see that actually there is work going on, day and night.  Thank you.

MR KAYONGO: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, when you look at this plan and the construction that is going on, I think it is not the same. The man is just building kiosks! 

Mr Speaker, when it comes to influence peddling, whether by government agents as it is reported here or from any other source, it is going to kill the investment in this country. Those who are willing to invest and do work for this nation will not get such tenders. They will go always to people who are incapable of developing, and who do not even have the money.  

I was also disappointed when the CID and the IGG failed to intervene when the people who complained appealed to them. I think they should have handled this matter and at least come out clean that they did not have or they were not also influenced.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES MWANDHA  (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity also to contribute on this report. Three things in this report disturb me: The first area of concern appears on Page 22, the Registrar of Companies. The committee observed that one of the causes of the wrangles at the bus park came from the various companies and individuals that had interest in the lucrative business of running the park. Consequently, there have been manipulation and forgeries of files with the Registrar of Companies. And if you go to Page 23 the committee specifically noted:

    • That there is a lot of laissez-faire way of handling business at the Registrar of Companies, which unscrupulous people can take advantage of.

    • There is total negligence at the registry to the extent that they do not demand for companies’ returns as the law demands.  

Mr Speaker, this is not the first time that this House has received such negative reports about the office of the Registrar of Companies. And it is unfortunate that as we talk now, both the Attorney General and the Minister for Constitutional Affairs who are responsible for this department are not in this House. 
 
Mr Speaker, the committee continues to report that this particular mismanagement of this very important office also affects investment in this country because the investors, if they cannot be sure that their records will be properly kept, they can actually have very, very serious reservations about our ability to manage their affairs. Therefore, I would like to call upon Government to do something and reform the office of the Registrar of Companies. It is actually in shambles!

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Mwandha. The information I want to give you is that the Registrar, Mr Cox, and I think one or two of his assistants were actually interdicted. And I think one of the papers reported a few days ago that they were looking for Mr Cox because he failed to report - I think he was on police bond or something, and he failed to report. So, we are hoping that the reform that you are talking about can pick up from the interdiction of those individuals.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, this matter is a very serious matter because it also affects the Uganda Revenue Authority in revenue collection, because the information available in that office can never be relied upon. So, I want to make this very passionate appeal to Government to do something about this office.

The second area of concern in this report, Mr Speaker, appears on Page 24, under the Inspectorate of Government. The committee, somewhere in the middle, noted that the IGG was not enthusiastic about investigating the wrangles for reasons best known to himself. The office was even negligent in as far as it did not bother to even advise the complainants to seek guidance from other institutions of Government. The committee got some testimony that the IGG’s Office was compromised.  The following allegations were made:

    • That the IGG himself, Mr Tumwesigye, was an operator under Reach Quick Coaches and thus, an interested party.

    • That his officers were bribed. And then the committee invited the IGG to come and respond to the allegations, but he wrote back that he was unable to attend.

Now, this is a very serious matter, and this is not the first time that the committees of Parliament have had problems with the office of the IGG. I was in the committee where the IGG was requested to come and testify, and he adamantly refused to honour the invitation by the committee on account that he was an independent authority. Now this committee singles out the IGG as an interested party, not as IGG, but as Jotham Tumwesigye, and he is invited to come and testify before the committee and again he refuses. 

There are two issues here: One, is the very serious statements in the report on the office of the IGG. In my understanding, the office of the IGG should be beyond reproach. It should be an upright office, the IGG himself and the people working with him should be the best men and women in terms of integrity. But if you have a situation such as this that the committee has reported, and even the IGG as a person has been given opportunity to come and clear his name and he adamantly refuses to do so, Mr Speaker, what do we do as Parliament? Can the idea that he is an independent authority really be the basis for him to refuse to appear before a committee, even to defend his own personal record?  Is he above the law?  

Mr Speaker, I hope one day somebody from the frontbencher, maybe the Leader of Government Business, can advise this House as to what we should do in a situation like this. Because it is not good for the committee to make a report like this and it is a permanent record of this House, and then we as a House ignores such serious matter that has been raised.

My last point on this report is that, while the committee made a good report, they were short on really zeroing on those people who were responsible for this mess. I think it is important that they should have singled out the people, according to their investigation, who were responsible for this mess and even recommended sanctions over those people because they are public officers. And if they were found in the opinion of the committee that they were responsible for this, I think it would have been necessary for the committee to mention the people who caused all these problems, and even recommend some sanctions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I read this report, I visited the Baganda Bus Park, and this is what I found out on the ground.  This Baganda Bus Park has been in existence since before I was born but there was hardly any toilet. I am reacting to what hon. Prof. Latigo said that actually, the person who was offered the tender is running it. And what I am saying is that, it is good and in order for him to run it because he has done something at least on the ground. Now there is already a public toilet, which was not there; there is a shade for passengers where they rest while waiting for the buses; there is security on that park and there is law and order in the park.

So, Mr Speaker, this UBOA Central, I am told, was established in 1979. But up to now, there were no such facilities at the Baganda Bus Park. Now, I agree with some of the recommendations. It is unfortunate that there was no transparency in allocating this tender, and unfortunately, I do not think it was the fault of the bidder. One thing I want to let you know, honourable members, is that we should not compromise this institution of Parliament. We are aware among us here there are Members who have interest in this bus park. So, that is why actually the bus park wrangles came in here. So, my humble submission is that  - at first we had actually recommended the –(Mr Wadri rose_)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Mutuluuza for giving way.  I get amused when hon. Mutuluuza says that this matter was brought to Parliament because some Members of Parliament have got vested interests in the business of bus services. Could he guide us and clarify to us whether this matter was not brought here because of its national importance?  Because, it is not only the Members of Parliament who have got shares in these buses that use these bus services.  They are people here like myself, Wadri. I have no bus, but I am interested in those buses because the buses are the ones that ferry people to and from Arua, and I also travel to Arua using those buses.  Can he clarify to us what he meant? Is it that the matter was brought here solely because one or two honourable members may be bus operators and not that because the matter is of national importance?  Can you please clarify?

MR ODONGO OTTO: Thank you very much. I would also like to draw the honourable members’ attention to two events. One, when these buses were parked around Parliament, I do not know how you associate that with the interest of a few MPs. Two, you said they are shades in the bus park and some few toilets. I do not know what you are using as a standard of comparison to say something has been done in this bus park. Otherwise, it is very interesting for you to compare with toilets, urinal shelters and a few mats and you say development is taking place, and yet we are talking of US$ 5 million corruption scandal.  Thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: I thank the honourable members for that information. But first of all, I want to inform hon. Kassiano, I do not need to answer him.  Let him read the report. Members who have interests in this –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think honourable Member, the problem is that you are causing uneasiness in this House because you are saying that maybe it was a subjective approach rather than an objective approach. Would you like to say why you said it was a subjective approach or you have fears it was a subjective approach?

MR MUTULUUZA: It could have been both. Can you allow me, Mr Speaker, to finish? (Interruption) No, I do not think I should withdraw. I said it could have been both.

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, the problem is that you are imputing improper motive in the House handling this matter because we are interested in it. What you are saying is that we should have declared our personal interests before handling this matter? That causes an embarrassment.  

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, I actually wanted to come to that because all the time this report was read here, some of us came up.  In fact, initially even the Chairman of the Committee just withdrew because he had interest in that. I read that in the report.  The Chairman of this Committee withdrew because he has an interest in the bus park wrangles. That is why he withdrew. So, I am not in position to withdraw.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker does the honourable Member wish to suggest that because the Chairman of the Committee withdrew from the investigations, therefore, the report was subjective?

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, I withdraw that statement. Initially I did not want even this report to be debated.  I had recommended that these people who have wrangles in the bus park go to the High Court because this is a different arm of Government that would settle such kind of wrangles.  

Now, there is an issue, Mr Speaker, if you read the letter from Kakooza Mutale. The way I understood that letter was that Kakooza Mutale was in position, after UBOA Investment Ltd acquired the tender, to help him and introduce him to moneylenders. It was not a donation from His Excellency’s pocket. I think that is why I insisted that we first produce all the documents. I have read that letter.

Another one is SKANSKA. SKANSKA actually had an interest in joint venturing, but when this problem came to Parliament, that is why they were scared and withdrew. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The holder of the Floor has been referring to some letter that he read. I was just wondering if it is proper to refer to some document, which is not part of the report and also not produce it or lay it on the Table. So, I thought you could help us.

MR AMURIAT: Point of order, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not use these points of order for a different purpose. Really, you stood to give information and the Member who was holding the Floor declined to get the information. This definitely cannot cause circumstance for you to stand for a point of order because according to our rules, a person holding the Floor is entitled to either accept or refuse a point of information. If he has not accepted, this is not something that I should rule him out of order on. I do not see any other intervening circumstance that would prompt me to say he is out of order.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the honourable Member from Soroti that he asked for these documents and they were actually produced. All of us must have got copies of all the communication between KCC, State House and UBOA Investment and UBOA Central.  Thank you.

My other concern in the report is the issue that why should one man own Baganda Bus Park? Mr Speaker, we are aware that we had UTC (Uganda Transport Company) it was sold to one man and he has already developed it. What is wrong with Baganda Bus Park being offered to one person? There is URC, we understand it is going to be sold. I understand there are individuals who are bidding. So, what is wrong with one man owning that Baganda Bus Park? The problem, Mr Speaker, is that corruption has brought problems in Uganda. But when it is here, we should not blame the people who use that weakness to acquire contracts like these ones. What do we do? 

Mr Speaker, if we go ahead to adopt the recommendations of the committee and this tender is cancelled, I cannot imagine how much money KCC will pay to UBOA Investment. So, in my conclusion, I say that let these wrangles go to the High Court and they settle those problems there, but not from here.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

REV. KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru South, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I have seen the bus park for several years. It has gone a long way but it still needs to be re-developed. When I was reading this report, I came across one point, which made me a bit happy. This is a letter signed by Muhangi, and it says there are Members of Parliament who have of recent developed too much appetite for the project and are actively sabotaging it, namely Guma Gumisiriza. I think this is a very important statement because if SKANSKA, a foreign investor, was actually winning the bid, I commend my friend hon. Gumisiriza for having resisted this bus park being given to a foreign investment.  

Who are the people using the bus park? These are our local people going to Terego, to Arua to Mbale and so on. These are common people! Why should it take a foreigner to milk this small money? Why can this not be left to Ugandans to manage? I think this kind of resistance should continue, so that we allow Ugandans at least to be involved in our work - (Applause).

Secondly, Mr Speaker, these wrangles between bus owners and bus operators have been going on for a long time. It is high time that a private company, which does not involve bus owners or bus operators, is really engaged in this work. Really, we need to see some development in this park. I think it is to the advantage of our city and our people.

Finally, I want to support the recommendation actually made by the committee. There was a point raised about the office of the President, because at one time it was only these bus owners and bus operators and KCC, which were involved. Now, you have more parties involved, including the office of the President and the State House. 

I remember soon after the liberation war in 1979, the Executive was involved in every work. Even the Executive was involved in giving chits. If you wanted to get soda or beer or soap, you could not get anything without chits. But I think with the process of decentralisation, we have gone beyond that. I think that the office of the President should not take us back to 1979, when you had to issue chits, because this is going on not only in – (Interruption)

MR KIBAZANGA: Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, one of the reasons why Binaisa was overthrown was that he started clearing investors in State House. Thank you.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I am begging the honourable Member on the Floor to clarify to me whether he would like the President not to have an interest in foreign investors, when they seek to be assisted in this country?

REV. SSEMPANGI: Mr Speaker, this is not simply assisting investors, but to make a commitment of four to five million dollars to somebody; that is not simply assisting an investor. By the way, this letter came from - the way I read it, this was UBOA writing to the President and mentioning a number of companies. I take this letter to be very non-patriotic because it is only recommending foreign firms to take over the Baganda Bus Park.  

On the point of giving chits, my friend was giving me information. It was not Mr Binaisa; we actually had the Minister of Supplies in the name of Apiliga. So, it was not the President doing that. If we do not stop this one, we will be having the office of the President distributing forests in Mukono. This makes the work of the ministers very difficult - (Laughter). We should allow the ministers to carry on their work without being interrupted.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Is it in order for the honourable member holding the floor to mislead this House that the Office of the Vice President is distributing forests in Mukono, when the minister clearly told us the procedure of accessing these forests countrywide?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, if you said there is a record of how these forests are distributed by the minister in-charge of forests and it is not the Vice President doing so, then the honourable member is out of order.

REV SSEMPANGI: I want to withdraw that statement.  Thank you.

Finally, I want to commend also the committee for being very clear and almost objective in its report, and I think this is giving us the background to this problem.  I still want to emphasise that we really need to see a committed company managing the Baganda Bus Park. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  I want, first of all, to thank the committee, which has investigated this good report, and I want to clarify one thing, which the committee has dwelt with in the report: The Office of the President and State House.  

We have been having some undisciplined people among my staff- (Applause)- but that we have stopped. As you can see, this letter was written some time ago. I want to re-assure Parliament that any communication now from anybody who is not the President must be copied to the Minister for the Presidency for authenticity – (Applause)- and also to the Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President and then they will become authentic.  I am going once again to have an encounter with Maj. Kakooza Mutale to bring up this issue again.

Secondly, on the issue of my Legal Advisor, Fox Odoi, I think that – (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for giving way. In view of the seriousness, as reported in this report, of the letter that was written by the officer the minister has referred to, and since he has offered to take action on that officer, is the minister intending to inform the House as to the disciplinary measures he is going to take against the officer so that we can appreciate that action in view of the seriousness of this matter in our report?

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, this kind of statement from the Minister in-charge of the Presidency, I would have loved it if you allowed him to complete the statement and then if you have anything for clarification, make it instead of interrupting because you will be given an opportunity to do so.

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I am saying the truth, and members should take this seriously.  I am also saying that on 13 June 2001, we passed an internal memo informing all my officers of what I am saying here today- (Interjection)- he is saying 17 years, but I am two years in this office.  So, this is really a matter of seriousness and, therefore, I do not think we shall see many of these permeating again.  

The second issue is about the letter from Mr Fox Odoi. I totally agree with him because all he is saying is that we hear there is an investment of so much money.  If it is there, please, push it quickly so that we make more money. And I do not see anything wrong with that.  All I wanted to emphasise is that Government commitment must come from the proper channel and, therefore, for that one, I will not allow anyone to play with us; I will be very firm.  So, Mr Speaker, that is what I wanted to say.

THE SPEAKER: Let us get the clarification they want from his statement and then we can proceed.  

MS BIGIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  This is not the first time the Minister in-charge of the Presidency has assured this House about the disciplinary measures he intends to take against Maj. Kakooza Mutale.  Mr Speaker, some time ago, the Minister in-charge of the Presidency came with a statement here and assured this House that he will be actually in due course informing us of what disciplinary action he has taken against him.  Here again, today, he is repeating the same assurance and yet he has not even told us whether the matter he had addressed this House on earlier, he ever took any disciplinary measures against him.  Now, my question is- for purposes of record so that in future we may be able to follow up- is the Minister assuring this House that Kakooza Mutale has stopped meddling in the affairs of the Police and other security organs?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I wanted the Minister in-charge of the Presidency to assure this House whether actually he is in-charge or he is just covering fire.  What action has ever been taken by him at any given time, apart from coming to this House to cover up some of these things?  

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Let me assure my honourable friend that I am in-charge - (Laughter)- and if you want to know, you come there and find out.  

Secondly, I want to reassure my honourable member for Bushenyi that we do take disciplinary measures; we need not go to the newspapers. And I think you have seen a change on how Maj. Kakooza Mutale is acting.  There is a change, and I am saying that what we are discussing today is really a post-mortem.  You read it carefully. It is referring to the time when the President was campaigning, and I am saying I do not want it to occur again.  I am in charge my friend –(Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.  Have you finished? 
Okay.

CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai District): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want also to join my colleagues to thank the committee at least for a well-researched work.  I think they have brought out the gist of the matter because when you look at page 3, the genesis of the Kampala Baganda Bus Park wrangles, they have clearly indicated to us that this is a matter of conflict of interest, and there are internal management problems Since the year 1996, KCC gave out the running of the Bus Park to private companies on its behalf. So, as we look at this report, we should clearly understand the meaning of conflict of interest and internal management wrangles, especially involving huge sums of money.  

However, I am so disappointed about KCC.  In fact, I want to urge this Parliament to heap the whole blame on KCC because under decentralisation, these colleagues over there have a lot of powers; the tender board of KCC has a lot of powers under the statutory bodies.  So, I do not know what went wrong.  In fact, in the committee report, there is where they indicate that there was some “inside dealing.” that phrase should be looked at.  What went wrong? And this is not the first time. We have had several tender awards in Kampala where pointers seem to put KCC in a very awkward situation.

Now there is this issue of influence peddling.  I want at least today to bail out and save State House, especially the name of Afande Kakooza Mutale.  The Minister for the Presidency has mentioned that they have put some measures in place to put the House in order; I think that is a new arrangement. But looking at these letters, which he has even supported, I want really to support some of these letters from State House - (Interruption). Yes, because His Excellency the President is a key stakeholder in the management of this country.  Muhangi petitioned him, now what could have been done?  

We are leaders, very many people bring to us various problems; what do you do?  Fox Odoi, if you read his letter those of you who have looked it, he just looked at this petition and forwarded it to –(Interruption)-

MR MBALIBULHA KIBANZANGA: Thank you, honourable member for giving way.  Some of us are really disturbed. Political indicators show that we are ending the transition and we are disturbed about individuals acting on behalf of institutions.  If the Office of the President was petitioned, really was it not in order for these people to be directed to an organ of the State, which would have solved their problem, rather than Kakooza Mutale and Fox Odoi?  Really, are we building up institutions? Thank you –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Really, honourable member, I don’t think this is information because you stood to give information but you are now giving an opinion.

CAPT. MATOVU DAVID: I thank you Mr Speaker. Wen you look at these three letters, really they were humble letters and very disciplined. Because, for example, like the letter from the State House, you would see word to word orders or instructions. But you can see this one from Fox Odoi was saying, please, do not allow anybody to delay something in your area of jurisdiction. That means he is aware KCC is responsible.  Kakooza Mutale, when you look at his letter- in fact today I want to defend Kakooza Mutale, let us not hang him.  Kakooza Mutale in his letter, if you have really looked at it, in the ending paragraph, he says; “However, the foregoing intentions will only come to fruition after the promoters have presented all the necessary documents. For example, tender accreditation letters, architectural documents fully evaluated and certified by the Office of the Chief Engineer of Kampala City Council.”  You can see no orders. He appreciates and respects KCC, which he knows is an independent organ of Government and decentralisation.  

So, we should put our voices together and condemn KCC because something went wrong with the Tender Board, as you have seen in all these documents that they have flouted.  Otherwise, let us not apportion blame. I am in total support of the report but to me something went wrong over there in KCC.  

I am also disappointed by the office of the IGG: People really appeal to you, you hear people spearing themselves and there is paralysis in the city- and according to Article 230 of the Constitution, the IGG has special powers to cause investigation, prosecute or arrest! The officer kept quiet there. Even when the Committee of Parliament invited him to say something, he said,” No I am not there for you”.  So I do not know what this House can do about the Inspector of Government.  I do not know whether he feared because I have seen in the report, he is also operating a bus, is it Reach Quick or something else.  Otherwise, I concur with the -(Interruption)

MS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  When this report was presented here, I had been given an opportunity to talk after the minister had responded, but as I stood here, the debate collapsed because the documents were not available and I did not know that it was going to be debated today.  Otherwise, I would have risen up earlier to prevent this entire negative debate on the Office of the IGG because what is reported in this report really is not correct.  

It is unfortunate that the report could reveal such unfounded information on the highest office in this country responsible for fighting corruption.  

I had prepared my talk accordingly, but I am not able to present it today. Therefore, I want to raise it as a point of information, since the honourable member is talking about the same matter.  

With your permission, Mr Speaker, the report says that the IGG was invited and for the reasons best known to himself, he could not come, and yet I have a letter here from the IGG. The IGG was invited to come and he replied: “Invitation for a meeting.  Reference is made to your letter Ref: AB 434/434/01 of 3rd September 2002, inviting me for a meeting with the Committee of Works, Housing and Communications on Tuesday, 10th September 2002.  

I wish to inform you that on this date, I will not be in the country.  Further, I wish to inform you that my office is in the process of investigating the wrangles involving the Baganda Bus Park.  When we complete the investigation, we shall issue a report containing our findings and recommendations.  It will be at that time and not before, when I will be in a good position to talk about the wrangles concerning the Baganda Bus Park.  

Please pass my regret to the Committee of Works, Housing and Communications.” 

Surely, when the Inspector General of Government gets an invitation calling him to be before the Committee at a date when he is out of the country, and he writes to the Committee and says, by the way my office is investigating –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: I think really, honourable minister, you came to give information.  The information you have given is that the IGG replied and gave reasons why he could not attend the meeting.

MRS MATEMBE: There is another thing in the –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Then give it.  You see, honourable member- 

MRS MATEMBE: Maybe I shall come here and make a contribution.

THE SPEAKER: No, you came for information.  You have given the information, maybe you have additional information; you give it and then leave it for assessment.

MRS MATEMBE: Then I will come and contribute because if I talk too long –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Please give the information.

MRS MATEMBE: Okay, it is the information I am giving.  So, the report paints the IGG wrongly when in fact it is not correct.  Secondly, it is–(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: I think she is giving information.  Let her give the information.  The information is that the IGG replied and gave reasons why he could not attend the meeting.

MRS MATEMBE: In fact, his officer appeared and the committee maliciously imprisoned him.  You know all these kind of things. I have that communication also.  

Secondly, when the information came in the paper about the Office of the IGG and the officers who were corrupt, the IGG did not keep quiet.  He wrote a letter to the DPP alerting him about the allegations about his officers and telling him that since he cannot investigate his own officers, he was asking the DPP to investigate allegations about his officers that appeared in the press.  So, he took action.

Thirdly, this report says that the IGG did not get interested in the matter because they learnt that he had a bus and, therefore, he is affected by conflict of interest.  The Committee said that in this report.  Immediately, I read the report, I wrote to him.  I said you are implicated, you own a bus which prevented you from getting interested in public affairs. And he wrote a letter where he explained it properly.  He is saying – can I read it?

THE SPEAKER: The salient features of the letter.

MRS MATEMBE: Because you know this office is very important.  He says – I did not underline.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if you want read it but I thought if -

MRS MATEMBE: No, let me read it.  These things are important.  He writes to me and he says, “Report of the Committee of Parliament on Baganda Bus Park.  Thank you for informing me about the report of the Committee on Works, Housing and Communications presented to Parliament on Thursday 6th March 2003.  

I wish to inform you that I was invited by the Committee to appear before it on 10th September 2002.  The invitation was on short notice and I already had other programmes, which I could not cancel.  However, I believe that the Committee was inviting me in my official capacity and not in my personal capacity.  In my official capacity, I wrote informing them that my office was investigating the same matter and that I would be in a good position to brief them after the investigations were completed.  A copy of my letter to this effect is herewith enclosed- It is the one I read. 

I was, however, surprised when the same Committee summoned one of my Officers, Mr Kangaho, to appear before the Committee to answer questions on the investigation of the case by my office.  I advised the Officer who was summoned to go to the Committee and inform them that if they had summoned him in his personal capacity, he would answer any personal questions they would ask him.  But if they summoned him as an Officer in the IGG’s office, he was not competent to answer their questions and they should ask the IGG instead. 

When he told them this, the Committee thought it was contempt of the Committee.  So they sent him into detention for two hours.  I wrote a letter of protest to the Attorney General about this and a copy of my letter is here attached.  

Later, people who had lodged the complaint with the Committee appeared before the Committee and alleged that they had given a bribe to my Officers who were involved in the investigation of this case.  The New Vision prominently reported this allegation. I wrote to the Inspector General of Police and asked him to investigate this allegation.  A copy of my letter to him is also enclosed herewith.  This investigation, I think, is still going on.  

According to the information he gave me, the Committee reported that: one, I have a bus company and I could not investigate the case because I have an interest in the matter.  Two, I refused to appear before the Committee for unknown reasons.  

I wish to inform you that I do not operate a bus company.  I used to have a bus in the past but I sold it in 1998.  So, for about five years, I have had nothing to do with a bus company or transport business.  This allegation could easily have been checked with the Transport Licensing Board and the truth easily established instead of reporting false allegations.  

It is not being sincere for anybody to say I did not appear before the committee for unclear reasons.  I stated my reasons clearly in my letter, a copy of which is enclosed.  The Committee did not invite me in my personal capacity.  I was invited in my official capacity.  Investigations, which the IGG conducts are confidential and this confidentiality is protected by the law.  I cannot, therefore, appear before a Committee of Parliament and divulge information relating to a matter I am investigating. I can only issue a report after completing my investigation. As I informed the committee in my letter of 4 August 2002, we have been investigating this case and I will be issuing our report soon. So, it is not true to say that the IGG has not been interested in the case because I have a bus company and my officers have been compromised. I hope this will help to clarify the matter to you. 

I hope it will help to clarify the matter to this House and you, Mr Speaker, to clear the name of the IGG.

Mr Speaker, I lay everything on the Table. This is the letter of the IGG replying the committee. This is the letter of the Attorney General where they imprisoned his people. This is the letter of the Inspector General of Police where he is asking Police to investigate if his officers are corrupt. And this is the letter he wrote to me when I asked him about all these allegations. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hope the IGG's name is cleared.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA CHARLES: Lastly, Mr Speaker, Parliament now is in a dilemma. The Minister of Works told us here that the issue at hand does not fall under his ministry, that it falls under Local Government. Also, another dilemma is what is the status quo now? These people are operating; they have paid ground rent of Shs 1 billion or something. So, I do not know how we are also going to handle that one.

My last one is about recommendation 3, that we cancel this tender. I would like us to critically look at this, its implications and who is going to implement this recommendation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County, East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for such a good report.  First of all, I would like to comment on the time taken investigating this matter. This matter was committed to the committee responsible on 20 August 2002, and we are debating it today. The hon. Minister has also told us that the IGG has been investigating this saga ever since and is yet to come out with a report. So, the time taken to follow up this matter is quite long, and in case there are any recommendations to be made, you actually see that it is very difficult to implement them.

Secondly, I want to comment on the Office of the President and State House that have been clarified by the Minister in charge of the Presidency. I also wonder whether his submissions here are not going to be like the Baganda saying 'ekiwuka ekitaluma' meaning, an insect with mandibles with which they cannot bit. 

Mr Speaker, thirdly, -(Interruption)

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, when I was investigating the shift and drift mechanism in a rotor virus, one of my professors said, you must think positively because this virus shifts and drifts. I would like the hon. Member here to think positively and give a benefit of doubt on what we can do.

MR MAWIYA: Hon. Minister, I thought you were going to give me some good information, but you have just disrupted me. 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I want to comment on the IGG's conduct, which is so wanting. The honourable Minister in charge of Ethics and Integrity has given us some clarification here, but it is not all that convincing.

Mr Speaker, in the first place, I trust the composition of this committee. The chairmanship and all the members in this committee are people with integrity. I do not think they had any reason not to bring to our attention this communication to them.  So, I do not think it is going to be debate of words with the chairperson who is yet to tell us what it actually was, because on page 25, they say that they actually failed to prove or to approve the allegations that were made on the IGG because they could not get the information. So that one I think should not be interpreted that way.

Mr Speaker, this is not the first time the IGG himself is being pointed out for influence peddling. He was pointed out when it came to supply - that was a tender in the Ministry of Education - supplying textbooks. He was also pointed out in some other saga that was in the EC when it came to tendering the ballot papers. So, this goes ahead to prove that this man is actually -(Interruption) 

THE MINISTER, PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The hon. Prof. Bukenya advised that we should think, but I would also like to advise that we should know. I stand here without fear to state categorically that the person of Jotham Tumwesigye must, by the way, be differentiated from the IGG. The two are different. 

The hon. Member has alleged that Mr Tumwesigye as IGG was involved in what he appears to suggest, murky money, with regard to procurement at the Electoral Commission. Hon. Matembe is here; the Prime Minister is here. Can we all be liars? Therefore, is it in order for the hon. Member, out of ignorance of the facts, to make false allegations about a person who has performed his job with reasonable integrity? Mr Speaker is the hon. Member in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have noted several times that this point of order should be used when the facts are within the knowledge of the Chair because you are talking about your assessment of the situation versus his assessment of the situation. Now, by raising a point of order on that matter, you are saying that I should say your assessment is correct or his is correct. I cannot do that. This is a difference in assessment of a situation. You see, I am not saying that what you are saying is not correct because I do not know.  But when you say, “Is it in order”, you are saying you are the source of the truth, you are the source of a standard. I do not do that.

PROF. KAGONYERA: What I was saying is that Mr Tumwesigye was fighting the apparent irregular conduct by the Electoral Commission; even at State House. He was fighting these people who were corrupt. He fought and fought and fought. Now, if that is what corruption is, Mr Speaker, I will seek your guidance. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But has anybody said he is corrupt?  No. I think he was just mentioning instances when this issue has come up of the IGG not attending the committees. That is all. He has not talked about his integrity. No, it was not about his integrity and the Minister of Integrity came here and gave information because Mr Tumwesigye cannot come here.  It is now up to you, after receiving that information, to assess and come to a conclusion.

MR LULE: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling.  As usual, it has always been wise. Coming to the transparency in awarding the tender by the KDTB, I want to point out that there was –(Interruption)- Mr Speaker, can you protect me from the honourable Minister of Ethics and Integrity? I am continuing with transparency concerning the award of tender by KDTB. I want to point out that there is a technical committee whose work, as stated on Page 11, is to examine the proposals for responsiveness and technical soundness, after which it would recommend to the KDTB the best bidder.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, also on Page 13, the committee points out that in spite of the above anomalies in the proposal of UBOA Investments Limited, the technical committee reported to KDTB that the firm was responsive as it scored 6 out of 6, the firm’s proposal was very good and it was financially viable. Therefore, considering the work of this committee as it said that it had to be technical and it had to give proper guidance to the tender board of Kampala, I would maybe apportion the blame, 80 percent to the technical committee because it was within its mandate to guide the tender board rightly so that it awards the tender positively with an objective mind.

Mr Speaker, we also see that Mr Segane himself, on Page 15, actually alluded to the fact that, was it not the coming together of SKANSKA and UBOA Investments Ltd, they would not have advised KDTB to award the tender. Therefore, this goes further again to prove that maybe they wrongly advised KDTB. However, I would apportion 20 percent of the blame to KDTB itself for actually deciding to convene a meeting with the UBOA Investments and SKANSKA actually before it awarded the tender to this so-called company in a joint venture. So, they were supposed to call or to write, as the committee tells us, to UBOA Investments to establish the relationship other than just calling the two. What could they have expected? So there, actually, the blame is totally theirs.

I want to personally disagree with the committee where it says that the three-year Government plan to put up peripheral parking areas in the suburbs of Kampala would be ripping off the investor in the project. Mr Speaker, we are trying to fight the heavy congestion in the city, and we cannot do this without setting up peripheral parking areas. In this, I want also to point out the fact that Kampala City Council was a stakeholder in this, as we are told by the committee, and you find that the tender was awarded to itself.  How do we get this?  

Mr Speaker, we see that despite all the interference from many interested parties, KDTB goes ahead to cross the tender. But Kampala City Council itself is coming up to actually throw a towel to this UBOA Investments when it actually failed to give the premium of one billion shillings as it was requested for in the tender. But Kampala City Council came up itself to even collect and pay the money. So, to whom was the tender awarded?

Mr Speaker, I want to point out one last remark when one company –(Mr Mutuluuza rose_)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to inform the honourable Member holding the Floor that actually the money, which was asked for from the Baganda Bus Park as premium was paid; one billion shillings.  Thank you.

MR LULE: This is what I am saying that after UBOA Investments failing to pay within a stipulated time, Kampala City Council comes up - actually originally it went on extending the deadline until they failed completely and they had to pay themselves. So, Kampala City Council in essence was awarding the tender to itself.

Mr Speaker, I was trying to bring an example where Kampala City Council has not only failed to address the problems within Kampala, but also has gone ahead to actually suppress private investments in town itself. I have an example in Nateete where one investor by the names of Prime Women Investments Limited tried to come up with a peripheral parking area and it actually involved a lot of money in paying or going into acquiring the plans for the project. It went ahead to actually get an environmental impact assessment from NEMA.  Kampala City Council also again demanded for an approval from Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Ltd for leeway, which was also secured, and they even put in a valuer from Kampala City Council who valued the project in terms of fees. This investment company paid in fees but later, to the surprise of this company, the project was stalled and the company was completely denied the license. So, Mr Speaker, this also goes ahead to prove that Kampala City Council is involved in this saga. Actually, before we put things right, or before the ministry concerned tries to guide Kampala City Council, we are likely to go into such misnomers all the time.   

MRS ZZIWA: I do not want to exonerate City Council, but I just wanted to inform the honourable member over the issue of a peripheral parking area in Nateete that eventually Kampala City Council saw the sense in this whole arrangement and were able to stop UTODA, who had constructed another site of parking, and they were able to award the tender for the parking allowance to the gentleman who had gone ahead into the preparation of the park. 

MR LULE: Thank you very much, Madam Commissioner.  I know the two parks in Nateete that you are trying to talk about, and both of these were private investors. They were not accessing public money in any way.  So, in spite of that, I think Kampala City Council –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is there planning for parking where you put that question of putting up a park, and you say this is a park, or you must consult with the planning authority, which is city council?

MR LULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Because you cannot say I have invested. If you say I have invested, you would have invested in accordance with city planning.

MRS ZZIWA: Let me just also come in - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think let us abandon this issue; you just concentrate on this issue.

MRS ZZIWA: Okay.

MR LULE: Mr Speaker, lastly, I just want to seek clarification from maybe hon. Sam Otada on this one because I have a report here –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Sam Otada? You are seeking clarification? You make your contribution or you seek clarification.

MR LULE: With that contribution, Mr Speaker, I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Before we go to hon. Ocula, let us first straighten the record because there are people who are affected by the report and they cannot come here. I think we should clear the record for purposes of the IGG. According to the information which I have received, which he has faxed, the committee wrote to the IGG.  Maybe they wrote, "IGG", which is the office. They summoned the office to come to the committee, but then there was a reply open dated that he was not coming because on that day he would not be available. Therefore, he gave a reason why he was not available. 

Then it transpires in the report that maybe he may have been wanted personally to deal with the issue of the bus. I do not know whether there was summons to Jotham Tumwesigye to come personally to deal with this report. This is not clear. Maybe the Chairperson will clear that. Apparently, the Minister in charge of this particular sector communicated to the IGG about the contents of the report, namely that he had a bus. Maybe that is what influenced him not to attend to the committee’s proceedings. What we get from the information presented by the minister is that he said, “Yes, prior 1998 I had a bus, which I sold off.” I think this should be our record for purposes of this debate.

MR NYEKO OCULA  (Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those who have thanked the committee for the job well done. Actually, at one point I saw the committee being very tough in compelling some people to give information. They even had to lock somebody in our cell here. So, I think they really went through a lot of difficulties in coming up with this report. But I would like to point out one thing. 

If you look at the motion moved by hon. Otada, it is requesting the House to abhor the manner in which Government in general, Kampala City Council, IGG, Police, Minister of Local Government, Ministry of Works and Transport, Office of the President have been handling this matter. I think by the time this matter came to this House, these people had already exhausted almost all available possible means because this very Parliament has set institutions in place like the office of the IGG, the Police and so on. By the Acts of Parliament, they are supposed to handle matters of this nature. But by the time a Member, any member of the Ugandan society gets so frustrated to the level of hon. Otada and his team, to make sure that these matters are handled by Parliament, we should not take it lightly, Mr Speaker. It means our institutions have broken down and when the institutions are broken down, if Parliament is trying to put them right, let us accept where things have gone wrong but not to jump on our feet.  

Mr Speaker, if you look at this report critically, you find that right from the start of that project up to now, there were already flaws and the interests are on issues related to money. You can clearly see in the report the interests of the KCC officials in abhorring this kind of corruption.  You can see the interests of different personalities like the Office of the President, in issues concerning money. Now, such interference actually make working of institutions most impossible. I still up to now – (Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker, I agree with the honourable Member that this Parliament makes laws that establish institutions, and these laws give powers and responsibilities to these institutions and each institution plays its role accordingly. For instance, the Local Governments Act gives much power to the local governments to the extent that - actually I want to inform this House that the IGG, and even me, the Minister of Ethics and Integrity have had our hands tied. There are situations, which we simply cannot influence because of the law that is made. Recently, if honourable members listen to the radio, they must have heard the Vice-Chairperson of Rakai on the radio calling upon the people of Rakai to ignore and consider the report of the IGG and Matembe irrelevant!

So, I want to give this House information that in these matters of corruption within local governments, the Act ties our hands so much, and people become so desperate that they find themselves appealing to every office. For instance, I am surprised that this report did not talk about my efforts in this matter because I handled this matter. I called about three meetings. Capt. Guma here can testify! I went to the city council. This is information because I met them over this matter. The city council has got its own ways of doing things. You remember when they were about to dig up the Constitutional Square? I came in, hon. Bidandi Ssali came in. The law, which you made, honourable members, is a big problem to us.

Finally, the information I want to give is that when all these things happen, you find everybody running to the President - (Interruptions). Yes, I must inform you this one. They run to the President and the President himself is busy doing other things, and then some officers in his office may use excessive powers and excessive authority and write some letters, which may bring the Office of the President to ridicule. This is what I would like to honestly and genuinely tell this House. I would like you to look at this matter as a matter of corruption within the city council, and make sure you look at it squarely and be able to see how we can maybe amend the law to let these institutions work. Otherwise, our hands are tied.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want also to refer to Article 200 of our Constitution.  It is not only the law, which we made but there is also the Constitution itself. Article 200 (1) of the Constitution says: 

“Subject to provisions of this Constitution, the power to appoint persons to hold or act in any office in the service of a district, including the power to confirm appointments, to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such office and to remove those persons from office is vested in the district service commission.” 

So, the power was given to the districts and there have been also occasions when people were not paying people on time, and we wanted to discipline these people, but we have to go through the district service commission, and this is Article 200 of the Constitution. When we were making the law, the law had to tally with the Constitution. So, these are some of the intricacies, which we need to consider when we are trying to grapple with problems at the district level and lower levels. So, I thank you.

MR NYEKO OCULA: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable Prime Minister and the Minister for Ethics for giving information. The point I am trying to drive at is that issues of changing those laws to make you effective actually lie with you people. If you find that it is very difficult to implement certain - the law is blocking you, why do you not bring it here and we pass it in record time so that you become effective?  

Mr Speaker let me go to the gist of the matter, not the general, about this tender, which was awarded to UBOA. Right from day one, when they were applying for the tender, these people were trying to forge around some documents - according to the report. When the tender was being awarded, they floated even two companies, which is always not the normal practice. They later on went ahead to  “merge” in quotes because they had not gone through procedures, with that company called SKANSKA. This very company later on denied having ever merged with UBOA and later on, the tender board goes ahead to continue awarding the tender.

Now, what do you think could have gone behind?  There could have been a lot of things, which went behind in all these processes such that the tender board of Kampala District Council could not now reverse their decision. This is what I interpret, and this is very unfortunate. So, I would really request those who are in those offices, the Minister of Ethics - the other time we passed here the Leadership Code. It should now come into play to catch those people there, who are trying to mismanage our public affairs, without fear or favour - (Applause).  

I would like just briefly to comment about the involvement of State House. That State House is not a small place, the so-called Office of the President. That is why many people are yearning for it. Even me, I am hoping to be there one time – (Applause and Laughter) okay?  It is supposed to be a reputable office. It should not be involved in these petty squabbles of petty cash, petty bribery and so on. These officers in the Office of the President, I really do not know whether the Minister for the Presidency has capacity to discipline Kakooza Mutale. This is a man who has his own army. If you try to discipline him anyhow, he may instead discipline you. But nevertheless, the more we can discipline such officers, the more the Office of the President can acquire the integrity we expect of it.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to encourage Members of this august House, let us accept to face something that is right and let us call it right when we come to debate in this House. Something wrong let us call it wrong. That is why we are here. If you come in this august House with a predetermined mind of your own interest, how you moved from here, went to check how the toilets are doing in the bus park and you come to confuse this House, that is going a bit too far! (Applause).  I thank you.  Let me stop at this. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, have we not really debated this matter enough? Because we are repeating the same things! Is it not high time we put the question? Unless there are clarifications to make, do you have any or I put the question?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, it is being proposed to put a question, but I was not very clear on what question is going to be put. Is it on the adoption of the report as it is or whether we need to look at the recommendations one by one so that some of the recommendations could be left out and maybe some amendments made as we go along?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the gist of the report actually would be the recommendations. It is not the details because some details are subject to correction in view of the information passed and so forth. But I think the important part of the report is the recommendations. Is it your view that we go one by one? Is that the consensus?  So, in adopting the report - the motion is for adopting the report but we have agreed to adopt these recommendations. The Chairperson maybe you should read them on page 31.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, maybe before I read them, there are a few clarifications, which I wanted to make. I beg for your indulgence.

Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you immensely for having spared this House the debate on this report. I want also to thank the honourable members for the attention they have given the report. I would like to make a few clarifications on what members have raised.

Hon. Ssentongo, representative of the workers talked about NSSF, and gave a strong warning that they should distance themselves from the workers' money. But I want to clarify that NSSF, in their wisdom, wrote to UBOA Investment Ltd, and I think to President’s Office, categorically denying that they have ever engaged in any talk or business with UBOA Investment Ltd. 

Therefore, the letter UBOA Investments Ltd wrote to the Prime Minister’s Office, saying that they have got funding from NSSF, was a lie. So, that was forgery.

Hon. Tom Kayongo said that actually KCC lacks a technical committee. But when we interacted with the technical committee of Kampala City Council, it was composed of highly qualified people. We can only question their integrity, but not their qualifications. 

They did a disservice to KCC by recommending, or by telling Kampala District Tender Board to do the work on their behalf, by saying that they should first investigate whether there is any formal co-operation between SKANSKA JENSEN International and UBOA Investments Limited, even regarding their financial status. That was not the work of the tender board.  

Then hon. Jalia said that work is going on. Yes, that is true. You see, UBOA Investment Ltd was running this bus park as UBOA (Central) Limited, so it was running this bus park even before. They are the same people but putting on a different skin. 

Since that time, in their management contract they were supposed to be constructing toilets, which they did not do. So now they have only constructed a few kiosks and toilets, which they were supposed to do when they were still UBOA (Central) and not UBOA Investment. That means all these are temporally structures. And when you go there and you see where they have put the toilet, it is just in the middle of the parking area! So, the buses turn around the toilets.  

AN HON MEMBER: Mr Chairman, it is a latrine, not a toilet.

MR BYABAGAMBI: On CID, true, CID Officers failed to do their duty. But, Mr Speaker, maybe what we did not put in the report is that some of the CID officers, who did not even want to be named, said that they could not continue with the investigations because their hands were tied –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But if you decided not to put it in the report, why do you bring it up now?

MR BYABAGAMBI: About the IGG, Mr Speaker, I want to clarify on this matter. When we called the IGG, our intention actually was to ask about the Quick Service bus company and about his officers, not the proceedings of the investigations. 

Really, when you look at the letter which the IGG himself wrote back, it is in two parts. In one part he is saying that he is going out of the country, he is not available. But in the second part, it actually re-affirms that he would not appear. He is saying that he was still investigating, and would only be able to appear after completing the investigations. An indication that really, he was not willing to come and appear before the committee. 

At the same time, Mr Speaker, I have seen this IGG hiding under the Act; -(Interjections)- let me finish. Well, as a layman, I do not know if the Act contradicts the Constitution. I am not a lawyer, I can be advised on this one. But I do not know which takes the upper hand, the Constitution or the Act. That one, I do not know. So, therefore, you can interpret. 

And the committee is empowered - I think under Article 90 we have got the powers to call the IGG to come and testify. On top of that, the IGG is supposed to report to Parliament. So, why should the IGG fear to come and interact with Parliament, where he is supposed to report?

Then at the same time, Mr Speaker, the IGG himself -(Interruption)- Let me finish, I will give you the chance. The wrangles at the Bus Park started in 1996. They started in 1996, and that is when this matter was reported to the Speaker. By that time, the IGG owned a bus. He sold the bus in 1998, two years after. Which means he owned the bus and the wrangles started in 1996, and this matter was reported to him, but he dragged his feet until he sold his bus. So, I do not see what the committee would have done in this circumstance –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The honourable minister who answers for the IGG wants to inform you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Mr Speaker, I find a big problem here when some honourable members of the House appear not to understand the specific role of the IGG. When complaints come to the IGG, he institutes investigations. And I want to tell this House that some of these investigations - for instance the one that eventually removed the Electoral Commission, started long ago. It took about four years to complete this investigation.  

The investigations of the IGG do not just come, and they call people, like Parliament, within two months and they finish. It takes a long time. They do not have enough staff, they have to travel and get concrete information to be able to bring here a report. 

So, when he writes and says, “I have started investigations, in my method of work, I do not reveal what I am already investigating to another body", that is the gist of the letter. That first of all, I am out of the country. Secondly, I want to inform you that I am investigating this matter, and it would be better if I came to you after I have completed, because as I investigate I am not allowed to divulge or reveal information. 

I thought, Mr Speaker, by giving the House this information, it would clear the matter in this House. For me, when I read the report, I thought there was some kind of malice on the institution of the IGG, to paint it as corrupt and to paint it negative. And yet it is an institution that is charged with the responsibility to fight corruption, and must have integrity.  

Therefore, I appeal for understanding of the communication that I brought to this House, so that the name, particularly of Jotham Tumwesigye, is cleared. Because, I want to tell you that if this House resolves that the man has no integrity, he is involved in a situation of conflict of interest, then that means you are moving votes of no confidence in him.  That is how it appears to me, and yet I have put all these matters here and they are clear. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The letter from the IGG to the Inspector General of Police was actually –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: But why don’t you go on to the recommendations?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Because these are the letters, which have been laid on Table.

THE SPEAKER: We have debated the report. We have agreed now to put the question on your recommendations. Why don’t we proceed? Anyway, you are the owner of the report.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, what prompted me to react is that there are documents, which were laid on the Table, and those documents do not really reflect what we found out. For instance, I am talking about the letter –(Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to refer the members to page 24 and 25, on top. The committee specifically states, in the last sentence on page 24, going on to page 25, “The Committee was unable to establish the truth of the allegations of compromise of the IGG’s office in the bus park wrangles.”  This is the report of the committee! I do not know if the chairman has a different opinion to that one.

THE SPEAKER: So, that is the conclusion.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I think, Mr Speaker, they should not confuse the conclusions of the committee with what actually transpired. You see, this was a process and then we reached the conclusion. The conclusions –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The important part is the conclusion.  You see, when you try a case, you get the facts, and after getting the facts, you assess them. The important thing is what conclusion you reach on the facts given. So, I think he is saying your conclusion was that you were not in a position to do this. That is the conclusion. That is the important part of your findings.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Okay, Mr Speaker.  I think we can go with that conclusion. I agree with the conclusion, it is part of our report. I was talking about the letter. I think we can leave the letter alone.  Though it was laid on the Table, I think we can leave it alone.  

I will only comment on hon. Mutuluuza’s submission.  Actually, I do not know whether hon. Mutuluuza read the whole report, or he read it in bits, and that is why he gave a submission like this. 

Hon. Mutuluuza commented about the chairman. Yes, the chairman had interests, and I think under our Rules of Procedure, this is provided for. He declared his interests, and that is why he did not even chair the proceedings on the bus park wrangles.  

Kakooza Mutale, of course, I do not want to comment much on him, because the letter was very clear. He said, “means and contributions”. I think it is very clear. I am not a student of English, I am not a lawyer, but the letter is very clear that really the man wanted to contribute. Maybe it was incompetence, I do not know, but that is how it is.  

Then hon. Mutuluuza again said SKANSKA had interests. But SKANSKA, in the letter of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, why don’t you go on to your resolutions?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I beg that the recommendations of the Committee on Works, Housing and Communications on the wrangles at Baganda Bus Park be adopted. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay that is the motion. But the members wanted to deal with them, one by one. Do you mind reading each one and then we see how we proceed?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that recommendation one of the report be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have the text. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the recommendation of the committee, recommendation two, be adopted.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I just want to seek some clarification from the chairperson of the committee on the technical terms used, because they are not clear to me - “loading facility” and “parking facility” - before we make this recommendation.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, “loading” means the bus comes to the park, then passengers enter and it leaves. “Parking” means that all the buses come, park at the bus park as a parking area, then you call one by one from the same park to come and load and go.

THE SPEAKER: I think he is saying it is like a stage - this is my layman’s understanding - a bus comes to one spot, people go in and then they drive away.

MR AWUZU: I hope the chairman will correct me if my understanding is wrong, because in the report it is mentioned that Muhangi's buses, Horizon, are in the park all the time, so they do not follow the regulations. 

The transport licensing board gives the timing for each bus to come, load and then go out. But when Muhangi's buses are there, they are not following those regulations. So, they have an unfair advantage. So, what they are trying to say is that each bus company should have its buses somewhere, whether in a garage or wherever they keep them, and the buses should just come in the park at the right time - at the time for loading – load, and go out.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: No.1 says, “All disputes arising from mismanagement of company affairs should be channelled to the courts of law”. But No.3 reads as follows: “The committee established serious irregularities in the award of the tender to redevelop Baganda Bus Park. The committee recommends that the tender to UBOA Investments Ltd be cancelled.”  

Now, if you are directing these people to go to court and yet you have cancelled their tender, on what subject are they going to court?

THE SPEAKER: So, the honourable member is saying that there is a contradiction between No.1, which we have already approved, and No. 3, in that you are becoming a court. If somebody wants to contest it, he should go to court and court looks into this and decides. I think this is what he is saying.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, we differentiated No.1 from No.3 because there are other disputes concerning the award of the tender to re-develop the park. Those are: the money, which was being collected from the park, not being submitted to the correct people; accountability was lacking, and even selling part of the piece of the land before it was awarded to UBOA Investments. So, there are many things. 

But on this award of the tender to re-develop the Baganda Bus Park, this recommendation actually emphasises what the Kampala District Tender Board has already done. Kampala District Tender Board, in its wisdom, cancelled this tender. And there is no minute of KCC or Kampala District Tender Board rescinding their decision to cancel this tender. Therefore, this tender is already cancelled; it is not there. So, we are re-affirming it.

THE SPEAKER: No, but the problem is, assuming the tender was given and somebody benefited out of it, can we really direct cancellation as Parliament, or we merely recommend? You should do things, which you can. Don’t you think that this is our role? 

First of all, it is executive, in case somebody refuses. Secondly, it can be the court to order that, “because of the procedures followed, this cannot be”. But we cannot. Don’t you think you cannot? Or supposing it is not cancelled, what happens?

MRS MATEMBE: Sir, while echoing your guidance, I want to inform the honourable members that actually, once the local government has done its own things there, we here cannot order otherwise.  

I think you are all aware of the irregular contract that was awarded for the markets. You know about these markets. Even hon. Bidandi Ssali went up to the maximum level, and even according to him, this contract is null and void, but the contract took effect. Therefore, No.3, I think should not come in, because we cannot enforce it at all.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, mine is a little bit of counsel about conflict of interest. If you read paragraph one, the introduction, it says, “On 20 August 2000, hon. Otada…” - except you did not add that he is the owner of the Otada Bus Service. That is in paragraph 1.1, and we have already been told that a former chairman of the committee was a bus owner, and he resigned.  Those are formalities. 

We already know, as a point of fact, that actually these are conflicts of interest in this affair. Let me declare, Mr Speaker, I have zero interest in it. Therefore, my advice, together with what you have already said, is that actually this recommendation should be deleted from our recommendations. I thank you, Sir.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had also observed that there is a problem with No.3, because KCC awarded the tenders actually using the laws that we passed through this House.  I really do not know whether we have any powers to cancel any tender. 

In any case, the observation that serious irregularities were realised in the award of the tender is correct. But then, we cannot direct the cancellation of the tender. 

So, I had proposed an amendment to the second sentence, that the committee recommends that KCC cancels the tender to UBOA Investments Limited. Let the authority, which awarded the tender, review the cancellation, or reconsider the position of that tender, but not this House. Let us recommend to KCC to cancel the tender.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have heard an amendment that it becomes a recommendation rather than an order. I put the question on the recommendation of the -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I think I should officially move the amendment, so that it is clear. I beg to move that recommendation No.3 be amended as follows: “The committee established serious irregularities in the award of the tender to re-develop the Baganda Bus Park. The committee therefore recommends that KCC cancels the tender to UBOA Investments Limited.”  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: You should have said, “review”. Don’t you think it is better? Don’t you think you should say, “review”, and then they will know what to do themselves?

DR EPETAIT: Yes, so the second sentence reads, “the committee recommends that KCC reviews the tender awarded to UBOA Investments Limited”. I beg to move.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, the first version of the recommendation this House, on the basis that it would not be possible to enforce it disregarded No.3. I would like to know from this House, after this amendment has been made, how we shall be able to follow KCC to ensure that it has done what we are now trying to say. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We have made a recommendation; there are committees in charge of KCC here. They will be interacting with them to find out and then they will report to us. But this is brought in the sense that we cannot sue council as Parliament. We are not the owners of the bus. But of course we have the oversight role and, therefore, we make a recommendation. I think that is the spirit under which it has been made. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that recommendation No. 4 of the committee be adopted.

MR PHILIP BYARUHANGA: With due respect to the hon. Member’s input on this, I would like to point out that while we may be having this problem, apparently there is no guarantee that we may get a situation where all the bus and taxi operators are working in harmony and are pursuing an objective of raising funds, either to run or to develop a park. In any case, we have a precedent where in some of the infrastructure within the KCC, vendors, individually or jointly, are managing some outlets very successfully and rarely the conflict of interest notwithstanding.  

So, I would like to advise my colleagues that I think this is a very strong recommendation and in view of emerging practices of public/private mix in our delivery of services in local governments, this would be a very bad precedent if we passed it.  So, I would like to caution colleagues that we discourage this resolution. Thank you.

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, the thinking behind this recommendation was drawn from testimonies that were given to the committee during investigations.  We observed that because some people owned the park, there was a tendency to undermine the other competitors. In this case, we know that the brain behind UBOA Investments is Mr Muhangi, who owns buses. We also observed that the timetable specified by the Transport Licensing Board is not strictly adhered to because some people now own the park. I believe this mistake has already been made in the case of the Baganda Bus Park. It should not be repeated in the case of subsequent bus parks that may come into place in this city. So, I feel this recommendation should really be taken as it stands, and I appeal to this honourable House to support it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, if I may ask, which is the dominant interest we are trying to serve? Is it that of bus owners or the travelling public?

MR AMURIAT: I think, Mr Speaker, we are trying to serve the interest of both. So long as there is no organisation in the park that we have seen in the past, because of this kind of problems, certainly the travelling public is going to be affected. So long as there is no order in the park and some bus owners are undermined - these people by the way, some of them acquired these buses through heavy loans. Their businesses are going to collapse and this is not in the spirit of privatisation and causing an enabling environment for investments.

THE SPEAKER: Can we give it to some people to think about the best formulation so that we move on and then come back to it later?  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the fears of a lot of us, especially the member who has just been on the Floor, are covered by resolution No.2, which we passed already, which says that the buses should stay outside and then only come to load.  Therefore, we run a risk of disenfranchising some people from applying for tenders, because we have no right to tell a certain section of the society that you cannot apply for a job because you own buses or anything like that. 

I think everybody in Uganda is free to apply for any tender anywhere. Even a Muganda can come from here and go to apply for a bus park tender in Arua. There is nothing in the Constitution stopping somebody from doing that.  So, No.2 solves that problem. So, I think stopping a section of the business community from applying for tenders is wrong.

THE SPEAKER: I think the mission in this proposal was to give guidelines to the tender boards when considering this kind of application. What kind of considerations they should take into account in awarding to one person or the other. I think these are some of the details, which we want. Wasn’t it to guide the tender board?

MR AMURIAT: In the future probably, but not referring to the case of this park as it is at the moment.

THE SPEAKER: But why don’t we give it to some honourable members to think about so that we proceed with transacting business? Maybe some of you who are interested in fine-tuning can go and sit down and then help us to draft it, if necessary.

MRS MATEMBE: I was having difficulty with it because the local government of Kampala City Council now owns that place. It belongs to it and it handles all the tenders and everything to do with it. Now, when we recommend like this, who is enforcing it? That was my main difficulty.  Who is going to interfere with the way they make their tenders and the regulations? Because they have their own tender committee, which is governed by regulations set by themselves. Once we have recommended here, who is going to ensure the enforcement of this? That was my difficulty with it and therefore –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: You see, we are making recommendations. If you ignore the recommendations and the problem crops up, we shall tell you, “But no; we told you this”. This is our oversight function of trying to see policies of government and of other institutions, which we think we control. They may ignore it, but if they do and there is a problem, we shall say, “As far as our record is concerned, we told you this and the other”. You see that whenever you make a recommendation, you do not expect to be obeyed; you may be ignored. But when it is ignored, it is ignored with the attendant consequences. I think that is what we are trying to say.

MRS MATEMBE: We as government then we end up being harassed. That is why you see me talking here because we shall be considered incompetent; that we are not able to enforce a recommendation, which we knew as we passed it that we would not enforce it! That is why we also clear ourselves here before this House, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, you see we are not saying that you, the central Government, are going to enforce this. We know there is a local government but we have a way of dealing with it. You mean to say that the local government is beyond our reach? 

PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish the minister could listen because I was trying to – I just wanted to make an analogy to the honourable minister, Matembe, that when you teach students, definitely there are those who pass with distinctions, those who just pass and those who fail. Definitely the teacher or the lecturer does not really owe if these people fail. So we are saying, let it go on record, if they do not respond, it will be like a student who attends a class and gets zero.

THE SPEAKER: But we are wasting a lot of time on this. I suggest that we get four or five who are interested in this particular one to go out and fine tune it and come back so that we can proceed.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am worried because to me, a lay person, this recommendation 4 will not address the problem we are trying to solve. The problem here is transparency in awarding tenders, and I do not know how, even if you say bus owners should be left out, this will add on the process of being transparent.  

I would rather that we say – because I have information and I am aware and, even those who are in that sector - by the way, I have no interest. I must say that previously, those who started managing these parks were bus and taxi owners. At some point, either they sold away their vehicles or whatever but they remained managing parks. 

There was a complaint from the bus owners that those who do not own vehicles should not manage these parks. That I know for a fact. Now the owners have come in to manage the parks. Are we saying we revert to the other one? I am really at a loss? I would rather we say, “in future tenders to manage public bus or taxi parks on behalf of local governments should be open and transparent”, and we leave it at that. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, maybe I give a clarification on this point because I was the Chairman of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We have really failed because we want a formulation that is going to work. So what do we do?  

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I would like to move an amendment, Mr Speaker, which reads that "in future, tenders to manage public bus or taxi parks on behalf of local authorities should be open and transparent." I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that recommendation No. 5 of the committee be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that recommendation No. 6 of the committee be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that recommendation No. 7 of the committee be adopted.  I beg to move.


(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYABAGAMBI: MR Speaker, I did not hear his recommendation. Mr Speaker, I beg to move that recommendation No. 8 be adopted.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This recommendation says in part, “there is urgent need for the establishment of a transport regulatory authority”. That part is irrelevant because there is already on the ground the Transport Licensing Board.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so you want deletion of what part?

MR AWUZU: I want the whole of No. 8 deleted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question, those in favour of deletion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Yes if there is deletion, there is nothing to amend.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that recommendation No. 9 of the committee be adopted.

MRS MATEMBE: I do not seem to understand this recommendation clearly, because they have been arresting us. I am looking at a situation where some people who are working in offices and maybe are involved in certain wrong doing come to Parliament to give evidence. They give it, all right; but all the same they were involved in wrong acts. Now, when the office either dismisses them or punishes them, they say we are being punished because we went to Parliament to give evidence. There is that kind of situation. I am wondering whether this recommendation where you want to protect those people will prevent the government from dealing with those people when they are in the wrong.

THE SPEAKER: This is in respect of the matter for which they have come to give evidence. It is not a licence that you commit offences simply because you appeared before a committee of Parliament. No, you cannot stretch it that way. It must be relevant to the work or to the appearance of that particular witness. So I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: I beg your indulgence, Sir. I know the House has been sitting for a very long time, but I think it is absolutely necessary for this House to pronounce itself accurately. You have said it is going to appear in the Hansard that what we mean is that they should not be harassed or arrested in connection with the evidence they gave to the committees, and we should even add, "under oath". 

THE SPEAKER: In respect –(Interruption)

PROF.  MONDO KAGONYERA: Yes, it should be clearly stated in this recommendation. Otherwise, people will continue to say, “but we are protected”. So, we should say clearly they should not be arrested, intimidated or harassed in connection with the evidence they have given to the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Is that formulation okay?  I think it is adopted as an amendment. Now I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, honourable members, I think with this, we come to the end of today’s business, and I thank you very much for the work done. Tomorrow, as I have indicated, we shall start with that important amendment of the Land Act. So please take your documents; study them so that tomorrow we can start on it when you are armed with the necessary information.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification in regard to the bill, which is coming tomorrow. It seems the report is not yet circulated because we have not seen the copies.  

THE SPEAKER: I do not know; because I was informed the report was ready and maybe the copies are in your pigeonholes. I do not know.  If they are not there, they will be there at least in the morning. I believe that before we start, the chairperson of the committee will have to read a report and then we have sufficient time to assimilate and then be able to participate in the debate.  But this is to order the office concerned with distribution of the report to do so between now and tomorrow 9.00 a.m. 

The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 April 2003 at 2 p.m.)











