Wednesday, 8 April 2009

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I want to thank those of you who attended the URA workshop. I was impressed with the numbers and the time keeping. 

As I indicated yesterday, this being Easter week, we agreed that for tomorrow we shall sit in the morning so that the afternoon is free for you. So we shall commence the proceedings of tomorrow at 9.30 a.m. and then go on up to around 1.00 p.m. so keep time. 

2.56
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry that this may look like an ambush on you; I had wanted to discuss this matter with you in your office before bringing it here. This matter is to do with our roads. I am perturbed by the rate at which our roads, especially the track roads, are failing. As shadow minister of works and transport, I feel it is my responsibility to raise this matter on the Floor of this House. 

I have recently travelled between Kampala and Arua, and I was disturbed that the section of the road between Arua and Nebbi and that between Nebbi and Pakwach and Pakwach and Olwiyo, which were done less than five years ago, have began to fail. I am told that the design life for these roads was 15 years yet there are signs of failure on the roads and I do not see government coming to explain this failure. In my opinion, there was no value for money in these contracts.

The other case is in respect to a project road Soroti-Dokolo-Lira. This is an on-going contract and it is noticeable that the contractor may be doing a good job, but there were failures on the part of the design. This road is an important road and yet the geometric design that has been done is on six metres carriage-way and 1.6 metres of shoulder. 

Mr Speaker, the design was also based on axle loads of the post war period which is not reflective of what is happening on the ground at the moment. I would like to call for the indulgence of this House for something fundamental to be done. It looks like these roads are going to be used as a conduit to lose money from government coffers. 

In Kampala, if you go along Jinja Road, a road which was done during the CHOGM period, it is already being re-done, and CHOGM took place not long ago. I would like government to address these matters; a lot of money is going on roads and yet our roads do not last. I do not know whether we should continue this way. It is my conviction that government should intervene in this – at least let this House intervene and task the committee responsible to come up with a report on this. I call upon the House to commission an investigation on these particular parts of the roads in order to establish whether there is value for money in these contractions. 

I remind this House that road construction –

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the point is made. Therefore, the committee in charge of roads should liaise with the Ministry of Works and investigate this matter and report to us. 

3.01
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of great importance to my people and to the whole country. There is a problem now between Tororo District and Butaleja District in the eastern region. People are fighting over a wetland. 

It should be recalled that when we were together in Tororo District before Butaleja County was made a district, there was no conflict. However, when the district was formed, the conflict started and it has been going on for the last four/five years since Butaleja District was formed. 

The people lying across the borders of these two districts have been scrambling over a wetland where they have been growing rice. They have tried to resolve the conflict through negotiations, we have tried to intervene as MPs and administrators – but just a week and a half ago, the situation became extremely volatile! We had explained the same problem to His Excellency the President when we met him and he had designated the ministers of Local Government and Lands to demarcate the border more clearly so that nobody would cross these borders. 

The previous Minister of Local Government wrote to the Minister of Lands in January, to try and see how they could demarcate the border. The Minister of Lands said that they did not have the money to carry out this exercise. As that went on, there arose a skirmish where several people were injured and one person in my constituency was killed. When we realised that there was a big problem involving death, this time, the RDC of Tororo District plus the LC III chairman of the bordering area and I went and discussed the matter with the Minister of Lands. He told us again that there was no money to demarcate the district boundaries. However, he promised that he was going to contact the Minister of Local Government again and I think there is a letter going to the minister to see how they can provide the funds to do this exercise. When we asked for how much this money was we were told it was only about Shs 7 million. 

It is my request therefore, Mr Speaker, that government take up this issue quickly. Right now there are soldiers stationed at the border in my constituency; there are 20 of them and even feeding is becoming difficult for the soldiers. So, it is my request that we handle the matter quickly before there are more skirmishes. Actually, right now there are about 20 people who have been arrested trying to cross because they had declared this a no-go area. But people are still going to the swamps to do their rice growing. Those people have been taken to the barracks in Tororo where it is felt they will be much safer. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Certainly, there are problems in that area because the other day I received a petition from people from I think Pallisa, they were complaining about people in Mbale – complaining over boundaries. They complained that somebody was cut by another from the other side. Now another new district is fighting with another. Well, the Leader of Government Business has heard and the Minister of Lands has heard. I hope a solution will be found not only in your district but also in the other districts so that those quarrels end. 

3.07
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, the Minister for Finance promised to provide the national budget framework paper for the Financial Year 2009/10 up to 2013/14 by 8.00 p.m. today. I am glad to report that this promise has been honoured. The books were delivered to Parliament by 8.00 a.m. and I believe that by close of business today, these books will be in the Members’ pigeonholes. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is a good development! But I suggest that you convene a meeting of all Members in the Business Committee so that you can plan what to do when we come back next week. Let Members take these books and study whatever is there and when we convene next week, they will be ready to start debate.
 
3.08
MR SAMUEL NJUBA (FDC, Kyaddondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to make a statement on a matter of public importance. On March 2nd this year, I received several calls within Buganda and outside inquiring about –

THE SPEAKER: Let me get clarification from you; do you intend to read that statement?

MR NJUBA: I will summarise it, Mr Speaker. It is only two – three pages. 

THE SPEAKER: Try to summarise it.

MR NJUBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I received inquiries following a report in Bukedde that people of Nangabo had been attacked by some thugs and I wanted to know whether this was true. 

It is true that there is a group of my constituents which was attacked by the Police and were injured. This followed a meeting at my house when they came to complain to me about the roadblocks prevailing in Wakiso District. They said that these roadblocks had been abolished as early as 2003 by the Minister of Finance. So, I promised them that I would check and find out the truth. When I checked, I found out that in the Minister of Finance’s proposal of 2003/04, roadblocks for revenue collection had been abolished nation wide. In 2005, people in my constituency complained about these roadblocks, and hon. Issa Kikungwe took up the matter with the district and the ministry. The ministry informed the district that actually these roadblocks had been abolished. So I went to check the proposals in the district council Wakiso and there was no such a head proposing this kind of tax. They came back to me and I told them that these roadblocks were unlawful because they were not being backed by any law. So they went excited. 

As they passed the police post – they were about 80 in number on trucks – they were stopped by the Police and asked where they were coming from and why they were so many on these trucks. The Police started whipping them and tried to arrest some of them. On that day, the report carried pictures of these people and I have some of the pictures. The pictures show people in slippers holding out guns, half naked, beating up people. I think this is improper and should be condemned by all men of good will! 

Mr Speaker, I will lay these pictures on the Table but I would like first of all this House to condemn the reckless activities of the Police of simply beating up a population. Even if these people were in the wrong, it is not for the Police to judge them; they should be taken to the courts of law and be judged. It is not for the Police to convict and punish; this is torture and must be condemned.

Secondly, I would like the Minister of Finance to confirm this information that they are no longer collecting money on roadblocks. And they have been told since 2005, but Wakiso continues to collect and harass our people. I pray that the minister comes up and explains what is happening. 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware of the story and in the first place Police, unless formally requested –(Interruption) 

MR NJUBA: Mr Speaker, I wish to formally lay these pictures on the Table.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I thought he had mentioned that already when he was up there. There was no need for repeating that to waste Parliament’s time. I am aware of this story as I have said. But before I say what we have done, let me make one simple statement that Police are not tax collectors. Police can only come in if the tax collectors are finding problems with their taxpayers. Even then, they would come in if there is a court order. 

The unbecoming behaviour of police officers judging cases and going to the extent of beating people is absolutely unacceptable. As we speak now, this matter has been handed to a unit in Police which is called the Profession Standards Unit. This unit, for the colleagues who may not have heard of it yet, is for bringing character and good behaviour within the force. So, investigations are going on and at an appropriate time, I will come back before this Parliament and tell you what this committee has decided. 

Once the committee has completed its investigations - we have got disciplinary committees within the police – these officers who committed this offence will be tried and be subjected to this disciplinary committee and depending on the gravity of the matter, a decision will be appropriately taken. Thank you. 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Following what hon. Njuba has just tabled here in the House, and those of you who saw the Bukedde pictures – we do not know whether they were police officers harassing hon. Njuba and the people; these were people not in uniform, they were dressed like any hooligan on the street. We would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to first of all tell us how many uniforms the police force in Uganda has. 

Two, the excuse they gave was that they were not on duty and that they were called from their houses and they rushed with guns. Is this how the Ministry of Internal Affairs conducts public affairs? 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to be informed by the Minister of Internal Affairs; this matter of uniforms has arisen. I have recently seen young men and women dressed in black uniforms and boastfully putting on dark glasses. Unfortunately, I am not informed whether this is an official uniform, whether this is accepted as addressing for the police. 

I had expected the ministry to come up with a statement or any form of notice to the public that we now have a new uniform that is being used by the Police and tell us which category of the police uses that uniform. I wanted that information so that we do not treat these people as black mambas or thugs and treat them as our genuine police force. 

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification. The minister has given us a short statement and has promised that investigations are going on through the disciplinary committee of the Police and that we shall get a report. But there are so many outstanding reports that we are waiting for regarding the conduct of the Police. 

A small child was shot in my constituency about eight months ago; she died and we have no report on that. A child was shot in Kalerwe about ten months ago, he died and we do not have a police report yet. Police have committed atrocities against the population of Uganda. Police are investigating so many things: murders, robberies, fires – why should we take the minister seriously when he says that investigations are going no and we are going to get a report shortly. How short can it be when we are waiting for police reports for years and years and even decades? Why should we take the Minister of Internal Affairs seriously? 

THE SPEAKER: Allow me to welcome students of Kisugu Junior Academy. You are welcome! (Applause)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, three points have been raised. Firstly, can a police officer arrest if he is not in uniform? I want to make it categorically clear that when we are policemen, we are policemen whether in uniform or not. We are mandated and we have a constitutional obligation to stop any crime that may be committed. Indeed, the Police Act as well as the Constitution empowers even a civilian to arrest anybody in case you suspect that they are about to commit a crime.

On the question of clothing, we have different functions within the police: there is the regular police, traffic police, there are police – we are creating two units of the police: one to protect members of the Uganda National Forest Authority and this was a request by the minister as you may have heard of the bad and ugly incident that took place in Masaka where foresters were shot dead by thugs. So, they have asked us to create a unit for them. So, we have a unit to deal with land matters. 

There is a unit yet, which we were discussing yesterday to set up for ensuring that Uganda Revenue Authority installations and property are guarded appropriately. We have just completed training a VIP protection unit which may not necessarily be dressed in the normal police uniform -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Hon. Minister, as you clarify the matter, could you also clarify on the police officers who have reportedly been sleeping in prisons, who have turned prisons and mortuaries into their residences? Their welfare is in terrible conditions. Sometimes when they are deployed with PGB, for example, they eat leftovers from the PGB officers. So why are we not facilitating these police officers as they are doing that good job there, which you are enumerating? Why have you really under facilitated them in terms of residence and even their welfare as a whole?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, let me continue answering the questions that were raised. I had finished the question on -

THE SPEAKER: But I think we are diverting the minister from the central issue raised by hon. Njuba. His concern was about roadblocks being used to collect taxes, and he wanted to know whether they are there or not. Other things were incidental; the main thing was roadblocks. We have forgotten about roadblocks, we are now talking about the role of the CID. The CID can arrest even though not in uniform. In fact they are not supposed to be in uniform. So, let us deal with the main issue then we can come to the incidentals later.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, thank you for saving me -(Laughter)- but I thought the Member had asked a question which deserved an answer. I think I have really answered that question of hon. Njuba. Please, let me repeat; police officers are not revenue collectors. And they only come in if they have been requested by a specific revenue body to protect the revenue. That is all that they can do. Those that engage themselves as I said, this story is not new. We know it in the police, we know it in the ministry and appropriate action is being taken as I have already promised.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Local Government or maybe Finance, can you tell us about the concern of hon. Njuba? Because what they have shown you - there was Wakiso District tax collection. Is it the method of collecting taxes by local government?

3.26
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I am not aware that this is the method of revenue collection, but since this incident took place, I would request that hon. Njuba furnishes me with a document which he read so that I can investigate and take proper action. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the question that has been paraphrased by the Speaker is happening all over the country. Even in Pader District, to drive across Pader, to drive across Gulu, you find roadblocks with policemen with guns. The only difference with ours is that they are uniformed policemen and they stop every vehicle, get a lot of money from people using undefined formulas -(Mr Omach rose_)- this thing is all over the country; there are roadblocks, especially I have seen so far in the North where policemen stand with local council officials and collect unspecified sums of money from vehicles and from individuals on those commercial vehicles. That is the point and this money has no receipts.

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, to the best of my knowledge, the road tolls have been abolished but if there are any other details that hon. Njuba would like to give us, we shall be able to look at it and give an appropriate response. But we do not collect revenue in that manner any more.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, maybe let me seek this guidance from your Chair. Recently, we had to introduce the Local Services Tax Act and most of these people have been hiding behind that Act which we passed, on how to collect this revenue. And now here we are with the road tolls reappearing and they hide behind that saying they are implementing the local services tax collection.

How should we now marry the two because from the speech of the Minister of Finance, they were abolished? What is the mechanism now? I am not condoning those road tolls – in fact I hate them because it is a crude way of collecting taxes and they are loading a lot of things on our people. That is the guidance I am seeking. The local councils are hiding in that and they are enforcing the law and the way they are doing it is very crude loading it on our people. Assist us on that note so that when we go back we are not beaten like they are beating hon. Njuba and we do not want to see black men in black uniform killing and maiming our people because of taxation.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what clarification I should make on this because does the law which imposes service tax say you do it by roadblocks? Since it does not say so, we follow the general policy of not using roadblocks to collect tax.

I want to congratulate my dear friend, Otto, who has finished his course at the Law Development Centre. (Laughter) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, what is going on is that local governments have made bylaws that they are enforcing locally. The point is that the minister should help us clarify as to whether those bylaws are in compliance with the Finance Act. The problem is not even with Ministry of Internal Affairs but local councils. Like in Pader, they have made bylaws that any vehicle passing with merchandise should be taxed. They have deployed police and they are collecting money without giving receipts. 

The Ministry of Finance should come out with clear guidelines clarifying whether what those local governments are doing is within the provisions of the law because it is happening in some districts.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if you want a statement, I would like to ask the Minister of Finance who is in charge of taxation to come out with a statement on this issue next week when we reconvene on Wednesday.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2008 – CENTRAL GOVERNMENT

3.32
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr Charles Oduman): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, I beg to lay on the Table the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2008 for Central Government in accordance with rule 22(2)(m) of our Rules of Procedure. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee undertake to study that report and report to us promptly.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH ORGANISATION BILL, 2006

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Research Organisation Bill, 2006” be read for the second time.

The object of the Bill is to bring the various existing health research institutions and any other that may be formed in future under one regulatory and coordinating body. 

The Bill also provides for creation of sustainable cultural health research by providing policy and ethical guidelines and coordination and regulation of health research.

The passing of this Bill and therefore creation of Uganda National Health Research Organisation will be a big boost to us as Uganda has already bid to host the East African Health Research Commission for which we are competing with sister partner states that have already established the equivalent of the organisation that this Bill seeks to establish. We have also already received a signal that Uganda has been identified to host the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative Regional Centre for Africa. We therefore needed this Bill yesterday. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

3.35
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to present a report of the Committee on Social Services on the Uganda National Health Research Organisation Bill, 2006.

The Uganda National Health Research Organisation Bill, 2006 (UNHRO) was read for the first time on 4 April 2007. The Committee on Social Services considered the Bill in accordance with rule 116 and 133(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The committee discussed the Bill with a number of stakeholders, among them: we met the Minister of Health, the interim director general of the Uganda National Health Research Organisation, the Infectious Disease Institute, the National Planning Authority, the Joint Clinical Research Centre and the Cancer Institute. 

This Bill seeks to establish the Uganda National Health Research Organisation. It also seeks to create a sustainable culture of health research and to bring the Uganda Virus Research Institute, the Tropical Diseases Research Institute and the National Chemotherapeutic Institute under the National Health Research Organisation.

The main objective of the UNHRO is to support Health Sector Strategic Plan II and ensure equity. It will also promote use of evidence-based interventions. 

The specific objectives of this Bill will be as follows:

1.	To evolve and enforce ethical code of conduct for health research in Uganda.

2.	 To co-ordinate all health research in country.

3.	 To enforce the national research policies and research priorities to support and promote the health sector strategic plan.

4.	 To develop a national research plan and agenda.

5.	 To strengthen and supervise health research work on processes, output and quality.

6.	 To develop the national health research capacity - the health research strategic plan, infrastructure and documentation.

I would like to state that the National Health Research Organisation (NHRO) will facilitate the development of the essential national health research agenda. And as a regional world health organisation policy, the World Health Organisation Council of the health ministers from the African region has endorsed the setting up, at the country level, of national institutes for the alignment and coordination of research. This is known as essential national health research, which will support the implementation of the national health sector strategic plans.

Thirdly, this Bill will respond to both political and technical concerns of research in Uganda. Other states in the East African region have already formed their national coordinating institutions. They are already mobilising funds and other resources for the regional East African Community health research.

The East African Community and the World Health Organisation have already earmarked Uganda as the regional hub for NHRO. The establishment of NHRO is one of the pre-conditions for smooth coordination.

Another objective is that the law will help address research as a comprehensive continuum of a process from basic clinical research interventions to applications. 

The major types of research to be addressed by this Bill will include:

1.	The bio-medical research on, for example, new drugs, traditional medicine, adverse effects of medicines and the related chemicals.

2.	It will also address the issue of behavioural research, for example, socio-economic issues that are useful in the prevention of HIV transmission and the common diarrhoea diseases.

3.	The health system research is to review health policies, human resources for health, infrastructure development, interventions, issues of obstacles and so on.

4.	The Bill will ensure the translation of research into policies that respond to the needs of the most vulnerable population especially women and children.

In particular, the following specific objectives will be enhanced:

a)	The promotion of stakeholders’ consultation, information sharing and consensus building, and update and upgrade research communication infrastructure – networking.

b)	There is a minor process and conduct of research and where it responds to equitable service delivery.

c)	The Bill aims to strengthen local and international collaboration and mobilisation of resources.

d)	To promote safety of client and researchers via human experiment and international priority rights.

The observation is that Uganda has been prone to new emerging infections and diseases such as Ebola, Marburg and HIV/AIDS. Some of these have been contained with the help of the World Health Organisation and the Centre for Disease Control in the United States of America on an ad hoc basis.

The enactment of this legislation, colleagues, will and should facilitate research into these diseases and the establishment of a permanent rapid diagnostic facility.

Research in Uganda should address critical elements of research, equity and development. With the establishment and operationalisation of this Bill, the country can have efficient and quality interventions that will:

a)	Improve population health, equity and balanced development;
b)	Support evidence-based policies and interventions; and
c)	Identify the gaps for improvement.

In conclusion, to benefit from health research, it is vital to ensure that research findings are translated into policy interventions. So, the NHRO will strengthen dissemination of research findings. It will promote information sharing and feedback to patients and the communities. It is hoped that this will also facilitate dialogue between researchers and policy makers, and monitor the use of limited resources for public good.

The enactment of this Bill into law will facilitate research, which is an important tool for an effective planning process, promotion of quality interventions and enhancement of equity. This will also respond to the needs of the East African Community and the Government of Uganda’s objective to improve health research and its utilisation.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that subject to the proposed amendments, the Bill be passed into law. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and the committee at large. The report is now open for debate. 

3.44
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Chairperson and Members of the Social Services Committee for this very comprehensive report. I more so would like to thank the chairperson for presenting it in a manner that attracted everybody’s attention.

I stand to support the motion in respect of the Bill because research is a very important aspect in the discovery of knowledge. Those involved in the research world know that it is through vigorous research that new discoveries are made in the frontier of knowledge. I strongly believe that in this epistemological world where everything involves investigating or putting scientific inquiry into issues of health, life - I strongly support such legislation.

I think this legislation has come at an appropriate time. It is very timely especially now that it has come at a time when we have some fake scientists claiming to be doing research on innocent people. I hope this legislation is going to help us a lot to counteract such researchers in the health field. 

I am sure the intentions of this Bill are very positive. I, therefore, call upon my colleagues to overwhelmingly support it. I thank you.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a member of this committee and that is why I want to give only information. The information I would like to give is that the concept of the National Chemotherapeutic Research Laboratory in Wandegeya was to deal with our medicinal plants and herbs in order to try and find out their potential therapeutic effects. That is why it is very important to include the word “research” in this institute. On page 1 (c), it says “National Chemotherapeutic Institute” and the word “research” is left out. However, that word is very important. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question since it seems there are no other contributions. (Laughter)

3.48
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for their efforts and I stand to support the motion. However, I have a few concerns which I would like the Minister of Health to clear.

There have been concerns, particularly lately but also for a long time, that medical workers or health workers in Uganda are very disgruntled and they are leaving the country looking for greener pastures. If they go to work, they work half-heartedly or if they work, they steal the drugs. The total result of all this is poor health service delivery. 

The concern I am raising is that if there is not enough money to do a good job in looking after patients - it is good to do a lot of things at the same time but isn’t it better to first concentrate on one thing and do it well before moving onto something else? Of course, this will need a lot of money, and I am fully prepared to support it, but wouldn’t we be better off, first of all, if we put as much effort as possible into prevention and looking after health workers instead of spreading so thinly all the resources that we might have? That is a very lay question that I want to ask. 

3.50
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I want to thank this committee for simplifying the report. This is a highly scientific Bill which would not have been very easy for us to construe if it was not simplified in the way it was presented.

I want to thank the Ministry of Health for finding a home for health research scientists. There are good reasons for appreciating this effort, going by the experience from the agricultural sector. For sometime before NARO was established, there were institutes that were carrying out research in agriculture without any remarkable impact and supervision and therefore they lacked quality assurance. Having established NARO, all scientists were definitely brought together and there was an established institution and accountability, and therefore quality assurance was established for the country.

I will, therefore, be able to support this motion because for a long time as well, we have never had this establishment and so a number of research scientists in the health sector were stranded. We had to fight very hard with the Minister of Finance to find out exactly what the role of the National Council of Science and Technology was, and whether they would take on health research just as agricultural scientific research. It became very difficult. Now that this Bill seeks to establish a proper institution and organisation for medical research, I think it is a welcome effort which should be appreciated and considered expeditiously.

My concern, however, is that research scientists are always under looked, underrated and ignored. As such, once we establish an institution like this one, government should seriously think about two areas: identifying scientists who are committed to carry out research and placing them in the rightful establishments and areas, and paying them well.

The reason I am saying this is because I know that 25 top scientists had to leave NARO because of underpayment and because they were not fully recognised in terms of contribution and scientific publications. So I hope the ministry will be able to take this into account. I have not seen in the report whether or not there is a sufficient fund to establish and support this establishment. All I have seen here is that because our other sister countries have done so and we are lagging behind, we should also be able to move in tandem with the rest. I should be able to hear from the minister this time that there is a sufficient budget to run the organisation fully. 

Basic research is a strategic and national interest for any nation. We should not depend on external funding for our own research because the foreigners or international development partners will have their own priority that they will set for financing the activities in our own countries. If this is done, certain areas, even though they are of national interest, are likely to be ignored by the funding that comes with conditionalities. 

I would be very grateful if I got persuaded that when the Bill is passed, there will be funding to be able to support the research initiative by our own scientists, the country and the ministry. I thank you very much for this and I fully support the motion.

3.55
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also want to thank the honourable minister for coming up with such an initiative.

I have two areas of concern which might sound interesting to both the honourable members and the minister. The Bill tends to provide, in the long title, for the establishment of the Uganda National Health Research Organisation and it provides for the composition of the board. The professional council has also been defined in the objectives of the Bill. My concern is that we are not making adequate provisions for protection of researchers who have not gone through the conventional British system of education. We have not done this and yet to qualify to be recognised as a constituent research institute, you need to meet the approval and the standards of the board which has been defined in this Bill. 

I have a problem with this, and I will give a practical example. Recently, my daughter was sick. I started by taking her to St Catherine and then later went to four health units but we were not getting the solution, and these were all medical doctors. After this, something ran through my mind. Three years ago, I had gone with the honourable minister to a medical doctor called Dr Kilama Moro who many of you could know. He is a dentist but he has been having problems with the Uganda National Medical Practitioners Association. After examining my daughter, he found that there was a problem with the teeth. False teeth were trying to come out of the gum and because they were not penetrating the gum easily, there was some blood being retained and it was causing fever. All the other four doctors had said that there was no problem and that that was just normal growth. 

After Dr Kilama Moro attended to my daughter, I went back to the other doctors and asked them, “Are you aware that there is this kind of research in this country?” They almost thought I was losing my mind. They said, “No; these are the traditional doctors we do not want to talk about. It does not make sense; these are old things that they used to remove people’s teeth those days in the 60s and 70s.” So, there was perfect contradiction among medical practitioners. 

Dr Kilama Moro, together with other professors, have even published a book in Uganda on that kind of research. However, because the medical system that the doctors go through in Makerere University in Mulago does not train them in that kind of problem, which does not affect those who designed our curricula from Britain because they do not have that problem, it does not appear anywhere in the books of the normal medical education. 

MS KAMYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for accepting to take my information. Those of you who used to watch television in the 70s will remember a programme which was called “Brain Trust”. On that programme, there used to be some medical practitioners. I particularly remember Prof. George Kirya and Prof. Kanyerezi. One time they were talking about false teeth and Prof. Kirya said, “In medical practice, we do not believe in false teeth.” 

I was young at the time but I thought to myself, “This man is saying that modern medical doctors do not believe in false teeth but our neighbour’s child had died from some strange disease in the gum which looked like teeth coming out and yet they were not coming out”. So, I wanted to give that information to my honourable colleague that this misconception has been around for a very long time. Just because there are no books from London saying there are false teeth and maybe it is because their diet does not let them get false teeth, we have – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean ebinyo?

MS KAMYA: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

DR ASIIMWE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleagues, hon. Otto and hon. Kamya. I am a dental surgeon qualified from Makerere University and I hold a Masters in Public Health. I conducted research in false teeth. I would like to inform members that false teeth are false. A lot of research has been carried out in this country and it has not been proved that they really exist. 

What happens is that when a tooth is developing, there is a swelling of the gum which is physiologically normal. When the gum is swollen, that area is deprived of blood supply and it appears pale or whitish. For those who are not qualified, they may think that there is a worm or a thorn growing when in the actual sense, the area is just pale. Now, those quack doctors go and extract a real tooth from the mouth thinking it is a false tooth and yet in the real sense, it is not a false tooth but a real tooth.

In the process of eruption of teeth and growth of teeth, there are physiological changes that occur in the mouth and in the body that cause high temperature in a child. One thinks that it is because of that false tooth that the temperature has raised. It is not true; it is just a normal physiological phenomenon in the body.

That doctor, I am sorry, has been refused because he is one of the dentists in the country who has been promoting this concept of false teeth. His research has not been passed by the research council of this country because the methodology is wrong and the information is therefore wrong. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for that information. Unfortunately, that is not my profession but may I inform you, doctor, that if you check in the medical dictionary, there is a word they call “schisis”. The meaning of schisis is exactly what you have been explaining.

Just for the record, I went into the laboratory where they were carrying out the operation on my daughter. What actually happens, as you explained, is that as the tooth is trying to come out of the gum, in some children there will be slightly more resistance so it causes more swellings and those swellings amount to a rise in body temperature because there will not be complete oxidation in that area. (Laughter) Yes because all dirt in the body must be taken back in the body for purification. So, the moment it says there for long, it causes temperature rise in children.

What I want you to get right is that Dr Kilama Moro is a reputable doctor and together with five other professors, they published a book. He was trained in Germany and he is a family doctor to hon. Odit. When I organised a meeting between that doctor and the new doctors who came out of Makerere University, the meeting failed to take off because one is trained under a different system and the other is also trained under a different system.

This is the most important; the doctor told me, “When you go to Europe, go and buy this medicine; this is what they use in Europe. The moment a child is produced, they apply it on the gum so that you avoid that situation in advance.” The operation that they did was simple - opening the area of the tooth with problems and allowing it to take the natural process of healing. 

The point I am pushing forward is this: as long as we are still bringing a medical council of those that study with a syllabus designed by people in Europe who do not have these problems, and then we have those councils sit down like my honourable colleague there and vet the other doctor in Nakawa with their opinions, you are not helping research in this country. I was there and found three MPs as well. Even honourable minister Onek was there with his children. 

The doctor practices in Nakawa under the stretchers. He told me, “11,000 children die of Malaria; does that make sense to you?” I said “no”. It is because the medical doctors are deceiving Ugandans that it is Malaria killing children yet we have several Malaria drugs on the market. What explains those deaths? He said that in his opinion it is this theory of false teeth that the medical practitioners from Uganda have refused to acknowledge in their research. How can 11,000 children die of Malaria every year yet we have Coartem, Artenam and other drugs? In the year 2008/2009, people still die of Malaria. How do you doctors explain this? 

Dr Moro says unless Government of Uganda can recognise that schisis is an actual sickness killing our children, we are going to have a problem. Today we are passing a law that this doctor has to go to a medical council, which will be composed of other doctors like him. I beg the minister to tell us how we are going to proceed. That is the single area that I wanted clarification on. Otherwise, this is a very good Bill but it must be inclusive of other non-conventional research methods. 

I can even organise, with the Speaker’s permission, for Dr Kilama Moro to come and present a paper to Parliament in the Members’ Lounge on that particular disease called schisis. Otherwise, we shall continue losing our students because they are learning what does not happen in Europe but learning using that very system. At an appropriate stage, I will also move an amendment that the board should not only be constituted by those who studied using the same system. 

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Odonga for giving way. The information I would like to give is that at Medical School, the curriculum has been domesticated. It is not copied from Europe but domesticated. We send our students to the communities to see what is going on there. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I think I have ably presented my point. We need to make provisions. In fact, I am just a political scientist turned lawyer. I would really pray that if we are not in a hurry, we would organise and get these professionals – he published a book with five other professors in Uganda – and they would come and formally present before Parliament. You could listen to their medical opinion and not just these politicians. These are very serious issues and as far as I am concerned, I will continue taking my children there even if they are not approved by this board we are establishing today. 

Mr Speaker, I do not know how you will help us but this is a medical doctor, they have published books but they have been disregarded by the medical council. In fact, at Kampala Club where I tried to organise a meeting for the two of them, they were changing names. It zeroed down to politics - that you are UPC trained. So I do not know how you can help us benefit from the wealth of these professionals whom MPs, including myself, have been visiting without the recommendation of the medical board. That is why my daughter is okay now.

4.09
DR MICHAEL LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for the opportunity. Fortunately, Prof. Anokbonggo and Dr Brian are my colleagues; he is my teacher and the other was my colleague. 

I want to state that in extracting false teeth, especially in private practice, there is some money to be made. Actually, in this kind of practice, the patients are not really the children but the parents. They need counselling and they need to be told -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The professional fees that Dr Kilama Moro is charging for extracting false teeth, as we are calling it now, is Shs 15,000. That is not a fortune for us to think that people are playing with other’s psychology.

DR LULUME: Whether it is Shs 5,000, Shs 15,000 or Shs 50,000, there is some money to be made in extraction of false teeth. I would like to inform my colleague that he should observe his daughter and see if in the region where the false tooth was extracted, a true tooth will grow. 

In my practice, I have also seen various people come to health units with bleeding gums. Some of these children become pale and die of anaemia. This Parliament should be very happy to have some medical practitioners - doctors and professors in the health practice - who can give expert information on the practice and psychology involved in the treating of patients. We should appreciate the expertise that has been exuded by both Brian and Prof. Anokbonggo.

I appreciate both the report and the intent of the Bill. However, there are other practices that I may also call non-conventional because some of the researchers are really traditional. Many of you have heard about people doing real scientific research and they can call it scientific because they deal in herbal medicine. We have heard about one traditional herbal researcher announcing himself everyday and claiming that he has some medicines that curb HIV/AIDS symptoms. They go out to the field and outside this country to look for herbs, which they use on humans. Whether or not they have been monitored is still a lingering question and whether or not they have successes in their research while they are dealing with herbal medicines on human beings who are sick, is something that we need to note with concern and we want the minister to come out with a comment on this. 

While they have been doing this research and continuing to give their clients herbs for healing, they do not seem to be integrated into the mainstream practice of medicine or even in the research system. That is why the committee does not seem to have approached these people for consultation. If they have been monitored before, we want to know whether these people are making a contribution; if they are not making a contribution, Ugandans need to be informed.

Two years ago, a certain gentleman called Dr Kyewalabye, who is a doctor in his own sense, published a picture of a patient who had a swelling on the breast before and after he had applied his medicines. I think some of these people should have been taken up by the Ministry of Health as real researchers, if there was a success. The primary diagnosis of that case was cancer of the breast and we saw the same woman, having been healed, in another picture which was published in the New Vision.  These people either need to be guided or we need to copy from their good practices and mainstream that kind of practice into modern research. 

It is in that vein that I think that it would have been necessary for the Committee on Social Services to either consult or investigate what these kinds of people do. Also, they should see how they can be accommodated in modern research, of which we are establishing an Act. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.16
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, research is very important. It is a very important component in any organisation. Even at our level, if you are a politician and you do not do research, things may not go the right way. 

I would like to pose a question to the hon. Minster of Health; there is a tendency to change structures of organisations hoping that it will cure problems. I want the honourable minister to tell me: what is the biggest problem with the existing research systems in the Ministry of Health? 

I can talk with experience from the sector of agriculture. I had the opportunity to work on the NARO Bill, which we passed into law, and then I moved out. The report about the NARO activities was presented recently. We moved out and we went to see, and I think the report revealed everything. Nothing much has changed significantly simply because the biggest problem has not been addressed, and that is prioritising research and its funding. 

When I see this, it is normally to follow a culture. When you look at observation No. 4.3, they say, “Other states in the East African Region have already formed their national coordinating institutions and are mobilising ….” Because they have done it, we would also like to do it. Is it just a fashion? I would like to be assured by the honourable minister that the setting up of this organisation will cure the biggest problem existing in the research organisation. Unless we focus on finding and prioritising on basic research, like hon. Odit talked about, we may not move. 

Lastly, we need to get a way of motivating and recognising our brave scientists. They make a lot of findings but we do not recognise them. I would be happy if we put up a mechanism to recognise and motivate these researchers in the country by even moving motions in this House annually. That would go a long way to motivate them. It would even encourage upcoming scientists because they would take pride in the field, which is recognised even at national level. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 
 
4.19
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, hon. Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the Social Services Committee for the very lovely presentation. I want to also thank the Ministry of Health for coming out with these very vital ideas of starting research. 

I know there are very many ways in which we have been doing research but I got happy when I read about the benefits of health research. There is a page where the benefits of health research have been written and one of them says, “Strengthen dissemination of research findings.” I just want to agree with one colleague who spoke before and said that the dissemination of research findings should actually be brought to Parliament and the most urgent and important items will be selected for research. I believe that with research, the work that we do will be very realistic.

I want also to appreciate the objective that says, “To promote information sharing and feedback to patients and the communities.” Very many times research has been done on people and they have never been informed; they have not got feedback on the research findings. I also believe that when you bring back research findings, you establish good relations between the client and the researcher. 

Research cannot be over emphasised because we need research in order for work to be done very well particularly in the Ministry of Health. Why are we saying that there are no false teeth? This is because research was done and the results of the research were not disseminated. You remember the honourable member said that they did research on false teeth; were those results disseminated to the population? 

As we stand now, our people believe in false teeth and yet the people trained under the Ministry of Health know that there are no false teeth. What exist are actually milk teeth, which can come out before time. A child of three months can have what we call false teeth and yet they are real milk teeth, which want to come out. Now what happens when we take these to hospital; in the hospital we know there is no treatment for that and so we shall give drugs for other diseases. What we need is for research to disseminate that information. Let the people be sensitised about the information so that people can know. Whatever research has come out should be known by the population. 

I am also concerned about sharing research information between patients and communities. When research information is shared between the communities, the communities get alert and know what is going on. I want to thank the honourable minister for coming out with this. We need research. It is inevitable that a ministry works with research. Research is vital and it means we are now coming out of the problems we used to face. The relationship between the nurses, patients and communities can now be established very well if we disseminate information among ourselves. Thank you very much.

4.24
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the minister for this presentation. I have got only one question. We have the Joint Clinical Research Centre and its role was not mentioned at all in the report. I looked at the others but I did not see Joint Clinical Research Centre. Thank you.

4.25
MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the work that has been done by the committee and to applaud the initiative of the Minister of Health. I am always worried about what I do not know. When we set up organisations to think for a country, to find out what we do not know, I think that is a step in the right direction, particularly in the area of health. 

There are many emerging diseases, many complex researches that are coming up and we end up getting confused as to who is right and who is wrong.

My only emphasis is that this organisation that we are going to set up should be able to emphasise the issue of research ethics. We have seen that very many researchers sometimes coax either respondents or the clients or the people they want to use as research instruments. That defeats the purpose. At the end of the day, you find that the person you have involved or coaxed into such a state will meet terrible consequences.

We would be glad if this organisation enforces serious research ethics. Mr Speaker, I will not only support this but when it comes to voting, I will also vote for it. (Laughter)

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for the very useful contributions. 

Hon. Kamya, who unfortunately has already left, talked about the motivation of health workers. She said that the government should look into the motivation of health workers before we take on other issues. I would like to inform her that the research institutions are already in place and they are doing their work. What this Bill is about is to set up an organisation which is going to bring together these research institutions. Obviously, the fact that we have a Bill means the Ministry of Finance cleared the financial implications of the Bill. So, we should not be worried about whether there will be funds provided by government for the work of the organisation.

Hon. Odit, I think was very clear. His concerns are very pertinent. He advises that research scientists should be properly identified, properly placed and properly motivated. The organisation that is going to be set up by this Bill will be autonomous. So, these are the issues that they will definitely address. 

The issues raised by hon. Odonga Otto, I believe, were adequately responded to by the medical workers – the doctors, the surgeons in this House. However, allow me to also state that in this Bill there is room for research in traditional medicine. As a matter of fact, we already have an institute, the Uganda National Chemotherapeutic Research Laboratory in Wandegeya, and this has tried to bring together the traditional medical practitioners. That is actually their home. The problem we face with most of them is that they do not want to come out because they believe in keeping to what they already know. They believe that somebody is going to take their knowledge and they will end up being cheated. So, we are really trying to bring them up.

Dr Asiimwe Brian, I want to thank you very much for having come to my rescue, being a dental surgeon, and I also would like to thank Dr Lulume.

The integration of herbal medicine in modern research; actually when you look at the Bill -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable minister, you talked about these traditional doctors, the herbalists, and then these witchdoctors; do you also take care of the witchdoctors?

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Actually, the people we deal with are those whose science we kind of understand. So when I talk about traditional herbalists or traditional medicine men in this context, I am leaving out those people who claim to practice the science that we do not understand. That is also an area where research should be conducted so that once it is understood then we can mainstream it. 

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister for giving way. The information I would like to give is that honourable Members of Parliament should clearly identify and differentiate between the so called witchdoctors and traditional healers. Traditional healers actually sustain our medicinal heritage. Most of us have been sustained by these traditional healers. 

Witches are not doctors and they are everywhere in the world. When the British came to Uganda and Europeans came to Africa, they found special people with knowledge better than their witches and that is why they got the name “doctors”. Otherwise, they are not doctors; they are witches.

My plea is that we should recognise our traditional healers as the custodians of our medical background. It is a culture which we should not ignore because they are useful. In fact, most of the medicines we use now are from natural origins and therefore the encouragement of our traditional healers is important.

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, I think I should give this information so that we do not take long on this issue. At an appropriate time, we will come here with a Bill on traditional and complimentary medicine. Right now, we are in the final stages of preparing the policy on traditional medicine and complementary medicine.

Hon. Bikwasizehi was concerned about the existing health research structure. We are not changing the existing health research structure neither are we changing the structure of the individual health research institutions. What this Bill is doing is to bring them together, as I have already said. 

We are not forming this organisation just because other countries in East Africa have gone that way. The objects of this Bill are clear in Clause 5, and we are saying the object of the organisation is to create a sustainable culture of health research by providing policy and ethical guidelines, and national coordination and regulation of health research. This also in a way answers hon. Tinkasimire’s concerns about research ethics. 

DR LULUME: Thank you, Minister, for giving way. It is on that point that I want to find out the entry point of those already into research in traditional medicine who are not professionals but they are within the system of that kind of research. They are difficult to classify as health professionals because they may not have had that qualification, but they are doing some kind of research and they may have success stories. What is their entry point?

DR NDUHUURA: The entry point is through the National Chemotherapeutic Research Institute because that institute is already working with researchers in traditional medicine. This UNHRO body will set guidelines and therefore that is a detail that should come under the guidelines that will be issued by the organisation. 

If my sister, hon. Kavuma, cared to read the report on page 1, under 2(5) there is the Joint Clinical Research Centre. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, there is a question that has not been responded to and this is to do with the financing of the board. As it will be appreciated, this Bill was read the first time on 04 April 2007; this is two years from then. As you will also appreciate, a lot of things have happened in two years and I think this House needs to be assured that the Bill, if passed into an Act, will be functional. 

There is an additional question that I want to ask the minister and this is to do with whether this Bill provides for the protection of knowledge that is generated from research. I have looked at the Bill and there is no provision whatsoever for patenting of knowledge that is generated from medical research. Thank you.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Part 6 of this Bill, clause 24, is very clear about the funds of the organisation. It says: “The funds of the organisation shall consist of- 
(a) 	Monies appropriated by Parliament. 
(b) 	Loans from any source. 
(c) 	Any money paid to the organisation in the performance of its duties. 
(d) 	Donations and endowments from organisations and individuals.” 

The committee has in its wisdom also proposed, and I have agreed, that we shall add (e) which will be grants. 

About the protection of the research findings, I think this is found in another piece of legislation which this House passed not long ago.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Research Organisation Bill, 2006” be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA NATIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH ORGANISATION BILL, 2006

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment to the title.

THE CHAIRMAN: But we have not reached the title. 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, okay, I would like to propose an amendment to clause 2. I propose that in the definition of professional council we substitute the word “board” with the word “council.”  The justification is that there is no board; we only have a council.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose that clause 2, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose that clause 3 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment to clause 4. I suggest that we replace sub-clause 4(d) with the following: “Any other recognised institution or entity, which undertakes health or similar research.” 

The justification for this is to bring in new entities that carry out similar work under the organisation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would pray that clause 4(d) remains as it is because what the chairperson of the committee is doing is only to add the word “recognised” and this is where the debate begins. We have professional doctors who are not recognised by the council. I would suggest we maintain the original text; there is already a big contest between professional doctors from the same university.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, we are proposing this because we feel there are other entities that are carrying out research, but which have not been pointed out here. We only want to give room so that at the end of it all, we do not have to again amend this law when others come on board.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The original text of the Bill instead would leave room. In amending the original text by adding the word “recognised” you are trying to say that this is recognised or this is not recognised. 

The original text talks about any institution which undertakes health research –(Interjections)– no, no, the debate is on the word “recognised” because where do you put this doctor who is not recognised?

THE CHAIRMAN: If traditional healers are recognised, how about these doctors. They will be covered. The text says, “Any other recognised institution.” So, if it is recognised, it is catered for. If it is not recognised, it is not recognised.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman that is where I need your guidance. This is a medical doctor, who studied from Makerere University Medical School, Mulago, in the 1960s, but he is not being recognised by the medical council; he is a doctor and not a traditional healer. Where do we put such doctors?

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Chairman, the Uganda Dental and Medical Practitioners Council is a professional council. Certainly, if it does not recognise the doctors you are talking about then there must be a problem. Otherwise, any medical or dental practitioner who is qualified is registered by that council.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the proposed amendment by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I propose that in clause 6(j) we insert the words “in collaboration with the National Council of Science and Technology” between the words “approval” and “to” that appear in the first line. The justification is to ensure collaboration of the two organisations since their functions are related.

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Chairman, I have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose an amendment to clause 7(2). We suggest that we insert the words “and National Drug Authority” at the end of the sentence. The justification is that National Drug Authority has got an interest in drug related research as one of its core functions.

DR NDUHUURA: I have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to clause 8(1)(a), by replacing the word “science” with the word “sciences.” The justification is to cater for the various categories of health sciences. 

And in clause 8(1)(c), we propose the deletion of the words “who are at the level of principal research officer.” The justification is to avoid restrictiveness of the provision. 

We further propose an amendment on clause 8(1)d, by replacing the word “two” which comes before the word “eminent” with the word “one.” The justification is that it is not necessary to have two persons from the community. 

Mr Chairman, we also would like to propose the addition of another sub clause 8(1)(f). The wording should read thus: “Two representatives from the research institutions.” The justification is to ensure adequate representation of all the stakeholders.

Allow me to also propose an amendment to clause 8(2)(b), by substituting the word “director” with the words “executive secretary.” Instead of director, we want to call him executive secretary. The justification is that the executive secretary and not the director, is a technical person and it is the right title for the Chief Executive of the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology.

But also, the word “and” appearing at the end is redundant because of the proposed new sub-clause (d). That is the new sub-clause I am going to propose.

I wish to also propose that we insert (d) on 8(2) to read “…a representative from the National Planning Authority.” The reason for this is that the National Planning Authority is interested in evidence-based information from research needed for national planning.

THE CHAIRMAN: The minister has no objection?

DR NDUHUURA: No, I have an objection somewhere. Mr Chairman, I agree with the amendment to clause 8(1)(a) but in clause 8(1)(c), it should read - because this is what we agreed in the committee - “…three distinguished research scientists in matters of health, two of whom shall be representatives of research institutions.”  This should be -

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the best thing to do is to go one by one.

MRS MASIKO: Mr Chairman, I agree that we can handle one by one but I was looking at the issue of having an odd number of the members of the board in case there is voting. So if we take the minister’s amendment it will be okay but the committee’s amendment makes it even - which is a bit difficult in case of a tie.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Let us handle one by one. I put the question on the first amendment on clause 8(1)(a).

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Then clause 8(1)(a).

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the proposed amendment to clause 8(1)(a) by the committee is superfluous because the proposal is to have health sciences instead of health science. The way I see the plural is that it applies to the faculties and to the colleges. This is why it says, “…one representative nominated from faculties responsible for medicine…” the plural is “the faculties” “…or colleges of health science.” So putting “s” at the end of science is superfluous.

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my colleague that the recently established College of Health Sciences at Makerere is known as such. It is the College of Health Sciences and not the College of Health Science. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, we have already passed that. Clause 8(1)(c) I put the question -

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Chairman, clause 8(1)(c) should be taken together with the sub-clause that the chairperson was proposing to add to provide for an additional two representatives from the research institutions.

Actually what was agreed when we met the committee was that we amend clause 8(1)(c) to read, “…three distinguished research scientists on matters of health, two of whom shall be representatives of research institutions” because originally it was two. So,

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I have no objection. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok. I put the question to the proposal by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok, let us move to clause 8(1)(d) and replace “two” with “one” before the word “eminent”. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us move to clause 8(2)(b), Substitute the word “chairperson” with “executive secretary”.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I think you have jumped the area I wanted to contribute to. The area I wanted to contribute to was where they want to replace “two” with “one”. The reason I was objecting -

THE CHAIRMAN: I will come –

MR TINKASIIMIRE: These are community representatives.

THE CHAIRMAN: You will come to a recomittal because we have passed what you are talking about. Let us now move to 8(2)(b) that is “executive secretary”, yes.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Chairman, I do not know how to deal with this and whether it is not a procedural issue. The committee decided that “chairperson” should be replaced with “executive secretary.” Now, is the chairperson’s proposal a committee proposal?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes it is the committee.    

MR ODUMAN: Yes, she is a member of the committee but she is not the committee -(Interruption)

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I do appreciate the shadow minister’s concern. He thinks it could be a position of the chairperson. But I would like to assure you that whatever amendment I am making here, even this very amendment, was agreed on by the committee. We work as a team. I cannot propose this alone.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us now go to 8(2)(c). Delete the words, “…but which shall not have any voting powers…” That is the amendment. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 8(2)(d), insert (d) to read “A representative from the National Planning Authority.” 

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am not comfortable with this provision because NPA is a planning body. It is of course interested in a lot of information from many institutions and it does not have to be a member of those institutions to get that information and use it for planning. Otherwise we would require NPA to be on NARO, MISR Makerere, Coffee Development Organisation, Coffee Development Authority and even URA.  So, I would suggest that National Planning Authority is not included on the board.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I strongly oppose the minister’s amendment. The reason is that planning for health must be based on research results and inclusion of the National Planning Authority is therefore necessary so that the authority is kept informed as regards evidence from research.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think the argument is that for the National Planning Authority to get information for its planning, does it need to be part of the organisation that is undertaking the research? 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 8, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman in clause 13(2) we want to replace “non members” with “co-opted members”. The justification is that this is more appropriate grammar.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment to clause 14 to delete the words “in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance”. The justification for this is to avoid incapacitation or slowing down the remuneration process.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose that we insert the word “facilitate” between “coordinate” and “and”. The justification for this is that the secretariat is responsible for oversight.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose that we delete the words “with approval of the board”. The justification is that the words are redundant.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, in clause 23 we are proposing that we insert a new sub clause 23(d). There is already an existing (d) but we are proposing that we insert after (c) a new (d) to read, “funding for essential research consumables”. The justification for this is that we want to empower the institution to ensure adequate funding provision for consumables. However, consequentially, it will affect the arrangement.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, can the chairperson of the committee be clear about what she means by consumables in this context?

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The information I would like to give to the honourable member is that a research laboratory without essential consumables like pipettes, reagents and other chemicals is not worth its name. These must be present in order to make that research laboratory effective and active. Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI:  Mr Chairman, these are deemed to be part of the process. If we are going to talk about needles for the doctors -

THE CHAIRMAN: The materials that they use in research are the consumables.

MR ARUMADRI: But is it necessary to insert them in the law? They are deemed to be part of the process. How can you undertake research without reagents? 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I think we have made it very clear that we have not actually broken down the word consumables by pointing out the chemicals, needles and the like, like my colleague may think. We have made it general because when you look at (c) in the Bill, there is provision for procurement, property maintenance, repair and placement and so forth. We wanted to make this very clear because we know the problems that arise. The reason that we brought this is because we have had experience and we have seen what happens down there. That is why we wanted to make it very clear.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I think if you want to make it clear as the honourable professor said, then you should bring it in the definition. We should define consumables because by leaving it open-ended it can even include beer. So we need to make a provision- Yes, this is law. If we are using a word, which is going to be ambiguous then we would rather define and insert it in the definition clause.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, we are proposing an amendment to add the word “grants” at the beginning of the sentence to read grants, donations and endowments from organisations and individuals. The justification is that the organisation may also receive grants.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I would like to make an amendment here on behalf of the committee. It should be clause 25(4) not (1). In other words we are proposing a new sub clause to read “for avoidance of doubt, each constituent institute shall open and operate its own account”. This means that in our report delete all those words at the beginning of the sentence they are not necessary.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I was wondering, can’t that be an administrative arrangement? Because if you are going to have constituent areas and you want them to be a bit autonomous to that level, wouldn’t it create conflict in their management? I thought that could be an administrative arrangement, I don’t think it is necessary here.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean that you want to leave it discretionary? Don’t you think that would cause more problems rather than having it stated categorically in the law?

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Chairman, I would like to give some information. These research institutes that we are providing for in this law have been on their own and independent. Their fear is that if you bring an organisation that is going to be an umbrella and you don’t specify this in the law, there will be a lacuna. So they want to maintain their independence and as such, we are saying “for avoidance of doubt”. I think the committee is right.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I support the proposed amendment but I think its placement is not good because if you look at clauses 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 and so forth, they relate to the board. For instance, if you look at clause 26, it talks about investment of surplus funds and it says, “Any funds of the organisation not immediately required for any purpose under this Act may be invested in any manner, which the board may, after consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance, determine…” Now if you put this clause as (4) in 25, it would imply that these other relevant provisions would apply to these constituent institutes, which in my opinion should not be the case. 

I think it would be better to bring this particular provision- For instance if you look at clause 22, it talks about committees of constituent research institutes; clause 21 talks about sourcing of funds by constituent research institutes and clause 23 talks about submission of annual estimates by constituent research institutes. We could put it as (2), that is create the existing clause 21 as 21(1) and put there a 21(2) that states, “A constituent institute may open and operate its own account.”

THE CHAIRMAN: No, the reason why they are bringing it under clause 25 is because part of (6) deals with finances. You find that clause 25 is about the power to open and operate bank accounts and this particular provision is for avoidance of doubt, the constituents would also be free to have their accounts. That is why it is there.

MR RUHINDI: Agreed, let it stand alone but let us give it its own clause. This is because (1) is in respect of the board, (2) is in respect of the board and (3) is in respect of the board. We could actually give it a separate clause.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we are saying notwithstanding those powers above and for avoidance of doubt, the constituents would have their own accounts.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Chairman, I need clarification from the chairperson. I think that this might create more confusion than solving the problem. This is because the bank accounts we are talking about are those of the organisation we are creating. Opening and operating bank accounts is only one of those activities the constituent organisation undertakes. Now if you are going to be specific for avoidance of doubt in terms of that particular activity, what have you said in terms of the rest of the activities? 

How semi autonomous or autonomous are they going to be in respect to their relationship with that umbrella organisation? The moment you choose to be specific in respect to bank accounts, you raise eyebrows about other activities. To me the section on finances and bank accounts that deal with the organisation should remain for the organisation rather than opening it up for the constituent organisations.

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Chairman, I think it is necessary to have this sub clause because if you don’t then the board may assume some of these powers and say, the law does not provide for the constituent research institutes to open their accounts. That is why this sub-clause is very important.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

MRS SENINDE:  Mr Chairman, I would wish to propose an amendment to clause 36(3) to insert the word “to” between the words “relating” and “there” appearing on the last line of the paragraph. The justification is just for grammatical correction. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose that clause 36 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 37, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Third Schedule, agreed to.

The Title

MRS SENINDE:  Mr Chairman, I would like to amend the long title to read as follows: “An Act to provide for the establishment of the Uganda National Health Research Organisation, its composition, objects, functions, powers, administration, finances and other related matters.”  This is a clearer and more accommodative title.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I think the committee chairperson should appreciate that the long title cannot have everything because after mentioning objectives, powers, functions and any other matter related thereto, I think it would not be good drafting. I would submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: But why do you want to amend the present format, especially as you are bringing existing institutions under an umbrella organisation? 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, the reason why we are amending this long title is because in the existing title, we have mentioned the various institutions. But as we go on in the Bill, we have made it categorically clear that we would like to bring on board even other entities and these entities are not indicated here. Won’t that be somehow –

THE CHAIRMAN: No, they are there. You had better recognise them because they are there. It is today that you are bringing this motion and they have been in existence. Shouldn’t they be honoured by being mentioned that they were brought there?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us hear from the Attorney-General. 

MR RUHINDI:  Mr Chairman, I strongly support your observation. This is a transition from a structural infrastructure arrangement to another. And you see the long title summarises the mission, the vision, the objectives and functions of an organisation of this nature. So this is very important to be captured. I support your observation. 

MRS SENINDE:  Mr Chairman, in view of your guidance and in view of the guidance of the Attorney-General, I wish to concede. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I propose that the Title stand title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Title, agreed to.)


MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduuhura): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Research Organisation Bill, 2006” and passed it with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduuhura): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that House adopts the report from the Committee of the whole House. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH ORGANISATION BILL, 2006

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Research Organisation Bill, 2006” be now read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED 
“THE UGANDA NATIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH ORGANISATION ACT, 2009”

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is passed. Congratulations. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 52.0 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE TWO BUSINESS, TECHNICAL, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING INSTITUTIONS (BTVET), PLUS REHABILITATE 42 TRADITIONAL AND CONSTRUCT 15 SEED SECONDARY SCHOOLS (ADB EDUCATIONAL IV-POST PRIMARY EDUCATION AND TRAINING EXPANSION AND IMPROVEMENT) PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Who is handling the Ministry of Finance? Who is the owner of the motion? [HON. MEMBERS: “The Chairman, Committee on National Economy”.] The chairman is going to make a report. Are you ready? It will be unfair if she had no instructions, don’t you think so? 

5.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, it is true a sufficient amount of work has been done by the ministries but the minister that has been handling this particular loan item is not here right now. I would like to propose that we handle another item, and since tomorrow we shall be here, you allow us to bring the loan item when the minister is here.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Tomorrow I want to bring in this item No. 9, which has been here and it came up when we were dealing with this motion. This is about regulating activities and practices of traditional healers and herbalists. I do not know, but since the minister is not here and this one is not ready, it will not be good to press her to handle the matter. So I think we shall deal -

5.27
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Mr Speaker, we are agreeing with the Chief Whip and my colleague here that as a beneficiary minister I give a background and the chairperson presents the report and the process continues. I am seeking your guidance on this arrangement.

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not want to be unfair to you because we may agree on that arrangement but we may get stuck because originally you did not plan to deal with this today. So, I think it will be fair maybe if I allow you tomorrow. I want this item No. 9 which cropped up; but I think we can have both tomorrow so that you prepare yourselves; if there are three ministers involved in the matter, they can agree on the way forward. It will be better that way. So with that we have come to the end of today’s business. We cannot start on item No. 9 now. Tomorrow we will handle two items, this one and the one on traditional healers.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, I saw the copies being brought to the House. Wouldn’t it be prudent to give out the copies so that we read them over night, we internalise and then -

THE SPEAKER: Copies of what?

MR ARUMADRI: Copies of the motion, which was supposed to be moved by the Minister of Finance, about the loan for the Ministry of Education.

THE SPEAKER: I have no problem with that. Let us have them tomorrow. I think they do not have the copies. Let us start tomorrow at 9.30 a.m., we deal with these two items and then we call it a day. With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.29 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 April 2009 at 9.30 a.m.)

