Thursday, 8th April, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The House was called to order).

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992.

The First Schedule

THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, when we adjourned yesterday I was moving an Amendment on the Representation of Women in the Constituent Assembly.  It is being proposed that every district be represented by one woman and that is agreed. The mode of their election we propose, Sir that we use RC.111 Council sitting together with the Gombolola or Sub-parish women’s Council in a joint Session.  I repeat; that the election will be on the level of RC.111 Council but when they do sit, they sit in a joint Session with the women’s Council for the Sub-county.

We feel, this is an area where will go wide as far down as possible without being unnecessary extravagance and without causing any other complication.  I hope this will be acceptable, not only to the women of Uganda but also to the population.

Next, Sir, we delete Item 3 on the Schedule, that is a Provision by National Resistance Council Representation.  And with a renumbering of items 4, 3, 4, 4, 5, 6, as 3, 4, and 5.  Delete items 3, that is National Resistance Council Representation and then renumber from 4 to 6 as 3, 4, and 5.

MR. MWANDHA (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I have an Amendment that I wish to move.  With regard to the representation of women, I have also consulted various women since yesterday and, the consensus I got was different from what the Minister is proposing.  Many women felt that it will be better for them to go through the exercise like men are doing.  (Hear, Hear!) I know that there is a problem of cost if the exercise has to be repeated separately for women because that means duplicating facilities for elections.  But I think, there is a solution to that one because at each polling station you could have two ballot boxes, one for the county and the other one for the district. (Interruption)

MR. TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I have also been thinking about that problem in detail and if you have two boxes at polling stations in a county and one of the candidates in the county happens to be a woman, the voters are bound to be confused. (Hear, hear!)

MR. MWANDHA: Well, in fact in my consultations that issue came up and one person said, look, you underestimated the intelligence of many of these people but in fact they will now where to cast their votes.  So, I still believe that this proposal by the Minister will be the best solution to electing women to the Constituent Assembly, Mr. Chairman.

(The First Schedule as amended and agreed to).

MR. OBWANGOR (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr. Chairman, I had my Amendment in respect of Item No.5 to the effect that since this proposed that the words parties in Item 5; after parties delete which took part in the general elections held on the 10th December 1980, Item 5 - (Interjection) It is there.  It is now No.4.  To the effect that we delete which took part in the general elections on the 10th of December 1980 and it shows; existing and it shows (e) the National Liberal Party has also energetically fault for political freedom and peace in Uganda since 1984 to present to the present day and well participated in the current Constitutional Making Process.  Cooperating willingly and by submitting, it is memorandum reference No.LP/CON/2 of the 25th March 1991 containing 37 eloquent pages only how to make a National Constitution.  So it is in this respect that the Mover would agree more so.  If he reads the recommendation No.1 on page 52 of the interim report that we do not need to segregate and go backwards to the 12 years or 13 years ago so that in the spirit of the broad based government, we have all the political forces or social forces cooperate in making a National Constitution without in a new way belittling any of them because the more we bring more people and more social forces the better for our country, Mr. Chairman.

DR. TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi): Mr. Chairman, I rise to support that Amendment that we include the National Liberal Party in the list because I do not see any reason for going back to 1980.  We are now in 1993 because it is possible that a big political party, much bigger than the National Liberal Party could have come into existence and we do not even know how big the National Liberal Party is but it does exist and hon. Obwangor is one of its leading officials. (Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information.  I am not declaring my interests up there are likely to be a political prayer because I am a citizen I pay my Income Tax.  I am the National Treasurer of the National Liberal Party.  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Continue hon. Tiberondwa, please.  Order, please.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, in fact the National Liberal Party has never disowned itself.  It is more qualified to be in this list than the Uganda Patriotic Movement because the leaders of the Uganda Patriotic Movement have said that, it does not exist.  So, I would propose that in the spirit of reconciliation and broadbasedness we include National Liberal Party, and we change the number from 8 to 10, Mr. Chairman. I beg to support.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose this Amendment basically for the confusion it is likely to cause.  First of all, there is no registration for political parties in this country.  Therefore, if you do not put off a cut off dense you will keep the gate open for everybody to say, I had a party because no party is required to have been registered.  The only cut off point which helps is that, if a took part in an election 1980 that party you cannot say it does not exist because in all the electoral process, that party was supposed to register itself in the process of participating in an election.  Now if you do not use this as a cut off point other people also may have had their parties.  They may not be here to be heard, they may have had their small parties everywhere.  So where will you end?  Secondly, this National Liberal Party is just a rebel group from the Democratic Party.  (Interjection)  Yes, I know the history this party.  This party was just a rebel wing from Democratic Party -(Interjection) Yes and hon. Obwangor knows it.  Therefore, that is why they did not even participate.  (Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, with due respect, if we are not going to respect political parties which broke off from others we should not forget that the UPM is a rebel wing of the Uganda Peoples Congress. (Laughter)

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member who has just misinformed this House that the UPM was not and has never been a sprint group from the UPC.  What happened was, at the time when the UPC and DP got married during the time they wanted to break the umbrella and the rest of the Members of the NCC then said look, it was not in the interest of the country to break back into those parties at that material time and the NCC, in fact, passed that the umbrella to be maintained.  Then in the afternoon in the wedding, the two parties got together and said, for them it was parties, the rest of the Members of NCC got together to say, what do we do because this is not the time to go partisan, again we know the consequences.  They said, for us we remain UNLF and we resolved accordingly.  Soon after two gentlemen said look, you have no right over UNLF, I am supposed to be the UNLF Political Commissar.  The Chairman said, I am the Chairman and yet we wanted to reorganize ourselves in light of what had happened.  So, these people insisted that UNLF as the name was theirs, so we said, okay, go ahead with your name.  The rest of us what do we do? The rest of us included those who had been members of DP, who had been members of UPC, who had been dismissed from UPC, who had been dismissed from DP, those who had no partisan cleavage before that and the UPM was born.  So, the information to hon. Tiberondwa is that he should go back a little bit to his records and put them right.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, my point is, whatever the situation, at least by 1980 UPM was a party and action of participating in the election, got it to be registered as a party because each party under the Electoral Law had to register.  Therefore, why I say this, hon. Obwangor should not mind, a number of us can speak for you under the parties because as I said, this was at that time a break war group but the important point is that, if you do not have a cut off dense and also you do not have registration of parties, you keep the door open for a anybody who did not participate in 1980 Elections to come up and claim, like the National Liberal Party is claiming that it is also a party which must be represented in the Constituent Assembly.  So, this is a point.  Had there been a Registrar of parties, this one should provide all registered parties but that does not exist so, we can only trace whether one was a political party written and accepted if it participated in the last Election and that happen to be 1980.  So, it is not because I do not want the National Liberal Party.  I am saying but as a principle.  You are now going to open the door if you do not put a cut off point. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I oppose this Amendment because I do not think it is based on any serious consideration.  History has it that when this country was being liberated against Idi Amin we had an open ended Clause which allowed anybody to come -(Interjection)  I do not want any information. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, take the information.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, this House consists of the best wisdom in our land, as the highest body politic by virtue that under Statute 5 of 1980.  Uganda Constitutional Commission was commissioned to go throughout the country to fish all the necessary information to be given to the nation in the fashioning or moulding of the new Constitution. 

Now, I respect my Colleagues and the House, this august House, if before us when we read page 52 of the document given to the hon. Mover does say, on political party existing now in the country, page 53 this book we have before us in the House, Democratic Party is mentioned, Uganda people’s Congress is mentioned, Conservative Party is mentioned, National Liberal Party is mentioned, so these are facts, not the fact because of float, because of the existence constitutionally under Article 18 Sub-section (g) of our Constitution.  Political Parties and associations are allowed, so therefore, we now -(Interjection) Yes, hon. Mover is shaking his head and if they give you the Constitutional statute the law of the land, the very Constitution, the Law, the land making, alliance now in our Statute Book.  So, therefore, it is also respected not through float as the hon. the Deputy Minister of Finance.  He said, these were half-baked people whether dancing away, no.  We orderly organize ourselves as responsible citizens to enjoy our political rights.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, just in order to help the Minister, I have got a similar Amendment where I have added there a closing date; that is “political parties which are in existence in 1993.”  It will just put a seal and we shall not allow any more political parties after that. 

AN HON. MEMBER: Why not?  Well, for the purpose of -(Interruption)

MR. SAM NJUBA: I am grateful for the information but I think it does not improve on the situation.  In 1980, we knew the parties that were there. When the Commission went out to collect the ideas, it came out with an extra party. Since the report was made a year or so ago, we do not know how many have marshalled up.  So, even by 1993, the date he is saying, there may still be a party, and if it is not included, they will challenge this provision.  So, I oppose the Amendment.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the First Schedule, No.5 be amended as proposed by hon. Mr. Obwangor.

(Question put and negatived).

MR. KALULE SENGO: Thank you Mr. Chairman, I have two Amendments to make on the First Schedule.  I circulated my Amendments, though by mistake First Schedule, Sub-section (b) was written as No.6.  In my Amendment -(interjection)- in my Amendments, I am proposing, that the five major religions be given delegates to this Assembly. I am basing my arguments on the following; that Uganda is very religious country, that religious leaders are part and parcel of our day today life.  If you open page 51, of the interim report, under section (a). It is stated and I quote; Religious bodies should be represented by a total of ten people as follows:  “Church of Uganda, three representatives, Catholic Church, three representatives, Islamic faith, two representatives, Orthodox Church one, Seventh Day Adventist, one.” In the spirit of justice I did, actually, change my Amendment a bit, by proposing that two delegates represent each of the five religions.  I am quite sure that many of the hon. Members are religious people, that there are going to support this Amendment and they have these people coming to the Constituent Assembly.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

MR. WANENDEYA: I beg to oppose the Motion. The reason, Mr. Chairman, is that if we were that religious, there would not be so much corruption in our country.  If we were that religious, you would not find people fighting in Mosques; if we were that religious, you would not find that some of the things which we are doing in this country, they would not be happening at all.  The Bishops are really in allay, and you wonder where we are going.  The Pope prayed for us sometime back when he came to this country last month.  So, until we reform ourselves we are not worthy to be said religious.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

BRIG KYALIGONZE: Thank you Mr. Chairman, I stand here to oppose my neighbour here, regarding his Amendment.  It is very unfortunate that this country has been entwined into political and religious wrangles; and the purpose of this Constitution that we are trying to adopt now, is definitely intended to correct and streamline some of these wrangles.  I wonder when my neighbour hon. Member from Gomba talks about the Religions being properly represented, they are influential in the day today running of the morals of the people. We have got a lot of division, which divisions up to today, if we adopted his proposal, would be very difficult to solve.  For instance, today as we speak, we have got a very big difference or rather division between the Luwemba group and the Kakooza.  Now, if we say two delegates from the Islamic religion who would represent the Kakooza or Luwemba group? When we talk about the Protestant Church, we are going to find; there is Bamwoze group and so - when you come to the Catholicism, you will find there are the Orthodox Catholic Church from Namungoona, and then the Roman Catholic.  So, give all these differences, I find there is no logic for us to support such an Amendment.  When it comes to the Protestant Churches, there are a lot of breakaway groups.  There is the Makumbi group, there is who, there is Kayanja all these, of course have there own representation, and as people they have a right to be represented.  So, I propose that we reject this proposal on those grounds I oppose.

MR. SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, it is obvious, I oppose his Amendment.

(Question put and negatived).

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, my Amendment to this Schedule, is to provide for the representation of disabled people in Uganda. One does not have to apply to become a disabled, and this country, about ten per cent of the population is made up of disabled people.  The disabled people are generally under-privileged, they are neglected, they are marginalised, they have no access to public and sometimes government facilities and the amenities; and to a great extent, their human rights are violated.  If you can realise that the Office for the Commissioner responsible for them, disabled, is on Udyam house, and getting to Udyam house by the disabled people, the blind people in wheel chairs is impossible.  So, you can see these people who cannot even reach the government office that is responsible for them.  Even the Minister responsible for the disabled of Local Government, is high up in Uganda House.  The lifts are always working, but even when they are working for people with wheel chairs, people who are blind to fight to get in the lift and try to reach the Ministry is a big problem. Even this House, we had a case here of one of us who has now left us, the hon. Major Bwana to get him to this House, and to play his role as a legislator was always a big problem.

MR. WAGWA WABI GWAIVU: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I wish to inform the speaker on the Floor and the whole House, that the issue the speaker is advancing is very important.  The issue of architectural convenience for the disabled.  I got information that a disabled student had to discontinue his studies, first year student at Makerere because of these actual problems.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that information.  We the disabled people always have problems of getting able-bodied people to understand our problem and hence the murmurs against these very humble amendments to this Bill. But, I strongly call upon the Minister, the leader of Government Business and you all, hon. Members to support this Amendment provide, at least for one disabled person to come to the Constituent Assembly and participate in the shaping of the future of our country which consist of ten per cent of people who are disabled.  The disabled people in Uganda have an organisation known as “National Union of Disable People of Uganda.”  The National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda is a national umbrella organisation of indigenous associations of disabled people, and it was founded in 1987.  It is a non-Governmental, non-religious, independent and voluntary and non-political.  

This body brings together all categories of disability including the physical, and the mental disabilities. The National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda is one of the most organised umbrella associations for the disabled in East and Central Africa and recently, it had successfully hosted a conference of all National Umbrellas of disabled people in East and Central Africa.  Those who have been reading in the press and heard the radio had our own Vice President opening that conference which was also closed by the First Deputy Prime Minister.  It is not too much to request to get, at least, one person to represent the disabled in the Constituent Assembly and I call upon Members to support me in this Amendment.  Thank you.

MR. APILA: Mr. Chairman, it is very difficult to force the Amendment.  I support it.

MRS. NKURUKENDA: I stand to strongly support the Motion. I support it.  I have had an opportunity to work with disabled people during my office when I was Deputy Minister of Local government and just as hon. Mwandha points out, there is a tendency to believe or there is a tendency among people, just like I have been hearing people trying to say it is not necessary for these people to be represented.  It is very, very important because the disabled people know their own problem more than any of us.  But at the same time here I would like to point out, that all of us are temporarily able bodies, any time we could be disabled, and you cannot oppose that fact; we travel in these cars and, in fact, I have seen quite a number of us here limping with sticks and what not and I call those disabled.  So, I would like to appeal to the House to support this Motion because we are talking of more than ten per cent of our population, the population more than ten per cent are disabled.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, for personal reasons I have great sympathies for disabled person generally, but I find it very difficult, because I have one in my house; I have found it very difficult to consider giving them a place.  In the first instance, many, in fact not the real disabled members cannot exercise the right to choose even if it is given to them.  Take the mentally derailed, the blind, the illiterate and so on. Then there is another question, how far do we extend this element of representation?  So, I find it hard to accept and therefore, I oppose the Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. SSEKIZIYIVU: Thank you Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose that the item which was formerly No.6 now No.5, I beg to propose that it should be deleted and the following words should be replaced by that, “one youth delegate from each district elected in each case by an electoral colleague comprising member of the District Youth Council and the District Resistance Council or the districts.”  I have reasons. The Youth like the women have been unprivileged politically and, therefore, need support.  If you want to avoid unforeseen problems, we should -(Interjection) Yes, Uganda’s problems have always been social, and this is a political right. The role of the youth in the deliberation of this country really made a good impact, and the peace we are enjoying today even the freedom and security was brought about by the “kadogos” are the youth, we would have neglected the majority of Ugandans, this group makes 70 per cent of the population.  The objective of the Bill is to reach a national consensus and we cannot really say that we have a consensus when the biggest group is left out.  I have already mentioned that we normally depend on this group when we have a political crisis which usually ends up in an armed struggle and after the struggle normally we tend to kick away the ladder that brings about the peace and freedom and all the rights we are enjoying. Thirdly, since the youth are our future leaders, we should guide, train and develop their talents and most important, being our future leaders they should participate in this process so that they would be in a better position in future to defend this Constitution, that is most important, Otherwise they can think may be this was undemocratic, maybe there was something that was left out. I appeal to this House, Mr. Chairman, to support the amendment in order to avoid another revolution in the near future -(Interjection) Yes.  I am only appealing. This constitution should last at least for years and many generations to come.  We should make sure that it serves us, and not only us, but even our children and great grandchildren.  

The age group I am talking about is between 18 and 30 according to the Youth Bill and normally people between 18 and 25 are not elected.  Specifically, we are talking about someone between 25 and 30 and these are the people who normally come out of university and some other institutions but who can not really make it, they cannot compete with the people who have been in the field for some time and, therefore, I appeal to this House that we should support these people so that we really get a national consensus.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE, CO-OPERATIVES AND MARKETING (Mr. R. Kaijuka): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With great respect to hon. Sekiziyivu, I listened very attentively to the amendment he raises and presents to the House.  I rise to oppose it on the following ground, one, for as long as they are 18 and above and that means men and women any youth is free and is expected to participate not only in voting but he can stand as a candidate.  In other words, by definition once you are 18 as a youth you automatically qualify to come to this House and, therefore, if it is not 18, it is 21 you are going to be a candidate -(Interjection)- 18, thank you very much.  I am confused about changed mood but I think it is 18 and for as long as you are 18 you can stand as a candidate.  If you do not want to stand as a candidate you qualify to vote so you automatically participate and you belong and automatically become - the question of not being represented, does not arise.

Secondly, I wanted to inform hon. Sekiziyivu and the House that one has to have a cut off point because if we are going to have a representative body in a Constituent Assembly where do we draw the line if we are going to have every small age group because someone may come up and suggest that we have elders representation and you will have an endless category of people to be in the Constituent Assembly.  But fortunately, we do not have to worry if an elder like hon. Obwangor, you are a youth like hon. Sekiziyivu, this House is a good proof to allay fears of the youth, allay fears of the elderly, that naturally if you are worth representing your people you will find your way here.  So, on those grounds, rather than waste time, I would like to appeal to my brother hon. Sekiziyivu, if not to save us time, to withdraw the amendment and we move forward.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr. Chairman, I strongly support hon. Sekiziyivu’s amendment and in supporting the amendment I have the following to say.  The only four seats given to the youth as proposed by the Minister in the Bill are almost equivalent to those representations, taking into account the population of the youth in this country.  To the youth who are the majority in this country and the fugue leaders of this country, giving them such a representation, to me is malice and a blunder.  The youth of Uganda are fed up of being told history for events and happenings for which they were not party to and in the new supreme law making of this country, it would be very correct and fitting to put the youth at the front.  The number suggested by hon. Sekiziyivu, 39 to me one member per district is just convenient.  Mr. Chairman, and I strongly support it.  

MRS. KAZUNGU:  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and before I make my contribution may be allow me to thank the Members for having supported hon. Mwandha’s Amendment.  Just because in the past one time I was reading a book, I think it is estimates for some years like 1966 I think and under that item they had bundled together the disabled, the youth and the women. Actually I have been thinking that it has been unfair for this government to take care, to seem to be concerned only about the women and the youth and forgetting all about the disabled.  So, turning to hon. Sekiziyivu’s amendment, definitely I am in full support simply because unless the Mover of this Bill can convince me what formula he used, if he is really saying that he wants full participation, he wants everyone to actively take part and yet we are saying that 70 per cent of our population, are actually the youth and then he gives us a very nominal figure of four, really I lose the track of the reasoning.  In addition to that, we are saying that what we are debating for today is to make sure that we create a body which body is going to formulate or to debate what we are calling a Constitution.  I would wish to urge Members to know that actually this constitution we want to make is not a constitution for us, it is a constitution for the future and we do not see reason why we cannot have as many members in this age group that are supposed to directly benefit from this constitution making.  Someone is saying we can always - but any way, what I am saying is that I would wish to have a body that is taking into consideration the direct beneficiaries of this Constitution because we have been saying that in Uganda our life expectancy is about 55 or so around there and many of us who are going to participate, who have all the facilities to turn up in this Constituent Assembly are actually roughly in that age group.  So, by asking for at least the number to come up to 39, I do not think it is too much.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KANYOMOZI: I am just worried about how far we are going to go with these extensions and interest groups. Ideally for me I would have wanted only two special groups.  One is the ladies or the women for specifically the reason of our tradition and culture which has tended to marginalise them and we are giving them this exposure may be for the last time after the constitution and then we go to the hon. Lady representative from Jinja so that they struggle after that.  The second group I would have favoured is the Army for the significance request that they gave us that it is not that they want to overthrow the constitution but they was also to see that for the last time that they have played the role -(Interjection) Yes, for the last time that they have played a role and in recognition of their work, we allow them to come in.  The other groups I find them very difficult in that one I also include the youth.  Why? First of all, if we continue extending and extending you will find a person who will have to vote about five or six times and I do not know how democratic that is when others are given only one vote and that is really diluting the very essence of our arguments in this very House.  The second point, the youth whom we are talking to and I am looking at Table 4 of the census, they are just a group between 20 and 29 and marginally let us not confuse statistics and say those represents 70 per cent because they do not because they are only about three million people and last time we lowered the voting age, I mean the participation age of candidates from 21 to 18.  What do the youth need? What the youth need is to be organised.  If they are in large numbers as they say they are and they are organised, there is nobody who is going to beat them.  Organised, hon. Members, and you will get what you want and get it in plenty and I think that is the message I want to direct to the youth because if we continue this way, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House is that what he is saying is actually very important because the fact that we are now taking caution before we decide on women, before we decide on the youth, before we decide on any category of the society is mainly because of the contribution by the youth and I would like to say that we really do not have to prop them up like we are doing for the women to make them a special category only to support what he is saying that if they are well organised, if they are well organised with this atmosphere I would like to inform the  hon. Sekiziyivu that he does not have to be worried, they can always take charge of the country according to their numbers.  Thank you very much.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, what I am saying and I am grateful for the information, what the youth need now is to organise themselves.  They have been given structures under the guidance of the hon. Minister of Youth and Culture, the present doctor sitting in front of me here, they have been given all the facilities, all they need is to utilise them, let them have access to radio and to the national media, call on the youth to move themselves and be able to move the old men and let me say about history also, this country actually has always been led by youth.  If you look at the composition of the past parliament, 1961 and 1962 and look at the composition of the government, by that time the Third Deputy Prime Minister was marginally nearly a youth and if you look at it, historically, the role of the youth has never been marginalised in the way that both people would want us to believe.  I am sure at the time the late John Kakonge was hardly 27; the Ibingiras of this world were about 28.  So, Nekyon was about a young age -(Laughter) - and I am saying, Mr. Chairman, and the hon. Minister here was a militant youth even at that time. (Laughter)

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I just want to inform my colleague the hon. Member holding the Floor that I became a Deputy Mayor of Kampala through a direct vote in 1963 when I was 25.  Thank you.  (Applause)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Now, we know where we have been.  The leaders of this country have always been young men and the age of 25 a Mayor and another one has just come in although he is now marginally less militant but I am saying, let us comfort our youth that given the opportunity they will get there and let us give this one as a token, the numbers we are giving them at the moment, four is a token because we know their potential, in fact, it is an appreciation of what they have done more than a requirement and a privilege.  I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I oppose this Amendment and I concur with the contributions particularly of hon. Kanyomozi but I would like to add that it is wrong to compare the positions of youth with that of women for the simple reason that while the youth grow into adults, the women remain women and they are always marginalised.  Sir, I oppose the amendment.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived).

THE FIRST SCHEDULE

(The First Schedule as amended and agreed to).

THE SECOND SCHEDULE

(The Second Schedule agreed to).

THE THIRD SCHEDULE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, the Third Schedule Rule I, on page 23, I wish to move that we delete the year 1992 and insert the year 1993 on these Rules referred to as a Statute. That is obvious that we are enacting the law in 1993 and no longer in 1992.  I beg to move.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to move that in Rule 14 (1), after the word, “Gazette” insert “local press” and after “exceeding” insert “working” -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Obwangor, let us first move to this one.  I now put the question that the Third Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, on Rule 4(1) - Rule 2  -(Interruption).

MR. SAM NJUBA:  In Rule 2 delete (1), (2) and (3) and insert the following new sub-Rules: “2 (1) for the purposes of election of delegates referred to in paragraph (a) of (2) of Rule 4 of the Statute, the Commissioner shall by notice in the Gazette designate electoral areas throughout Uganda. (2) The Commissioner shall, under (1), only designate every county and every municipality as an electoral area.” Mr. Chairman, I have circulated a small alteration.  The proper (3) should read like this, “(3) When designating electoral areas, the Commissioner shall (a) where a county has a population of 140,000 inhabitants or more, designate out of that county two or more electoral areas so that each electoral area comprises approximately 70,000 inhabitants; and (b) In case of Jinja Municipality, designate out of that Municipality two electoral areas.” Mr. Chairman, this Amendment has been necessary because Government has already indicated that it has conceded to Members’ claim that 80,000 inhabitants is too big and 160,000 is too big per electoral area that we lower it to 140,000 and 70,000 respectively.  Again of course in my earlier contribution I omitted to point out that Jinja Municipality has been having two representatives because of its population.  It should be treated as counties.  I thought it was obvious, but in drafting it did not come out clearly.  So, I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BARIGYE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While I support the hon. Minister’s Amendment with regard to keeping the status of municipalities being represented here, I would ask him to retain the figure of 160,000 as a cut-off point for rural counties.  Because the more we sub-divide, the more we increase the task of the Commissioner and sub-dividing, and the more we lay ourselves open to accusations of gerrymandering.  Because the task becomes greater.  I think the more we can keep to the constituencies, as they were, the better.  So I support the Amendment, but I would have preferred that the hon. Minister retains his original figure of 160,000 inhabitants.  Thank you.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification from my Colleague, following from his proposed Amendment, particularly the Amendment that provides for the sub-division into 70,000 where the population is 140,000 and more.  I do not know whether my Colleague is going also to make it clear that in his Amendment the definition of county includes a division so that should he find, for instance, that the population of a division of Kampala is much bigger than what he is looking at.  Maybe, it will also be sub-divided because we are saying the five divisions of Kampala shall be taken as counties.  Then he should tie it in so that the division also of Jinja and the division of Kampala; otherwise we may find that we do not sub-divide Kampala.

MR. SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, if we look at Rule 2(4), what the Minister is talking about is already provided for.  The five division divisions of the City of Kampala, for the purposes of these Rules, shall be regarded as counties.  In otherwise it will be subject to the same division where the population is in excess.  Thank you.

MR. LUBEGA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate, Mr. Chairman, the proposition and the provision contained in the Bill to the effect that every county stands as an electoral area.  But, Mr. Chairman, I have moved an Amendment which I can use now to debate by opposing the Minister’s proposition that 70,000 for purposes of counties which are heavily populated is too big a number. If that Amendment by the Minister that electoral areas of counties which are heavily populated is going to be at 70,000. This in effect means that just one person will represent a county that has 135,000.  This is grossly unfair in view of the fact that counties which contain even or which have inhabitants of even less than approximately 10,000 are going to be represented by a delegate.  In representation, the most important principle is that it is based on population, not necessarily on sizes of the electoral areas. We are representing people.

MR. GASATURA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the principle of representation, while talking into account the population some times, at the United Nations China with more than 1,000 million people is represented in the Council by one member and Uganda representing 17 million people is represented by one member.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. DR. KAZIBWE:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member and to remind him that as we have been debating this Bill, we have been reminded that the people to go to the Constituent Assembly are delegates, not representatives like we are here.  To be a delegate, you must consult the people and the ease with which you consult the people actually matters.  The areas that are heavily populated also seem to have better communication in terms of infrastructure.  A place like Kalangala will take a whole month to visit that 10,000 people.  Whereas in Kampala here - I have been a District Women representative and I leave my office and go to my Constituency.  I want Members to become statesmen and women.  We shall set a very bad precedence if we do not put into consideration the ease of representation or collecting the views of the people to be able to come here to be their delegate.  Thank you.

MR. LUBEGA: Mr. Chairman, the information I have received has not been very helpful to me.  Because in the case of hon. Gasatura, he is referring to the United Nation General Assembly that was not based in its formation on the principles of Parliaments the way constituencies are demarcated.  United Nation was created after a war and for convenience.  So they never took into consideration these principles. In Parliament, Mr. Chairman, the principles are mainly of demarcating constituencies are based on population more than on anything else.  The Minister is talking about the ease of communication.  If that could be the logic.  Probably one person would represent the whole of Kampala.  I cannot see how the Minister can extend that logic, because it is so easy.  But certainly the principles, which are used in demarcating constituencies, are usually drawn from a census.  The reason why censuses are taken before elections are held is to find out the density of population.  In most Parliaments the guiding principle is the density of population.  If I represent 200,000 people.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman,. I think the hon. Member is dwelling on an issue that cannot be easily resolved in statistics. Because even if you want 50,000, the 49,000 will lose.  Even if you went 10,000, the 11,000 will lose.  I think the hon. Minister’s Amendment is intended to give a cut-off point that one person represents up to a maximum of 70,000 and thereafter a county which exceeds 140,000 can be considered for division.  This would also mean that the Commissioner will have an intelligence of finding out the relationship between the population density and geographical spread to be able to come to some reasonable arrangement of having a constituency that can easily be traversed in a reasonable period.  Otherwise if we keep on this, Mr. Chairman, there is no way that you have cut-off statistics unless you come to only one to one.

MR. LUBEGA: Mr. Chairman, I will go down in Hansard that I have articulated the principles and those who want to follow me will follow me certainly.  Certainly constituencies are based on population density.  That is the most important principle and I had put in an Amendment that 60,000 per electoral area would make the arrangement fairer than the Minister is making it.  So, I oppose the Minister’s Amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question on the Minister’s Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Rule 4 agreed to).

(Rule 5 agreed to).

Rule 6

MR. SAM NJUBA: In Rule 6, Mr. Chairman, add the following new sub-Rule (4) as follows: “(4) for the purposes of sub-rule (1) and (2), no person who holds a political office within a district shall be appointed either a Returning Officer or an Assistant Returning Officer.”  During the debate Members expressed suspicion that some officials of the Movement may interfere and we want to operate above vote and we have made this provision.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support this Amendment overwhelmingly. Because we have seen instances where some District Executive Secretaries have manipulated. In fact there is a need to have these people out so that people are not marginalised.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I support this Amendment.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, the hon. Minister moved on to Rule 6 and brought reasons which can be advanced under Rule 3 - exactly the same and for which we had submitted Amendment.  Otherwise, I support the Amendment, but he jumped Rule 3 that has the same principles.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question on the Minister’s Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

Rule 7

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, I propose an Amendment to Rule 4 (1) -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We are on Rule 7, please.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Yes, but because I am allowed within the courtesy of the House on procedure -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: What Rule are you talking about now? We are on Rule 7, (iii).

MR. TUMUBWEINE:  I wish to move, Mr. Chairman, that on Rule 7, we delete the words two days and replace with one day.  Mr. Chairman, Rule 7, (i), says the commissioner shall by not in the gazette declare a period of two days to be known as nomination days.  If we are going to be nominated in our Councils, I think one day should be enough.  I am talking of nomination day not Election Day, of you being nominated.  I do not think you need to fill your form for two days if you are going to present the people. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SAM NJUBA: I oppose the proposed Amendment because we want to play fair to everybody.  Supposing somebody is not around on that day, what will happen?

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that in the Third Schedule, Rule 7, be amended as proposed by hon. Manzi.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Rule 8, agreed to).

Rule 9

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, under Rule 9 on page 27. (i) Delete sub-Rule (2) and insert the following new sub-Rules. (ii) The returning officer (a) shall issue a general receipt of all in respect of all fees received under paragraph (b) of the sub-Rule (1) and (b) deliver all such fees to the Secretary to the Treasury to be credited to consolidated fund. (iii) All nomination fees credited to the consolidated fund under this Rule are not refundable.  Then renumber Rule 3 and 4 as (iv) and (v).

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I oppose the hon. Mover’s Amendment because in the first place, in the line of my proposals to this Rule, first of all that, after semi-colon, insert a full stop and delete ‘and therein’.  The Rule 1(b) and Rule 2(b) be deleted for the reasons are these.  We do not have to tax these delegates who come here just for four months. There is no need whatsoever; there is no valid argument that we can take the country when we ourselves came here, freely nominated, historical members elected.  Therefore, because they are coming to support the nation in making their contributions fully to the making of the new Constitution.  So, there is no need to enable those people who are financially poor; when I say poor, our products from the University, Makerere, ITEK, the Colleges, and so on.  These provisions in Rule No.9 should be deleted.  It is really very unfair to the country and when you want all the co-operation of the whole people when we talk about broadbased Government in order to being peace and law under the Constitution of the country. What right have we, Mr. Chairman to enable all those both men and women who would gain a position to come and contribute to the making of the new Constitution? Why? Because under Section 4, of the Uganda Constitution Commission’s Statute 5 of 1988, we said the Constitution was to study and review the Constitution. By whom? By all of us; all the citizens of Uganda.  So, we should all have an open opportunity to everybody, to every citizen.  When I say a citizen, responsible citizen, I mean. Those who will be in a position to come and make the laws here; that is we were even very fair in our recommendation No.1, when in the interim report to the Government on the question of the Constituent Assembly, that people should be given every opportunity. So, it is in this respect that I oppose this question of - it is not taxing, it is enabling people, it is not stopping people from enjoying their political rights to make a Constitution for Uganda.

MR. NDEGE (Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For every thing you want, you must pay a price.  Men who are poor, when they go to get married and they are asked to pay dowry, the look for it and pay; and if you want to go to school, you look for the money and pay.  So, I do not see any valid reason why these people must not pay something if they really want to come and represent us.  So, on that simple logic, that every poor man will pay a dowry; because he loves that girl.  If anybody loves the Constitution, he must pay the little money. (Laughter) 
 
(Question put on the Third Schedule Rule 9 as amended and agreed to).

(Rule 10 agreed to).

Rule 11

DR. TIBERONDWA: Rule 11, Mr. Chairman, election campaigns.  Mr. Chairman I want to replace the whole of Rule 11 with the following words:  “that Candidates may freely carry out political campaigns within their electoral area.”  I want to delete all that there is, because, what is contained in this proposal is very restrictive.  It states for example, that there is no - that elections must - that campaigns must be done on restricted kind of method.  For example, they say, you do not talk about religion, about political party.  These things are not practicable; they are bad, but you cannot put rules that you are not able to enforce.  Sir, I would like to propose that people within the rules governing this country, campaign freely, without restricting them and giving them rules which cannot be enforced.

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr. Chairman, I beg to support the Amendment of hon. Tiberondwa.  Mr. Chairman, there is already existing law regarding issues to deal with campaigns; so that when you commit - when you incite or if you do not have a proper license, these laws already exist in our Statute Book.  What the Movement is doing, is to build a basis on which Uganda will be able to exercise democracy and that the period that we have now should be a period in which an opportunity is given to people but also observed.  I think this is a very healthy situation.  So, when the Minister put this provision in place it is a negative provision and therefore, it does not help in the process of democratisation, it does not help in the process I believe that in place now, we have the laws that can take care of what the Minister has proposed.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to oppose the Amendment.  I oppose the Amendment because of my very rich experience of what it means to go into an election where religious sentiments, where party sentiments are misguided and cause trouble.  Many of us do remember what was experienced in certain areas and I think we have always been saying, this is an interim period, we are nursing our wounds, we are growing up, the bone marrow is strengthening and we are becoming stronger.  I believe that this Amendment goes contrary to the very aim of what this interim period is about. There are some people who would want to bring things in advance.  I remember when President Binaisa brought the elections in advance and he was not there to participate in them.  So - (Interruption)

MRS. KALEMA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and to save a lot of the Members from being confused, that Binaisa never brought elections. Elections were brought forward by the manipulations of UPC and DP; because previously, it was agreed that elections should not take place before two years have elapsed which was agreed upon in Moshi but it was DP and UPC who wanted elections to be in December 1980.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Mr. Chairman, I would not like to extend that argument because I know that Binaisa tried to bring the elections in advance hoping that there would be an advantage after we had a meeting in Makerere and Edward Rugumayo supported him.  So, I do have some idea.  But what I am talking about Mr. Chairman, is that, there is a logic, there is a reason, a very genuine reason why, if we tribalise - if we have you know partisan, we have religious, competitions and so on, in our election for the Constituent Assembly.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that there are existing laws to fight the ills that are stipulated in this section. There is the sectarian law that covers most of those things; there is an electoral law in place, which gives us how to conduct ourselves during elections.  Therefore, this is a repetition of what is already in law and I do not see any reason we are not legislating for the sake of emphasis, because we have a law, this House, before some of us came, passed a sectarian law and that sectarian law, deals with tribal things, religious things, all those things that are considered sectarian and they are fully covered under that law.  If anybody goes against that law, he can be taken to court.

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, please.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to remind the hon. Member who gave me information that I think it is on record in this House that we have been sometimes bending backwards to make sure that even those who have eyes that have not yet been able to see, they can see.  So, I think this is really out to make clear even those who opposed the sectarian Bill, those days, they are now saying it is a good law. (Applause)  So, why not now, see it clear, in any case, we are talking about the rules that will guide the exercise of the Constituent Assembly, in particular, it the particular rule we are talking about; we are not talking about the general law that deals with sectarianism and so on.  I oppose very strongly the Amendment.

MR. RWABIITA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to oppose Dr. Tiberondwa’s Amendment.  As we stand now, the question of parties is a Constitutional matter and this is going to be sorted out by the Constituent Assembly.  Now, the day you allow the parties to come out with their campaigns, you are already putting the cart before the horse.  So, let us continue with our system of campaign about somebody’s effectiveness, performance and politics of development and when time comes and a Constituent Assembly decides or whether the country will have parties or not, then the parties will have the chance to campaign the way they want.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information. Mr. Chairman. Although the closed sessions these days are open, during the closed Session which we had recently, His Excellency the President the substantive Chairman and in his Chair, said that people will be allowed to campaign and they will be asked questions about their political affiliations (Applause) and I am taking it, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Point of order.  Is the hon. Member in order to mislead the House by misquoting the Chairman of the National Resistance Movement.  The Chairman of the National Resistance Movement was not talking about whether it will be partisan, party, people will be asked about their party, the President was saying that Chairman, if I recollect, that the question of whether - he was not talking about parties and people campaigning as members of the party but that, the question may arise where a candidate may be asked to pronounce himself on whether if he comes to the Constituent Assembly, he will support the idea of multi-party or will not support the idea of multi-party but not campaigning on multi-party basis.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, let me finish my information.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not in order to discuss here what was in the closed Session.  Therefore, take your seat.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Okay, can I continue, then?

MR. RWABIITA: So, Mr. Chairman, I want to emphasise that the day we allow Members who are standing for the Constituent Assembly to campaign the old system, we shall be messing up the whole exercise.  Definitely, whether we want or not, the wounds are not yet healed.  Therefore, we are going to open up the old wounds and the work of the Constitution can be put in a mess.  So, I would suggest, and oppose strongly that we do not allow partisan campaign based on political or religious parties; because it is going to mess up the exercise that is supposed to be for the unity of this country.  Thank you very much.

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose hon. Tiberondwa’s Amendment.  In opposing it, I want to refer hon. Tiberondwa to Clause 2 page 4, of this Constituent Assembly Bill.  This Statute will be effective for a specific period.  Part 1, Clause 2, page 4.  This Statute will be therefore just a given period and whether we refer to the standing laws of the country or not, we are stating regulations for holding elections for a Constituent Assembly and when the Constitution is put into force, this Statute expires.  So, I do not think it affects the laws that are all in place. Neither does it affect the laws that will be there for further campaigns in future.

MR. SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I have no alternative but to oppose this Amendment, because it is really fighting what we are trying to put in place, in the last seven years.  Why should a man, for example, want to hide behind tribalism, behind his religion or any other sectarian ground?  And that is all this section is about.  Do not hide behind religion; do not hide behind sectarian grounds, do not hide behind your tribe or your party.  Mr. Chairman, we have all these years tried to cool wounds, to  -(Interruption)

MISS NAMUGENYI: Point of clarification.  In this Bill, we indicate that a participant in the Constituent Assembly must be a Ugandan. How are you going to identify then, without saying I am a Ugandan, and I come from such and such an area?  If we do not say our tribes?  Secondly, this Constituent Assembly is going to decide whether you want parties or you want Movement. Without identifying yourself, how do you think the electorate is going to vote? Clarification, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SAM NJUBA:  By saying you are a Ugandan, if I may clarify, by saying that you are Ugandan, it does not mean that you are hiding under any tribe.  There are indeed some people who have no tribe in Uganda, who are Ugandans but these elections, we are saying that in order to build a permanent foundation for this country, let us not hide under any of these things but present ourselves as Ugandans who have a point to deliver.  I, therefore, oppose the Amendment, the restriction is necessary.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Rule 11 be amended as proposed by hon. Tiberondwa.

(Question put and negatived).

Rule 12

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, I have a very minor Amendment to Rule 11, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have finished that one, we move to Rule 12.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Chairman, you finished the Amendment of hon. Tiberondwa, but I have another Amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, bring it.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, I propose a very small Amendment actually, what you call recasting and I plead with the Minister that he accepts.  This is just a style of really drafting.  The spirit behind Rule 11(1) is that Members who are presenting themselves to be elected will be emphasising personal merit.  I think this is the point and I would like to have this come out very clearly in Rule 11, (1).  The way it is put now, it seems the Minister is emphasising the non-partisan aspect of the candidate rather than the personal merit of the Member and, therefore, I propose and I beg the Minister that it be recast as follows: Delegates shall stand and be voted upon personal merit and not on any political, tribal or religious affiliations or any other sectarian ground. (Applause) Mr. Chairman, it helps us to emphasise the personal merit rather than the non-partisan as the minister talks.  Thank you.

MR. SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, this was deliberately prepared because what my Learned Friend is saying is already in tool, that we clarify that position in one, that these elections are non-partisan, that the person shall be elected on her or his own merit.  This is important.  Then next, we emphasise these other restrictions. (Applause)  So, I am unable to accept.  In respect, greatest respect, I am unable to accept your recasting, thank you.

(Question put and negatived).

Rule 12

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Rule 12(5)  -(Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Rule 11(2), I proposed an Amendment that was circulated long ago, that on that one, we delete any person who uses or attempts to use political party; I am going to give reasons.  You delete the word “Political Party,” the rest stays. The reason why I am saying that is that during the campaign, Mr. Chairman, we will be asked about parties, what parties we will support when the things come in place.

HON. MEMBERS: Which things?

MR. KANYOMOZI:  All the systems we are likely to support.  The system whether we are for multi-parties or whether we are not for multi-parties, or we are for the single party. And definitely in the process of those discussions, I can see words of political party nature coming out.  So, I am suggesting the rest remains; we only delete the word ‘political party’ because we are bound to be asked during the campaigns about political parties, anyway. 

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I definitely oppose the Amendment by my young Brother hon. Kanyomozi. I think he is trying to rub out with our understanding. (Laughter) In the first instance, his very proposal negates what is already in one.  Two, the word is used and not mentioned. It is not stated that any person who mentions he says: if you are asked a question and you answer, you are not really using the party, you are answering whether you are going to say parties in 94 or no parties in 94.  You are not going to say, me as a staunch of UPC hon. So, I will solve these things.  So, I think we better distinguish between use and mention, and secondly, I think hon. Kanyomozi with all due respect, he is trying to think that he can take us for a ride the whole of this House by trying to make us believe that what he is trying to amend is in conformity with what we have already passed under 11(1).  So, I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, that without even needing to other Members to say we oppose, my young Brother, the honourable, could wish to withdraw it certainly.

MR. SAM NJUBA: I oppose the Amendment.

(Question put and negatived).

Rule 12

Rule 13

Rule 14

MR. OBWANGOR: Rule 12(5), after the board parish, I would like the following to be inserted, dates shall be stated there because it is important to inform the would be delegates in a notice that has been given by the Commissioner so that it is known where the meetings are going to take place rather than to be taken by surprise as it is usually in Africa.  I make a very strong plea to the House that it is very important in Rules 12(5) that in each parish, dates shall be stated where the candidates meetings shall be chaired by the Commissioner or the officers.  That is vital important.  To make sure that no one will be told or we publish these things over the radio, there must be dates, not over the radio, not over the TV there must be dates, actual dates so that we know people - in elect their delegates to come into this House, in a proper way and in a clear way.  So, therefore, I beg to move. 

MR.SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I am having problems following the contribution of the Member.  This Rule 12 is very clear.  It lays out the various steps and a programme is published in the parish. I oppose the Amendment.  

(Question put and negatived).

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Rule 12 sub-Rule (10), I am suggesting that sub-section be deleted and we re-arrange the numbers.  The reason is that you political work, this is about public rallies or any form of demonstration in support of a person, a person will be prosecuted for it.  I am saying that when we start campaigning surely there will be people who are for or against you.  It is natural I do not think you can really stop that happening.  If this sub-Rule is maintained, any people who say we are supporting the hon. Rugunda in Kabale or something will be contradicting this Rule.  It is not only demonstration, its is also meetings, public meetings, in support of any candidate.  I am finding that very difficult in political life, that there cannot be an expression of support as long as it is normal, as long as it is peace.  So, I am suggesting and I hope the hon. Minister will accept that just that Sub-Rule gets removed as long as the campaign is allowed, definitely there will be expressions of support and those who are against.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the Amendment, mainly on the grounds that the Mover is saying in political life, only such things can make politics move.  I do not remember in the elections we have had where such demonstrations such as rallies - I mean and noise has been the only way in which to express your political opinion to support somebody. (Applause) And the whole purpose of this whole exercise is to make everything calm, peaceful, and without having to injure any individual emotion or soul during the exercise.  So, I do not see why people should not - if they support somebody should not wait for the supporting time during the voting, and they support him instead of having to use emotional and exciting methods. I oppose the Amendment. (Applause)

CAPT. GASATURA: Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.  I want to oppose the Amendment moved by hon. Kanyomozi, because the issue of tension and sectarianism has come up several times under this and the previous article.  Hon. Kanyomozi happens to have been the Member of Parliament for my area, before I came in, and he knows very well the tensions that were built, and homes that were burnt, intimidations that were pushed, he may not be necessarily responsible, and as I speak right now, in my Constituency somebody is already giving out registers. For example, to register the Banyarwanda so that they do not vote; and that is an hon. Member of this House. (Laughter)

 MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member who now represents a part of the Constituency I used to represent; I represented it effectively, Mr. Chairman. That when the Committee of Inquiry went to investigate that Constituency about even the issue he has just raised of Banyarwanda, they found none of the problems that he is trying to paint.

CAPT. GASATURA: That is very amazing, Mr. Chairman because my own father and mother has to flee the twarire so, how could they find none, that is I understand in the House Members do not lie, they only misled. I wanted to oppose again this Amendment because of the tensions the Commission being very well aware and the government that tensions during such times are very high.  Is the very reason they have in their great wisdom proposed that such campaigns be kept to be slow level.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR.SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, oppose the Amendment very seriously because this is one of the major evils that this law seeks to eradicate.  Once you get a demonstration, once you get insults, there are going to be replies.  The results will be violent.  We have witnessed violence and the price is not worth it. I oppose. (Applause)

(Question put and negatived).

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, this is a very important Rule and when we leave this House, we want to be very clear so that those who want to contest or those who do not want to contest or those who want to know what we have passed, we can tell them.  So, I am seeking this clarification from the minister as far as sub-Rule (10) is concerned.  And I want the Members to read it very carefully for purposes of interpretation.  Public rallies and any form of public demonstration in support of or against any candidate shall not be permitted at any candidates meetings.  If I read that very carefully, it means that public rallies and any form of public demonstration, outside candidates meeting will be allowed.  Can the minister please clarify the point that the intention of this Sub-Rule is to ban public rallies and public demonstrations only at candidates’ meetings?  And that if I can organise it outside candidates meeting, it will be lawful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, we have provided in almost everything apart from public rallies.  We have provided that every candidate may use all methods other than public rallies and you can hold a public rally only if you are supervised and controlled.

MR. TIBERONDWA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I rise on a order of order because I feeling very concerned personally about the way the debate is going. Is it in order for us to sit in this august House and really turn Uganda into a prison?  To stop people from expressing their views against the very Constitution to which we swore in this House, Mr. Chairman, is it in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: What do you mean?

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Let me attempt, if I may, to answer the point raised by hon. Omara Atubo.  Mr. Chairman, in opposition or in reply, I may draw the House the attention to two provisions that if you read sub-rule (10), which has just been read.  And read sub-Rule (11), and also read ahead 13.  You will see that his answer is there.  Sub-Rule (10) is saying that at a meeting for the candidates, demonstrations or rallying in groups for or against for a particular candidate is prohibited.  But it is not saying that you can then hold it outside beyond the meeting because it is not necessary because (13) covers that.  (Interjection)- No.1 is saying at the end of it that you may use all other methods posters and travel all over the place, but you may not hold a public meeting intended to solicit votes other than that at a candidates meeting.  So that we emphasise you back to 11, and when you are reading law as the hon. Member knows, you do not read one section, you read the entire Rule.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, as the hon. Omara Atubo mentioned that it is in the interest of all of us and those who are not here to be very, very clear about this particular rule.  The information given by my Colleague that the expression is in 13, could mean that I who is not a candidate can go and hold a public rally in support of a candidate I support.  Because 13 is saying, towards the end, that no candidate shall hold any public meeting.  So, if I do not and I am a candidate and I do not hold it, but my campaign manager goes and holds the really.  I think this is what hon. Omara is trying to bring forward.  It is really in the interest of clarity of the whole exercise and I think that it is worthwhile the minister trying to clarify to clarify further so that we are all clear and the people who are not here are cleared.  Thank you.

Rule 13

MR.SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, in Rule 13 on Page 29 I request Members to delete the words, ‘or radio and television programme.’ The reason is simple; that while we would like to give everybody equal opportunity to air their views on the media, it is practically impossible and as a result the radio will be dominated by a few privileged ones.  Therefore, we have decided to rule against campaigning over radio and TV.  As I indicated in my address, if you can afford space on CNN and it reaches your Constituency, you can go ahead.  Mr. Chairman, we remove those words ‘or radio and TV programmes.’

MISS T. OMARA:  Point of information.  Will the hon. Minister inform the House where the churches fall under, in this Clause? (Laughter) If I may say, the churches and other private functions.   

MR. SAM NJUBA: I do not know what people do but people go to church to pray and not to campaign.

MR. KIWAGAMA:  Mr. Chairman, I am foreseeing some problem for NRC Members who have got responsibilities to their Constituencies. Some of them will become candidates for the CA Elections.  Does it mean hon. Minister, that during that time NRC Members will not be organising rallies as NRC Members?  (Laughter)

MR. SAM NJUBA: If the meetings or the rallies are developmental, you can go ahead but if they are for campaigning, you will be offending the law.

(Rule 13, as amended and agreed to).

(Rule 14 agreed to).

Rule 15

MR. SAM NJUBA: Rule 15 on page 30 immediately before  -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I rise on point of order to protest about jumping certain clauses.  Mr. Chairman, Rule 14 has not been passed!

THE CHAIRMAN: It has been called here.

DR. TIBERONDWA: It has not, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Take your Seat, please.

Rule 15

MR.SAM NJUBA: Rule 15 on page 30 immediately before sub-rule 3, insert the following new sub-rule and renumber sub-rule 3 as sub-rule 4.  Sub-rule (3) ‘every polling station shall as far as possible be located in an open ground or where there is no open ground, in the large premises of convenient access having an outside door for the admittance of voters and if possible another door through which voters may leave after voting.’  This should be inserted above (3) and renamed (4).  Now the reason Mr. Chairman, is that while previously provided for open space but there are paces where we can find accommodation which can be used which will protect against rain and everything and it might be more convenient that way that even if there is no open space we can use a hall which is conveniently place.

(Rule 15, as amended and agreed to).

Rule 16

MR. SAM NJUBA: Rule 16, Mr. Chairman, again on page 30 immediately after sub-rule (1) insert the following new sub-rule.  (2) ‘a Returning Officer may at any time before the polling day revoke the appointment of a Presiding Officer and appoint another person to perform the duties of a Presiding Officer.’ It is the duty of the Returning Officer to make appointment but we had omitted to provide for termination of that appointment where for some good cause, this is necessary.  Then we have to renumber the existing sub-rule (2) as Sub-rule (3).  I beg to move.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, I want to add 16 (3) to read as follows: ‘that persons holding political appointments in the Districts shall not be appointed Presiding Officers or Polling Assistants.’

THE CHAIRMAN: Which one are you talking of? (Interjection) Let us deal with the Minister’s Amendment first. Anything to say about the Minister’s Amendment?

(Rule 16 as amended and agreed to).

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, my Amendment is that we add 16(3) to read as follows: ‘That persons holding political appointments in the districts shall not be qualified to be appointed Presiding Officers or Polling Assistants.’ The reason Mr. Chairman, has been advanced earlier on in the case of Returning Officer by the Minister.

MR. SAM NJUBA:  I think, it is in order.

(Rule 16, as amended, agreed to).

Rule 17

MR. SAM NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, immediately after Rule 16, I propose that the following new Rule to be called, “17(1) A candidate may, at any time after nomination but prior polling day withdraw as a candidate by filing in person with the Returning Officer, the declaration in writing to that effect signed by the candidate and attested to by signatures of two voters who are qualified to vote in the electoral area in which the candidate was nominated.  (2) Where a candidate withdraws under sub-rule (1).  (a) Any votes cast for the candidate on the polling day shall be void.  (b) Where time permits, the Returning Officer shall print a Notice of a candidate’s withdrawal and distribute it to all Presiding Officers within the electoral area.  (c) On the polling day, every Presiding Officer shall place in conspicuous place in the polling station a Notice of the candidate’s withdrawal and d) When delivering a ballot paper to each voter, the Presiding Officer shall inform the voter of the candidate’s withdrawal.  3) Where only two candidates are nominated and one of them withdrawals before the polling day, the Returning Officer shall, without waiting for the polling day, declare the remaining candidate as due elected.  4) Any person, who before or on the polling day with intention of procuring the election of another candidate or of malice or of bad will intended to create panic or confusion in the election process announces or publishes a false statement of the withdrawal of a candidate, commits an offence.” 

This provision is intended firstly, to recognise that a candidate has freedom of choice to withdraw from the election and then it proceeds to provide the various steps that are necessary - on which he can accomplish and then to inform the public or the voters that so and so has withdrawn.  We take care to make sure this case does not cover where a candidate dies, because that is against public police - we might be encouraging some people to kill others.  Where a person dies, something else takes place.  Well, a man is not declared to have been nominated and elected.  This deals with a case where a candidate withdraws and anybody who seeks to confuse or to benefit by this confusion is punishable.  I beg to move.

MR. I. MAYENGO:  Point of Clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I have listened carefully to the proposed addition but I did not hear any suggestion from the Minister. What happens to the 100,000/= when the candidate withdraws? Is it non-refundable in all circumstances? (Laughter)

(Rule 17, as amended, agreed to).

Rule 18

MR. SAM NJUBA: As I indicated, Mr. Chairman, Rule 17 is a new one.  Now, the old 17 becomes 18 and it goes like this, and we insert, 10) ‘On the polling day all voters intending to vote shall form one line commencing backward from a point at which 10 meters away from the table at which the voter is to place the mark of his choice on the ballot paper and voters after casting their votes and other persons present other than Election, Officer shall stand or sit at least 10 meters away from that table.’  Sir, if I may stop there and explain this.  We are trying to provide that when a person goes to vote, those who are waiting do not see for whom he has voted.  So, we are providing for sufficient distances to keep away from recognising who he has voted for.  Then, we have (2) as it exists and then (3) renumber the existing Sub-rule (1) as Sub-rule (2) and delete. ‘On the polling day at every polling station there shall be positioned’ and insert ‘at every polling station there shall be stationed and immediately after the existing sub-rule 1 of Rule 17 as amended, add the following new Sub-rule (3) ‘For the purpose of sub-rule 2, table includes a desk, a box, a chair, a stool and any other object with a hard and smooth surface that can be used as a table.’  This is to try to clear all steps because there might not be some table in Kasangati or other places that we can improvise.  I beg to move.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: While I support the Amendment, i would like to propose an Amendment on that.  Especially in the distance away from the voting table.  Knowing that most places have football pitches, I was thinking the reasonable distance from the voting table should be at least 50 meters to avoid anybody who has finished voting to interfere with the freedom of the person who will be voting. So, I wanted to propose 50 meters away.  

MR. KEHERU:  Now, Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an Amendment to what was Rule 17 but now is Rule 18 and add a Sub-rule which reads as follows: ‘A Presiding Officer or Polling Assistant, shall just before polling and at reasonable intervals of time, thereafter -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us deal with the Minister’s Amendment first.  Hon. Tumwine, did you circulate your Amendment?  

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: No, I was requesting the Minister to consider, which is allowed. 
	
MR. SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, 50 meters is a very long distance.  It is almost half of the pitch.  Half a pitch is a long distance.  10 is reasonable; we have been out and we have measured but I think 10 is reasonable.  10 is where the line starts not ends.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  If we measured 10 meters from here, I can echo from here that ‘where are you putting?’ and in that distance, I can intimidate a voter - in 10 meters and if we measure the distance from here, it is not very far.

MR. SAM NJUBA: That intimidation is also taken care of in the law but to be sure and on the point, there will be only one box.  So, you cannot say ‘where are you putting?’ because you will not know unless you had said man to vote or woman not to vote.

(Rule 18, as modified and agreed to).

MR. I. KAHERU: Mr. Chairman, let me ready my proposed Amendment. It reads as follows: ‘A Presiding Officer or Polling Assistant shall just before polling and at reasonable intervals of time there after explain to the voters the procedure of voting.’  In all these Rules there is no provision or there is no statutory or mandatory duty for the Presiding Officers, Polling Assistants to explain this procedure.  This procedure is really complicated for an ordinary citizen and that is why I am trying to propose that every time there is a change of group of voters, the Presiding Officer should explain the procedure.  There has been provision for other parts of the electoral process but there is nothing to oblige anybody explaining to a simple voter what he should do in voting and I know that it has been a problem in many places, particularly since some of our citizens are not literate.  So, I would like to ask the House to agree to this.  Thank you.

MR.SAM NJUBA: Provide for every detail in a law of this nature.   However, I would like to assure Members that long before the election there will be what we call civic education at which they will be told everything about this law, the procedure, how they can complain.  This is a special course almost throughout the country; so that people will know exactly what they are supposed to do and what they are not supposed to do including intimidation.  That is what we call civic education and this is  -(Interruption)

MR. I. KAHERU: It means that all citizens who have not attended those courses are not entitled to be explained.  It is very simple.

MR. SAM NJUBA: Anybody who is interested will definitely come to these sessions throughout the country, even the RCs. I do not see how anybody who is not interested in going to those seminars, and discussions how they will fail to read to this Bill when it becomes law. 

(Question put on Rule 18, as amended and negatived).

MR. SAM NJUBA: I apologise, but, Mr. Chairman, it is necessary all these arose out of the debate and we had to clear them.  I wish to insert a new Rule 19 just before the old 18 so that the old 18 becomes 20.  ‘1). The ballot papers to be used at every election shall be in form B.P Specified in part 11 of these Rules.  2). Each ballot paper shall have a counter-foil and a stamp with a line perforation between the ballot paper and the counter-foil and between the counter-foil and the stamp.  3). The ballot paper shall be bound or stitched in books containing 25, 50 or 100 or 200 ballots as may be suitable for supplying the polling stations appropriately to the number of voters in each station.’ 4). Every Returning Officer shall furnish each Presiding Officer in the District at least 24 hours before the Polling day with, (a) Sufficient number of ballot papers at least enough to cover the number of voters in the parish voters’ register or in the polling roll of the polling station.  (b) A statement showing the number of ballot papers so supplied with serial number indicated in the statement.  (c) The other necessary materials for the voters to mark on the ballot paper and complete the voting process.’  Then we renumber Rule 18 as Rule 20.

(Question put and agreed to).

Rule 20

MR. SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, delete ‘in the register’ and insert ‘in line of voters.’

(Rule 20 as amended agreed to).

Rule 21

MR. S.AM NJUBA: Delete the words ‘not beyond 5 o’clock in the afternoon.’  Mr. Chairman, it was provided for closing time to be 5 o’clock. But if there has been an interruption, it is better to continue beyond this time rather than sleep over it.  Because there will be a problem of how you will keep the boxes with half the votes there.  So we are providing that we continue until we complete elections.

Rule 22

MR. SAM NJUBA:  In Rule 22, delete ‘counting agent.’ This was providing a mandatory provision of agent at every polling station.  Where a candidate wants, he may have an agent; where he cannot afford, it is not compulsory.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister who has moved Amendments in changing the numbering to continue giving us wrong numbers? Why does he not make the correction and then say the amended number first so that we can follow him?  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: That is what he is trying to do.  He is trying to do exactly that.

MR. SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I have provided these Amendments.  Mr. Chairman, we re-number Rules from 19 to 34 consecutively as Rule 21 to Rule 36.  That should be the starting point.  On page 32, paragraph (a) delete ‘in the register’ and insert ‘in the line of voters.’  In Rule 21, as amended, (1) on page 33 delete ‘not beyond five o’clock in the afternoon.’  In other words, there was a restriction that we want to lift so that you can continue voting so that we do not expose the votes to other interferences.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  We passed one of the Amendments that was saying five o’clock.  Now are we going to revisit that one also?

MR. SAM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, if the hon. Member had cared to read, we are addressing a certain problem, that is where there has been a disturbance at the election and that disturbance has cooled, or an interference.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, even if it is necessary to continue and complete the voting, there may be situations when continuing to vote may be disastrous.  I think we should all the same have some limited time.  Because you can start late and if you have to go on until you complete, there may be darkness.  So I beg to propose to the Minister that we make it say seven o’clock and not beyond.  You just cannot continue indefinitely.

MR.SAM NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, we are dealing with a situation by a situation.  That situation he is talking about has also been catered for, if he allowed me to continue step by step.  So I suggest to the Member to be patient.  This is where not what hon. Tiberondwa is looking at, but this is a situation where there has been a disturbance and it has been turned to normality.  then the election should continue rather than putting the vote off until the following day for fear of interference.  Now Rule 22, as amended, (3) on page 33 delete the words ‘an accounting agent.’

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr. Chairman, I am getting very confused and worried. When we delete the words, ‘one accounting agent’ at each polling station who was supposed to be nominated by the candidate, what is going to be the security now for the candidate? What provision is there? Is it going to be a day light rigging or what?

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, I am only worried about timing under Rule 15 (3), the words ‘shall commence at seven o’clock in the morning and it shall close at five o’clock.’ Now, the Minister says in case we do not finish, we can continue.  What are we going to do to Rule 15 (3)? I would like to know, because if it was made, it could have been easier.  But it is ‘shall close at five o’clock.’  In fact I had provided an Amendment to extend it to six.  But in the process we did not get there. Now if we leave Rule 15 (3) as it is, then his proposal of allowing that latitude does not fit in.  It conflicts.

MR. SAM NJUBA:  With due respect to hon. Kanyomozi, I do not follow his argument.  The Rule he first cited was referring to a normal polling station. But in Rule 21, as amended, we are providing for a situation where there is a possible adjournment in any event at a polling station being interrupted by a riot or violence or any event where there remains in the voters’ register.  Voters who have not completed the polling process, the Presiding Officer shall adjourn the polling to the next day or any other day or the same day not beyond five o’clock in the afternoon and shall immediately inform the Returning Officer on that fact.  Now this is where you have not been able to normalise the situation.  You have adjourned to the following day.  By restricting you to this hour, you may not be able to finish.  It is not in a conflict with anything else.

MR. NASASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I tend to agree with hon. Kanyomozi and I wanted to propose a balance so that where the Minister is amending this, he starts with ‘not withstanding Clause 15...’ so that it is clear that he is only referring to riots.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Mr. Chairman, I think it is important that whatever we pass, tired or not tired, should have meaning.  If we say that the polling will be extended only in conditions where there have been riots or something like that and you say you can vote up to nine in the evening.  But there is another polling station where the polling has been normal, no riots, but is going beyond five o’clock.  Now in both cases, I think the spirit of the Amendment is that in both cases voting should go on until it is completed.  And as the Minister is saying, it is less of a devil to go up to eight or nine than to say you carry the box or the two boxes - the full one and the unfull - to the following day at eight.  There is a need for the Minister to accept that we harmonise that in all situations what we are trying to avoid is carrying the boxes without counting and then bringing them the following day and voting continues.  That is a worse devil than continuing under a candlelight or hurricane lamps.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I have got some fears with what hon. Bidandi Ssali has explained.  Because I foresee a situation where people have rioted, one group supporting another and the other group supporting the other.  then voting starts at around three and you allow these groups to vote at night, I would rather stop the election at six and then start the following day when I am seeing every thing.  So I am very worried that we are likely to make mistakes.

DR. SEMAJEGE: Mr. Chairman, in case of a riot, the fear that hon. Serwanga Lwanga says is very real.  The best alternative would be that after the riot has cooled down, then the Returning Officer says the voting starts tomorrow at seven o’clock in the morning.  Everybody go home.

MR. S. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, in all fairness, I wish to seek for an adjournment.

THE CHAIRMAN: We want to finish this Bill today.

MR. S. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, these are very complicated Rules. I know I am to blame.  I accept the responsibility. This cannot be left to go on like this, Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move.

 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to).

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that, we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until Thursday next week, at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Council rose and adjourned at 5.40 p.m. until Thursday, 15th April, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)



















