Wednesday, 6 April 2011

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting and I want to inform you that today I received a big delegation headed by Dr Martin Sempa, pastor of one of the Pentecostal Churches. The delegation included another bishop, I believe from the Pentecostal church, who told me he comes from Agago. They are members of the civil society and there were some people who claimed they were homosexuals in the past, but have now seen the danger. 

The essence of their visit to me was to appeal to the Eighth Parliament to pass hon. Bahati’s Bill on homosexuality. I informed them of the procedure that we go through before a Bill is considered by the House. I informed them that the first procedure, the first reading, was done and the Bill was sent to the committee to scrutinise and accord the opportunity to members of the public who cannot come and debate in the House to make an input one way or the other. 

I also informed them that at one stage there were appeals to me to throw out or reject the Bill. These appeals came from all continents of the world, but because I, as Speaker, do not have powers to throw away a Bill that was properly initiated, we have to follow the law. 

As I have said, they presented to me what they claimed were two million signatures that support the Bill. I said I would inform the Members but strictly speaking, we have to follow the procedure. I also told them that if we cannot handle it during this Parliament - it is good that the hon. Member who moved it will also be a member of the Ninth Parliament - maybe the Ninth Parliament can handle it. I did not say that we cannot handle it, but I said in case we cannot, it can be done that way. So, I thought I should brief you about what happened this morning. 

2.54
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also read that those who had come to present their petition to you had in the process been arrested by the security at Parliament. In that regard, are there guidelines in place for members of the public, bona fide members of our society, who may wish to have their issues and petitions brought to you, on how they can be protected from the embarrassment and harassment so that your Office is easily accessed without undue duress? 

Sometimes those who may want to appear before you to present their petitions peacefully are constrained. They are being blocked and face all manner of harassment. I pray, Mr Speaker that you guide us on how your office can be accessed by members of the public. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, the Office of the Speaker is a public office which any citizen of Uganda and even non-citizens can access for a cause, provided they inform the people who are keeping the peace in the precincts of Parliament of their intention. If there has been a problem, I will talk to the people concerned with security – the Sergeant-At-Arms and others – so that they work out a formula or procedure. Otherwise, every citizen of Uganda or any person living in Uganda is free to access the Office of the Speaker. 

2.56
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the Anti-homosexuality Bill, I appreciate the guidance you gave to the various groups that came to meet you, but I think that even the House needs to be briefed on the progress of this Bill. Some of us are keenly interested in the passing of this Bill and I think that the chairperson of the committee should tell us what has happened and how far he has gone. 

There have been contradictions. At one point we even heard from the media that Government had said that they were no longer interested in this Bill and that the Bill should be withdrawn. So, there are all these contradictions to sort out and the sooner the chairperson comes out with a report, the better for us all. Whether the Bill is passed or amended, we should complete the task ahead of us. 

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, the chairman of the committee is not here, but we shall get in touch with him so that he finds time to give his report to brief us on what is happening.

2.57
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. We are aware of the disasters that have happened in the different parts of the world. The people of Tororo County, especially those at the border in Malaba, would like an explanation from Government about the safety of the goods that are coming in from Japan - whether they are contaminated with radioactive material. Other countries in the world have suspended importation of goods from areas like Japan because plutonium and other radioactive chemicals have been found in those goods. 

The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry sometime back licensed a company to deal with pre-inspection, but Government suspended that during the budget speech. However, I am sure that even the terms and contract of that company would not have the capacity to look at such chemicals. So, the people of Malaba and Uganda would like to know how safe the goods being imported from Japan are. Can we get a position from Government, Mr Speaker? 

2.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Ekanya for raising that important matter. This is a matter that we shall bring to the attention of the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry because issues of inspection are being handled by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, which falls under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. I am sure we shall be in a position to get updated on exactly what measures have been taken to ensure that the possibility of the country receiving contaminated goods is clearly addressed and such goods do not get into the country. Today is Wednesday; so, Wednesday next week.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Government Chief Whip. In this country we have been receiving very many counterfeit goods and expired drugs and we do not have the capacity to detect them. Do we have the capacity to detect what is coming from Japan? That is the clarification I want to seek.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I am sure if hon. Okello-Okello could wait until Wednesday, the minister will come with a very comprehensive statement, which will also address issues of capacity on the part of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Hon. Members, in the gallery we have Midland High School, Kawempe. This is a school in Kawempe Division represented by hon. Latif Sebaggala Ssengendo. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Well, you do not see your Member of Parliament, hon. Latif Sebaggala Ssengendo here, because currently he went to Mecca for Umra. He informed me and I allowed him to go. [HON. MEMBERS: “Hon. Nabilah is here.”] Hon Latif Sebaggala is not here, but there is the overall in charge of the city of Kampala, hon. Nabilah. She is there.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you are aware that the bridge across the River Nile at Jinja was constructed a long time ago and as a result it has developed structural defects and is not capable of performing the purpose for which it was initiated. The Government of Uganda has negotiated a soft loan with Japan International Cooperation Agency to fund the construction of the second bridge across the River Nile at Jinja.

I, therefore, wish to present to Parliament and lay on the Table a request to borrow Japanese Yen 9.198 billion, equivalent to US $102.8 million, from Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for the purposes of financing the construction of the second bridge across the River Nile at Jinja. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Very good. Let the appropriate committee, the Committee on National Economy, take up the matter and report as soon as possible. We need that bridge.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to present to Parliament and lay on the Table a request to borrow 75 million Euros from Agence Française de Développement (AFD) of France and Euros 75 million from the European Investment Bank to support the Kampala Water - Lake Victoria Watsan Project. This is another project that the Government is desirous to develop in order to improve provision of water to Kampala and the surrounding areas. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Again, let the appropriate committee study the request and report promptly to the House.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you are aware that the Government is trying to invest in infrastructure development, particularly development of roads, railways and energy. In that respect, the Government has negotiated with the Export-Import Bank of China to finance the proposed Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway and we are going to borrow US $350 million to fund that project -

THE SPEAKER: Is it 350; because on the Order Paper they wrote 35?

MR KAJARA: It is 350, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KAJARA: I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Again, the papers should be studied by the appropriate committee and they should report promptly to the House.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have just had costs of Kampala-Entebbe Road through CHOGM and now I am seeing a Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway. Apparently, it is a different set of roads, but well, maybe before going into the details, is it procedurally right that having spent colossal amounts recently, Ugandans are again made to provide a staggering US $350 million over a matter which I think could be duplication? Do we allow this to proceed?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. According to Government policy, this express highway is supposed to be a toll road where the private developer was supposed to bring in his money or her money, invest and collect the revenue. We are now surprised that we are getting money and we need to approve it as Parliament. The information available is that China Road and Bridge have already been given a contract without tendering. So, it is quite disturbing, Mr Speaker.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. Normally, when papers are presented, like you have done, you commit them to the relevant committees where Members appear, whether they are members of that committee or not. The committee then presents a report for debate in this House and finally the House makes a decision whether that loan request is useful or a waste of time. Are we procedurally correct to move the way we are moving with Members beginning to debate the details of the loan request we have presented?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think what you have said is what happens, but as I see, they want to know what this Kampala-Entebbe Express highway is. Is it the same road? Otherwise, the procedure is that we wait for the report.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would first want to respond to hon. Ssekikubo. I am sure hon. Ssekikubo travels to Entebbe once in a while and he can see that the Kampala-Entebbe road can no longer serve the capacity of our traffic. 

The highway we are going to build is part of our modernisation programme to improve roads. I am sure everybody that uses that road is not happy with the size of the road, the delays and the traffic jam, and this is what happens with any other country that wants to modernise its transport system. 

I am, therefore, surprised that he is comparing the work that we are going to do, which is an entirely new highway to link Kampala from Busega-Entebbe to Kajjansi via the new Serena which was Ranch on the Lake up to Munyonyo, decongesting our city. People now will have to move from Makindye-Kabalagala to Entebbe and back to Masaka. And those who will be coming from Entebbe will join the highway and link with the expanded Northern-bypass. I thought hon. Ssekikubo would support this. Compared to what was spent on CHOGM, which was US $6 million, just to repair the road to Entebbe for CHOGM, why would he call that money colossal? I think that is an exaggeration to say the least.

Finally, with respect to hon. Ekanya’s question, this road is going to be a toll and is built on the basis of the strengths that Government is getting a loan, which it will pay back. We are going to provide two options: the toll for those who can afford to pay and the old road for those who cannot afford to pay for the toll. But please, as my colleague hon. Nankabirwa said, let us give the loan an opportunity to go to the committee so that we can discuss it there.

THE SPEAKER: So will the current road to Entebbe remain?

MR NASASIRA: The current road to Entebbe will remain and hon. Ssekikubo is free to use that one.  (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Nasasira knows that I am a progressive Ugandan, I am not conservative and I look forward to enjoying modernity in a fast moving economy like ours. Nevertheless, my interest is, if we knew we had this master plan, we should have introduced it then when we had the opportunity, but now we are duplicating resources. Maybe when he comes later to justify it, it will get clearer, but where there is a central planning system in a country, you plan ahead for 10-20 years; that is why we do strategic planning. 

If we knew that we would need this, the money spent during CHOGM would have gone towards that direction rather than originating a new aspect altogether. Otherwise, I will go to the committee and he surely knows that he will have many questions to answer at that point in time –

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, those arguments will come up in the committee, but you have made your point.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, hon. Ssekikubo is imputing that there is no master plan. We developed a National Transport Master Plan. On that plan, there is what we call the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area; and part of modernising Kampala-Entebbe Road is part of that plan. 

The US $6 million spent on the Kampala-Entebbe Road during CHOGM is normal maintenance and that maintenance will continue even after this highway has been built. We have got a National Development Plan, we have a National Transport Development Plan, the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area Plan and all that we are doing is within those plans.

3.14
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concerns are general in nature and I wouldn’t like it to be construed that I do not want a new bridge on the Nile; I look forward to a new bridge on the Nile and I look forward to all the good things that can happen on earth for this nation. However, my general concern is the rate at which we borrow from other countries. Every day that passes by, we have some loan to acquire and this is against a background of poorly performing loans, penalties, and under-utilisation. We borrow literary every week for this country. 

I am worried and I would like someone in Government to give me a projection; 40 years from now, how much will Ugandans be paying back on these loans? I think someone has to think about this country beyond this moment. How much will our children have to pay; should our children be in a mortgaged country? I think good governance also requires that we also look at the future of our children.

We have had scenarios where we have raised money locally and at one point we gave the Ministry of Works, Shs 1 trillion and they even failed to use all of it; they brought back part of that money. So I am wondering, can’t some of these projects be financed locally, and of course on top of the wasteful expenditure that we have as a country, money is wasted through corruption; can’t we fund some of those things locally? For instance, we are planning to fund a swearing in ceremony of a new President at Shs 3 billion; can you imagine? That is some of the money that would go into funding these projects.

Finally, I want the minister of Works to allay my fears. I am told that against loan request No. 3, there is already information on the website of that bank that a contract has already been awarded to a company called China Road and Bridge Construction Company. So, what is the point of sitting here or going to the committee, thinking that you are going to approve a loan when there is a contract that had already been awarded outside PPDA? Mr Speaker, those are my fears and I think they are the fears of the whole nation and they need to be allayed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, we borrow to invest as a country and we are investing for our children and grandchildren; and we borrow within our macro-economic plan. So all these loans that we take – we would not qualify for loans if we were not viable as a county. So these loans also show that our economy is improving. You cannot go to a bank to acquire a loan unless you are financially viable. 

With respect to this money, first of all, this money is from the China EXIM Bank. As we said earlier, the details will come later when we go to the committee. There are conditions on how you access money from different banks. For example, I know countries where when you borrow you use contractors from their country and sometimes there are methods of evaluating and identifying that contractor. 

This project is from the Chinese EXIM Bank and we have tried to follow the conditions of the EXIM Bank and all these conditions will be explained in the committee and to the House –(Interjections)– part of the conditions state that it has to be a Chinese contractor. May I also add that let us not see things from a suspicious angle; let us see it from a positive angle until it proves otherwise?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, next item -  

MR NASASIRA: There was no money returned to the Treasury. You cannot return money you do not have.  This issue of Shs 1 trillion has been blown out of proportion. We need trillions, not just one trillion, to put this road infrastructure in place. So, there was no money returned. As of now, a lot of our projects are going on. It is only that the absorption at that time needed first for projects to be designed and so forth. So, there was no money returned. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 119/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is not here. Okay, you can answer. He was here yesterday and the question was put. The only problem is that you did not have enough copies for us. 

MR EKANYA: Hon. Denis Obua and hon. Odonga Otto have gone to visit our friend who is in detention in Luzira Prison, hon. Godi.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can you put the question for him? 

3.20
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): “Can the Minister of Education and Sports answer the following questions:
i)Would the Minister inform the House why salaries of primary school teachers are not enhanced when those teachers acquire higher qualifications?

ii)What plans does the Minister have to enhance the meagre salary of primary and secondary school teachers in light of the heavy taxes they are currently paying like PAYE, Local Service Tax, and UNATU etc?

iii)What is the UPE capitation grant per child per year, and what plans are in place to revise it upwards?” 

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Denis Obua asked why salaries of primary and secondary school teachers are not enhanced when those teachers acquire higher qualifications.

The response is that public service salaries are paid according to the establishment and not attainment of the qualifications. That is why a primary teacher is at the level of Grade III under scale U6. New salaries are paid on the basis of a new job after advertising or after an annual increment but not after attaining higher qualifications.

Part (b) of that question was saying, “What plans are there to enhance the meagre salary of primary and secondary school teachers in light of the heavy taxes they are currently paying like PAYE, Local Service Tax and UNATU, et cetera?” 

The response is that this is an issue being handled by the Ministry of Public Service. Increments have been made before but budgetary constraints have not made it possible to raise their salaries any higher. But as the resource envelope increases, Cabinet will always consider improvement of salaries for Parliament’s consideration and approval. 

Part (c) of the question was, “What is the UPE capitation grant per child, per year, and what plans are in place to revise it upwards?”

The response is that the UPE capitation grant, per child, per year is an average of Shs 6,000. In the next financial year, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is agreeable to increase this amount to Shs 7,000 subject to approval by Cabinet. Efforts have been made to raise this higher but it has not been possible due to our resource envelope. 

3.23
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, part (c), what is the UPE capitation grant per child per year raises more questions. I request the Minister of Education to lay on the Table the grants that have been sent to primary schools for the last two years. This is because to the best of my knowledge, most of the primary schools have not been getting this Shs 6,000 per year. In fact, they have been getting less. I find it unacceptable that a minister in charge of education talks about “average” when we are talking about figures and finance. What does the minister mean by saying “average of Shs 6,000 per year”? These are fundamental. Some schools are unable to teach.

THE SPEAKER: So, the supplementary question is: are there documents to support your claim that Shs 6,000 has been disbursed to every school? 

DR BATARINGAYA: Mr Speaker, this capitation grant is directly sent to the districts by the Ministry of Finance. Given time, we shall be able to produce documents to that effect.

3.25
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Mr Speaker, in view of the increased cost of living, are there plans by Government to insulate the meagre salaries of the primary and secondary school teachers from the harsh taxation?

THE SPEAKER: You mean primary school teachers pay tax on a salary of Shs 200,000?         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, it is a fact that when those primary school teachers go to pick their money; they find it slashed to about Shs 167,000. It is slashed and he has to give an explanation. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you considering giving tax relief to primary teachers?

DR BATARINGAYA: Mr Speaker, as I said in my response, this is being handled by the Ministry of Public Service. As far as we know, even this increment of teachers’ salaries, like this financial year, there was an increment of 30 percent. And the hard-to-reach areas also, in addition to the 30 percent, also had to get 30 percent. But the issue of taxation is not the responsibility of the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Ssekikubo is asking us, as Parliament, to consider the threshold in the Finance Bill. That is where the remedy would come from. 

3.27
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The supplementary question to the Minister of Education is: is there a plan to provide salaries for private partners of USE? USE delivery by private partners is cheaper than Government schools, because there is a lot of stress due to the fact that there is no construction by Government and the teachers are paid from the parents’ contributions. Are there plans by Government to provide salaries for critical subjects for the USE private partners? 

3.27
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA: (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want some clarification on how the Ministry of Education monitors progress of UPE and USE in relation to the salaries of the teachers and the absenteeism of the teachers. I do not know if there is some qualitative monitoring that is done by the ministry vis-à-vis the remuneration of the teachers.

3.28
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): My question to the Minister is that, can you now write a circular to all districts and schools confirming that it is really a waste of time to go for further training to get further qualifications? Districts are wasting time allowing these teachers to go for further studies, at the expense of the students.

If this is the issue, what should really be the qualification for a primary teacher, so that they do not waste time and resources to attain these qualifications which do not help them, their families and this country? This is going to cause a setback. Somebody who has attained better knowledge and qualifications will shy away from teaching. If this is a policy, could you please put it in writing so that the whole world can understand it? Thank you.

3.29
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inquire from the minister whether he honestly believes, in all good conscience, that a sum of Shs 7,000 per student per year as capitation grant is adequate to provide for the children of Uganda.

3.30
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Mr Speaker, what does the Shs 6,000 per child, per year, cater for? That would mean each term a child is entitled to Shs 2,000 and that is on average. So, what does Shs 2,000 per term do or what is it supposed to do?

Secondly, are you aware that the low capitation grant and the poor working conditions of teachers have led to very poor performance of the UPE children?

THE SPEAKER: This is the last supplementary question.

3.31
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the minister whether he understands the relationship between motivation and performance -(Interjections)- yes! If he considers additional training crucial to adding value to teacher performance in class, then what does he have in place to motivate them? You get qualifications, you stay there, there is no promotional opportunity, you have your knowledge but the knowledge is useful anyway. So, how do you reward acquisition of additional knowledge?

Secondly, I would like to know from the minister whether he knows the salary of a primary school teacher -(Interjections)– yes, he continues to say it is meagre. He is shy to mention it. I would like to know whether the minister knows what salary a primary school teacher is paid.

Thirdly -(Interjections)– yes, these are very serious questions. Where do the primary school teachers buy food from and how much is a kilogram of sugar or a bar of soap for a primary school teacher? It is important that we factor in those things; otherwise, you would think that Shs 100,000 is a lot of money, yet we go to the same Nakasero market with the same primary school teachers. It is important that we know what they earn and where they buy food from.

Lastly, what has the minister done to address the issue of irregularity of transfer of capitation grant funds to schools? Little as it may be, the schools get this money sometimes after the term has closed. Our teachers go to the bank and acquire loans even to buy chalk to look after Uganda’s children. So, even with the small amount of money, the money is irregular. The Committee on Social Services, on which I sit, has made a similar report. We found that teachers were getting loans to buy chalk and school requirements for our children because even the little money does not get there. So, have you addressed the transfer to make it even more regular? Besides, of course, you know Shs 6,000 per student, per term cannot do anything. Thank you.

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): On the issue raised by hon. Mukitale that Government should pay for the private partnership in USE, that one we do not do. We pay Shs 47,500 per student to that school. On top of that we provide text books for the compulsory subjects and we also provide science equipment but we do not construct any structures. You can use that money which we pay - the Shs 47,500 per student, to pay your teachers.

The other issue was raised by hon. Nabilah Sempala about whether we are monitoring salaries of teachers and absenteeism. That is being done because at the district level in Kampala here, we have the Director of Education and the other districts also have DEOs, Inspectors of Schools and the CAOs. So, the returns come from there and those teachers who absent themselves are reported. That is how we do the monitoring. On top of that, we have a fully fledged Directorate of Education Standards which goes and supports supervision in the districts and they are able to monitor and also get data on our teachers who are absenting themselves. 

On districts allowing teachers to go for training, the ministry is talking of capacity building. Our teachers go for training. As I said, the primary school teachers are Grade III but they go for Grade V and once they come back, they are promoted under a new scheme of service and we call them Senior Education Assistants. This financial year, we have promoted 7,500 countrywide and we are continuing to promote more.

Hon. Akena asked what the Shs 6,000 can do. It is not adequate but that is the size of our coffers currently. However, as I said, resources permitting, we are already discussing with the Ministry of Finance and they will be able to increase that when the resource envelope improves. 

Hon. Alaso talked of motivation and performance. That is true. You know what performance and motivation are and you asked why I did not mention the salary of primary school teachers. A primary teacher is currently earning Shs 270,000 per month after the increment. Those in hard-to-reach areas are earning Shs 320,000 per month and you know the hard-to-reach areas. Government came out with a list and we have 31 districts, which are categorised under hard-to-reach areas and they are getting that Shs 320,000 -(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: We are aware of that salary scale you are talking about but I know what hon. Alaso emphasised here is that the cost of  living is very high and you can imagine a primary school teacher who, even if she earns Shs 320,000, has to pay school fees for her children. Assuming he has children in institutions of higher learning like universities, will he be able to pay, even if he has to accumulate this salary for three or even six months, hon. Minister?

THE SPEAKER: Do you have plans to pay a living wage to teachers? 

DR BATARINGAYA: Yes, Mr Speaker. I said the Ministry of Public Service is working on that one. It is the responsible ministry but not the Ministry of Education. If the Minister of Public Service were here, he would tell you. As far as I know, they are working towards that to ensure that our teachers –(Interjection)– okay. But that is what I can say. 

I was asked what Shs 2,000 does. That is used to buy things like charts and chalk. 

Then also hon. Alaso said that capitation grants are transferred after the end of the term. It is good you are a member of our committee as the Shadow Minister of Education. We have discussed this issue with you. The thing is that our terms do not match with the Ministry of Finance’s quarter when they release this money. And the Ministry of Finance is trying to find a way out so that that money is sent to the schools before the term ends -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Minister. You are emphasising that I know it and it is true I know fully well that I know it, but you cannot continue having three ministries move the way they do. Public Service does its own thing, Finance doing its own thing and Education, its own thing. I thought you were one Government and the three ministers were interested in seeing that our schools run normally. 

There is a problem, for the last ten years, the committee has been saying that transfers are irregular – they do not help the teachers to re-open the schools in time. The teachers are borrowing to buy chalk for our own children. What type of coordination is this? What type of Government do we have which cannot harmonise Finance, Public Service and Education to ensure that the term begins normally and that there is chalk when the children need it. What type of Government is this?

DR BATARINGAYA: Finally, you said that the capitation grant has led to poor performance in our schools, but I want to say that it is not only the capitation grant which is causing poor performance; there are other major factors, like parents’ attitude towards education of their children and also our teachers, plus some other factors which the Government is addressing like the provision of infrastructure. So, I would like to thank all colleagues for the supplementary questions. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 112/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

3.44
MRS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): I stand in for hon. Pajobo. 

“i) Would the Minister inform the House about the total number of people employed in Uganda in both the formal and non-formal sectors?

ii) Of the above, how many Ugandans are employed in the formal sector and how many are non-Ugandans?

iii) Are all non-Ugandan workers in possession of work permits? And if not, what steps have been taken to ensure that those without are brought to book?”

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My answer to part (i) of the question is this that the total number of people employed in Uganda is 11 million and the source of this figure is the Uganda National Household Survey 2010. 

For part (ii), 2,640,000 people are employed in the formal sector – both public and private. The latest statistics from the Uganda National Household Survey 2010 do not show the figure of non-Ugandans. This figure is still being compiled. I also wish to hasten to add that my ministry plans to put in place mechanisms for co-ordination, namely; strengthening labour market information system –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU IBI: Mr Speaker, on the Order Paper, there is Question 112/1/08. But the question the Minister is answering is Question 100/1/08. Which one is he answering and why has he brought wrong copies to the House?

DR OTAALA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for seeking that clarification but I would like to draw her attention to the third page of the document she is holding and she will be able to get the question I am responding to. The reason we brought Question 100/1/08 is that the previous time these questions were raised here, they were put together. Therefore, we prepared the answers together. However, today, the Order Paper specifically sought our attention to address the questions relating to employment. The copies are available and I think they are being circulated.

Like I said, my ministry plans to put in place mechanisms for co-ordination, that is, strengthening the labour-market information system and employment services to be able to monitor the movement of persons in the regions and immigrants from other countries within the framework of implementation of the National Employment Policy. 

The other question is, “Of the Ugandan workers in the formal sector, how many are employed on permanent terms, contracts and casual basis?” Our response is that in addition to the 240,000 civil servants, about 4.6 percent, an equivalent of about 121,000 persons, employed in the formal sector are on permanent terms, 11.6 percent, an equivalent of 306,230 persons, are doing temporary jobs. The rest, about two million, are on contract.

On the fourth question about whether all non-Ugandans are in possession of work permits or not and the steps that have been taken to bring those without to book, I would like to say this. As was directed by the Prime Minister last time, my colleague, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, will be answering this question soon after I get done with question No. 5. 

This question is about the minister informing the House whether there is any unemployment policy in Uganda. The same question also carries the element of when such a policy would be tabled in Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a different question, according to the Order Paper. But it is okay since you already referred it to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Anyway, in view of the answer that you had given earlier about the list of non-Ugandans that you are compiling, how do you expect the minister to answer such a question? I think we should wait for this exercise to get done before we can ascertain how many have work permits and how many do not have. Yes, hon. Ssentongo?

3.51
MRS THEOPISTA SENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Hon. Minister, in the olden days of 1960s, 70s and 80s –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to be guided on Question 112/1/08, which my colleague has partly answered. There is a section that can only be answered by the Minister of Internal Affairs because he controls the number of aliens that come to this country. Don’t you think that it would be better for me to first do my presentation to help us dispose of this question?

THE SPEAKER: It’s okay.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, part (iii) of Question 112/1/08 reads as follows: “Are all non-Ugandan workers in possession of work permits and if not, what steps have been taken to ensure that those without are brought to book?”

The response to this question is as follows: 
Legal stay and taking up of employment - I hope my written response is being circulated, because I delivered it to Parliament yesterday. 

In Uganda, employment of aliens is controlled by the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, Cap. 66 and the regulations made there-under. For example, we have the Registration and Control of Aliens Regulation, 2004. These laws require all aliens to register with the Citizenship and Immigration Board. Those intending to take up employment must apply and be issued with work permits. The granting and issuance of work permits by the Citizenship and Immigration Board is guided by agreed upon criteria. 

These, among others, include the non-availability of qualified Ugandans with the required expertise. In other words, the employer who wants to take on an alien must prove to us that actually there is no Ugandan qualified to take up such a job. While every effort is being made to ensure that no aliens work in Uganda without work permits, sometimes it is true that some of them get employed without fulfilling the requirements. That is why the Legal and Inspection Department of the Immigration Directorate regularly makes on-the-spot checks at the various work stations. During these checks, all those non-Ugandans found to be working without permits are arrested and prosecuted. Maybe, I can add that when we arrest anybody working in Uganda without a valid work permit, two things are done. 

One is that the person will be arrested and produced before court. Two; if the person is found guilty, he/she will be sent to jail and immediately such a person completes the jail term, they are deported. In some cases, the jail term may be an immediate deportation and we usually do that.

Our records indicate that to date, the number of non nationals holding valid permits is 23,971. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is, however, concerned about the rising unemployment levels especially among our youth. Nonetheless, we have always called upon employers to try their level best to employ only Ugandans. We have also tried to be strict with the issuance of work permits. 

To help the situation, I call upon all of us to be vigilant. Please, report to the police or to the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, any alien that may be working within our country without a valid permit for our appropriate action.

That marks the end of my statement on this matter. Thank you.

MRS SENTONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the two ministers for their responses. However, I have some supplementary questions. To begin with, let me ask a question in regard to the latest submission by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. 

I would like to say that yes, as the minister put it, the law exists and has some steps that are taken to monitor the influx of foreign people into the employment sector of Uganda. And the workers have been so vigilant on this and have made noise over it. But the implementation of this law by the responsible ministry is still wanting. I am saying this because there is no alien who has ever been held and brought to book as part of the action that the minister has talked about. We need to help the minister, as workers, by taking him to the right places which we know employ foreigners without work permits. But the minister needs to tell us the steps he is taking to reduce this phenomenon, given the high levels of unemployment among the locals especially in the foreign investment enterprise sector.

The second supplementary question is to the minister in charge of labour. We used to have a department for employment that helped those youth who graduated from various institutions – they would register them and whenever an employer wanted employees they would go to that department to get the people who have the skills that the employer needs. How soon are you establishing this so that it could be functional to help workers so as to get rid of unemployment vis-à-vis the foreign workers that are still around? Thank you.

4.00
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question is addressed to the Minister of Internal Affairs. He has informed us that in giving work permits, they address themselves to whether or not the jobs to be given can be done by Ugandans. My question is: we have seen some foreigners at hotels, in some schools and installations doing security guard jobs; being waiters and washing cars. Are these jobs that cannot be done by Ugandans? Or putting my question the other way round: isn’t the minister aware that there are people doing those jobs of security guards and nothing has been done to bring them to book?

4.01
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the two ministers for the responses they have given us. I have two supplementary questions. 

The first one is about working on contract. When a person retires that means he has reached the limit of his thinking capacity. (Laughter) It means he is tired and that is why he has to retire. But in Uganda, we have people who have retired and are given contracts one after another. How many times should we give contracts to the same person? A person who is supposed to be resting is given contracts – he is sleeping at his desk instead of working. Can we have a limit for such contracts so that we get fresh and young people to take up jobs? 

Secondly, this is to do with our young graduates; those with diplomas and degrees. What programme does the Government have to provide experience training? Because these young men and women are ready to do some work but because they lack experience, they are not given any jobs. What plans do we have so that we can employ these people, either temporarily, so that they gain that experience? Thank you.

4.03
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you. I also have some brief supplementary questions. I want the Minister of Gender to break down the unemployed in terms of gender so that measures to address unemployment are strategically taken by Government. 

The other issue is age; we should know the age bracket of the unemployed. The youth might be the most unemployed and measures geared to addressing that could be developed. We want the break down with regard to gender and age. 

The other issue is about “expatriate” workers or the foreign workers. How much discrepancy in pay is there between foreign workers at the same level with our own Ugandan workers that the ministry has identified, in case it has identified it? And if it has not identified the pay discrepancy, what investigative measures are on about that? This also fits in with the Minister of Internal Affairs. Is the ministry aware of the segregation of our people, especially when they are employed with foreigners? 

The other issue for the Minister of Internal Affairs is corruption in the department that issues permits to foreign workers. How is the ministry dealing with the corruption that is there? Because whenever they do a round-up that means it is pay day for some officials in the department. So what are we doing about the corruption and the netting of aliens who do not have work permits? Thank you. (Mrs Ssentongo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I think the supplementary questions should end here. They are limited; you just cannot ask 20 questions as supplementary questions. 

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I think I have only two supplementary questions to answer. The first one was, “Mr Minister, are you sure that every alien that is working here is doing a job for which there are no Ugandans? We have security guards; we have got dish and car washers taking up employment in Uganda?” 

This is precisely what I said in my statement. If at all in our inspections we do catch these people, we do what the law says -(Interjections)- that statistic is very simple to provide. We know the aliens who are here working illegally and the sectors they are in. We have those statistics and we can bring them any moment they are required.

The second question –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister, for giving way. Moving around town, is the minister aware that even menial jobs, that include, making chapatis, pancakes - aliens are everywhere in this country and in this capital city, Kampala, selling chapatis; they are in washing bays. Is the Minister aware that Ugandans are being phased out of even these simple and ordinary jobs that Ugandans ought to be doing?

MS SARAH NYOMBI: Are you aware that in some cases, Indian employers hire our children on probation and pay them only Shs 1,000 every day for six months to cater for transport and when they finish the six months probation period, instead of confirming them, they accuse them of not performing and go ahead to recruit another batch? Are you aware that they are exploiting our children?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I think I will begin with the latter. As regards exploitation of our workers, this is a matter to be handled by my colleague in the Ministry of Gender. I deal strictly with matters related to infiltration.

Corruption was the second question. Before I go to corruption, the law is very clear. If we catch anybody working without a valid work permit, we will definitely arrest that person and prosecute him or her. If there are people who you know or suspect to be working without work permits, please help the ministry and give us that information then we can take appropriate action.

Corruption within the work permit section; well I am not aware. Again I would be too happy to receive information because it is not possible for me to know every case. I have heard rumours but we have investigated and not found the truth because some of these Asians invest - corruption takes two people. You will get a businessman and he will offer a bribe to one of our employees. When you go to seek evidence from him, he says, “No, I know nothing”. So I would be the happiest person if I could get information as to who is bribing who and then we shall move according to the law.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Kasaija for answering some of the questions raised. I will start with the question raised by hon. Theopista Ssentongo regarding the establishment of a department for employment services. I wish to inform this august House that this department exists in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and is charged with sourcing employment opportunities for our people. 

We also capture data from all our students who qualify from various institutions of learning. I wish to take this opportunity to call upon honourable colleagues to inform those who have left institutions of higher learning to come to the Department of Employment Services in the Ministry of Gender to register their qualifications with us.

Right now, we are still mechanical but in the near future, our plan is to go web based so that we capture the qualifications of various students leaving institutions and also employment opportunities and try to match them with these qualifications and we inform the students. This is one way through which we think we can provide placement for these students.

The second question was from hon. Baba Diri regarding the people who are tired and retired but they continue getting contracts. I think there is a limit generally but what affects us is that when we lack the required skills, we may be compelled to continue giving someone a contract until a time when we get someone with the right qualifications and skills.

The other question was about what plans we have to equip students after leaving institutions so that they are better placed to get jobs in the job market. My ministry is now working hand in hand with the International Labour Organisation and Enterprise Uganda, an agency that is under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to ensure that when students qualify, we offer them additional training that will make them suitable to get jobs in the job market.

I am happy to report that since we started working with Enterprise Uganda particularly to change the attitude of our people, we are seeing a lot of progress. We are seeing most of the young people begin to establish their own enterprises. As Government, we really believe in private sector-led growth as one of the opportunities of generating employment for our people. Thank you.

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you for giving way for information. I would like to inform the Minister that there are opportunities with the informal sector especially carpentry and workshops where Government would proactively place some of these students but it needs to be an engagement of Government to reach out to these people.

DR OTAALA: Thank you, my colleague. I want to agree with you entirely. This was going to be my second point in that in order for us to provide the necessary skills, especially for young people who have not gone through formal education, Government has plans to establish various centres like we are already working on one in Makindye but also regionally, we are going to establish common centres where we shall put common equipment that can be used by young people as a group.

You may be a carpenter focused on making tables for example; you will go to that common centre facility and shape up your tools the way you want them and another person also goes to the same place. We want to establish these regional centres and we have already started with Makindye. We are going to Mbarara, Mbale, Lira and land has already been procured for this.

The other question was from hon. Sempala where she required me to de-segregate in terms of gender and age the unemployment levels in the country. As I have already stated, my ministry is working on establishing a labour market information system where we can capture data and be able to de-segregate them by age, sex and so forth. So this is something that is in the offing. I thank you.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 113/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

4.18
MRS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): I have come back to stand in for hon. Pajobo. 
i) “Would the minister inform the House whether there is an employment policy in place, and if so, when is it going to be tabled in Parliament?

ii) When does the Minister intend to institute a minimum wage in this country to alleviate the suffering and exploitation of many workers?”

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, once again. Hon. Pajobo again asked the Minister to inform the House whether there is an employment policy in place and if so, when it is going to be tabled in the Parliament. 

Our response is that the National Employment Policy for Uganda has been approved by Cabinet. It is in place and is being printed right now. I wish to add that I shall be able to share these policies with you, and I think that by the 22nd of this month, the printing will be over and we shall be preparing for its launch on 1st May 2011, which is the International Labour Day. (Applause)

I hasten to add that it is not a requirement that Government policies should be tabled here, but I want to promise that I will share with you, honourable colleagues, because you are key partners. 

The next question was: “When does the Minister intend to institute a minimum wage in this country to alleviate the suffering and exploitation of many workers?” 

Mr Speaker, the ministry shall appoint the Minimum Wages Advocacy Board to study the wages in this country. And I am happy to report that as we talk today, we already have a draft Cabinet Memo in the Cabinet Secretariat where we are proposing to constitute the Minimum Wages Advocacy Board. 

As provided by law, the board is meant to study each sector and what should be the minimum wage therein. For example, the minimum wage in the industrial sector may be different from that in the agricultural sector, and as hon. Otto said, even that one in housekeeping should be different. It is then that the board will be able to advise the minister on how to establish the minimum wage. I thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MRS SSENTONGO: I thank the Minister for his submission. And for the first time, I am compelled to smile; but could you give us a timeframe within which this board will be constituted? Because I remember there was a board that was constituted in the 1980s and it came up with a report which died a “natural death.” So, we are not very sure whether this one will stand the test of time.  

4.22
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Hon. Minister, I know you may be aware but I would like you to confirm to this House that you are indeed aware of the so many Ugandans suffering out there because of lack of a minimum wage.  

I will give you an example, one day in April last year I was walking on the streets of Kampala, actually along Bombo Road, and I found a young Ugandan who was crying just in front of the Computer Business Centre. I took the bother to ask her why she was crying and she told me that her name was Namuyangu, a resident of Bweyogerere and was working with the Muyindi there. She had been employed there on condition that she is paid Shs 60,000 per month, but without lunch and transport to and fro Bweyogerere. She further said that she is meant to report at work at 7.00 a.m. and leave at 7.00 or 8.00 p.m. but had gone on for two months without pay. And to add to all that, the Muyindi was chasing her away which made me feel very bad. 
 
So, Mr Minister, are you aware that several Ugandans are going through this in their own country because there is no minimum wage? And while debating several reports in this House, Members of Parliament have recommended that we hurry the process to ensure that we establish a minimum wage. I hope what you have told us today is really going to be true. We are eagerly waiting to see to it that this minimum wage is in place by the end of this year.  

THE SPEAKER: Although, hon. Members, this issue of a minimum wage has come up very many times in this Parliament and in the ones before, there was a fear, and I think a genuine fear, that simply imposing a minimum wage may cause redundancy. Many people may lose the employment they have currently. And remember that at least when those people are employed, they at least get a wage.   

So, there was a question of balancing. People were asking themselves whether we needed the cut down in employment or we need people to be engaged, although they may not be having the minimum wage. So, hon. Members, this is something we have to consider. There are people who would say that: “Even if it is a small wage, let me go to the office and at least have a telephone and be able to communicate.” There are many such people. Simply saying that today, the “Minimum wage is 100,000,” you may see a higher level of unemployment. So, we should deal with this matter very carefully. And I hope the board which the minister intends to set up will have to consider all these before it becomes something that may cause us tears. 

4.26
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. It is true that very many Ugandans are willing to work at a fee where the consideration is between the employer and the employee. For example, you may be surprised that there are very many maids and houseboys in Kampala who work for about Shs 30,000 a month provided -(Interjection)- someone is even telling me that even at 15,000 provided they can get food, accommodation and money to go home during the Christmas holiday to go and check on the relatives and tell them that they are based in Kampala. 

So, what I would want to request the minister is that other than hurrying to have the Minimum Wage Advisory Board, probably you need to commission a survey or a research to find out the various levels of employment in Uganda. Otherwise, a person employing four maids, immediately you come out with a minimum wage, will automatically maintain one. But in the meantime, I don’t think it is absurd for the minister - maybe not absurd - I don’t think it is wrong for you to come out with a minimum tentatively. 

At least we should know that there is no one employed in Uganda below 15,000 a month. If you feel 15,000 will cause a lot of unemployment, then you make it a question of law that no one should be employed below Shs 10,000 a month; at least Shs 1,000 a day. We at least need a minimum - an LCM that no one in Uganda works for less than 1,000 a day - so that from there the Minimum Wage Advisory Board can come into place to increase from the minimum we have set. That is one. 

Two, the NSSF and PAYE; is the Minister aware that there are several organisations that only pay their employees after the employer has already deducted the amount meant to be remitted to the NSSF? So, if you are moving around and saying, “Employees should make their monthly contributions”, it is actually deducted from the salaries of the employees. So, if I am supposed to earn Shs 150,000 and they should remit 10 percent of that, I would instead earn Shs 135,000. So the 10 percent remitted to NSSF is still –(Interjections)- yes, that is what is happening. So, is the minister probably aware that if you hurry –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much. Two pieces of information should be given. The first one is: labour as a factor of production is paid - in accordance with a liberal economy like ours - whether the company or a firm is making money to cover all its factors of production, including labour and capital, and consequently, it is very difficult to have a minimum wage decreed by the ministry. He can be advised indeed, but before the Minimum Wage Advisory Board advises the minister, they will have carried out the surveys that he is carrying out. But the factor that you, Mr Speaker, have advised on is very true that if you imposed a minimum wage for companies whose profitability cannot cover the costs that you have imposed, the alternative to them would be to dismiss the labourers they have and that would be much more serious to the people you want to save. Similarly, to hon. Akello on dismissing a worker, even if there were a minimum wage, you can refuse to pay whatever wage levels you have decided. The case she quoted would not be saved by having a minimum wage.

The final piece of information is that the National Social Security Fund Act requires the employer to contribute ten percent of the salary of the employee to the Social Security Fund and the employee contributes five percent. So, at the time of retirement, he would have contributed his five percent plus the employer’s ten percent. It would be difficult for you to know whether the employee is contributing five percent of his portion and at the same time contributing ten percent on behalf of his employers. It will be difficult to determine, Mr Speaker. 

MRS SENTONGO: The clarification I want to give is that today we are in the East African Community, and of the five states, it is only Uganda that does not have a base in terms of salaries and wages. The one which did not have, but is already in the process of having one is Burundi. How are we going to function? I want your guidance. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for that information, but what I wanted to put forward to the Minister and maybe just to inform you is that I handled one case of drafting an employment agreement. The salary was Shs 180,000 but this Israelite - not even an Indian - was telling the person that, “Yes, there is a legal requirement that I should remit ten percent of your salary. So, the salary I am going to pay is Shs 160,000 so that I remit the Shs 20,000 to NSSF as a precondition to accepting the job.” If you do not accept it, they will look for someone that can actually accept the Shs 160,000 as opposed to the Shs 180,000; but that is not the main point. 

The main point I am putting to the Minister is that probably this advisory board that you are going to appoint should make a clear distinction between a contract for service and a contract of service because the moment you come up with very stringent requirements as to the minimum wage, then I will opt to employ people on an hourly basis and not enter formal employment. So, they will still find a way to go behind you. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to react?

DR OTAALA: No, it is clear.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I have seen the people who were here. This is an important item and I am not persuaded to go on with this debate. 

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I suggest that we handle it tomorrow first thing at 2.30 p.m. sharp. 

THE SPEAKER: With this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.
 
(The House rose at 4.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 April 2011 at 2.30 p.m.)

