Thursday, 4 April 2002

Parliament met at 2.33p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker,  Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, earlier this year when the President was addressing Parliament, he informed you that Uganda will be hosting a symposium related to the 1979 liberation war and matters connected therewith. We have in the gallery, Mr Joseph Atiku, the Executive Director of the Nyerere Foundation. 

As you know, Mwalimu Nyerere was a great friend of this country, and is associated with the liberation of 1979. So, amongst us we have some members who are organising the symposium. I will permit hon. Kabwegyere to brief the Parliament on what is going on and how we are going to relate to it.

PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE (Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have the historic honour of informing this House of the impending symposium on the Great Lakes Region under the theme, “The Reinforcing of the Region’s Solidarity by Setting a Regional Agenda for a Culture of Peace, Unity and People-centred Development”.  

The symposium arises from the vision of the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, the former President of Tanzania, together with the President of Uganda, His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Both of them got involved in the regional issues, in particular, the Burundi peace process.

Before the late Mwalimu departed, he wished that we had a symposium to address problems of the region together.  Having been the facilitator for the peace process in Burundi, he discovered, rather disappointedly, that the problems of the region could not be solved piecemeal or by focusing on individual countries. Had he lived, he would have been here on Monday to open the symposium.

The symposium focuses on eight themes: 

• Regional Peace and Security, 

• Regional Stability and Democratic Governance,
 
• Gender Participation Empowerment and People-centred Development, 

• Regional Food Security and Health Care, 

• Education Human Resource Development, 

• Job Creation, Science and Technology, 

• Regional Integration and International Co-operation, 

• The Role of the Media and Kiswahili in globalisation. 

These themes have been looked at by the writers of papers who are commissioned from the region. We have 25 papers so far, but by Monday we will have about 35 in all. These papers have been looked at and their content has been synthesised with the eight themes. As we talk now, in the Conference Centre, there is a team of paper givers as well as those persons numbering about 50 who are looking at these papers again to synthesise their content with the themes I have mentioned.

The idea is that by Monday, when the symposium opens, the themes will have all been concretised and the contents of the papers will have been synthesised with the eight themes. His Excellency, Benjamin Mkapa, the President of the Republic of Tanzania will open the symposium, and the keynote address will be given by His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

All Members of this august House are warmly invited to participate in the symposium.  It will take place from 8 – 10 April into the celebrations of 11 April. The celebrations of the 11 April combine the commemoration of Mwalimu Nyerere who would have turned 80 on 13 April had he lived, and the fall of Amin which took place on the 11th of April 1979. 

Setting this agenda is of great importance to the region.  Yesterday, when I opened the Round Table, I remembered that in 1884, European leaders sat down and divided Africa into the pieces they chose and we were divided, and still divided we are. I wondered whether we could not sit in the Conference Centre and decide to re-unite these parts! The challenge is for all of us. This august Parliament and other parliaments in the region have been called upon to participate in this agenda.

The invited guests are from the six countries of the region of Rwanda, Burundi, DRC, Tanzania, Kenya and Uganda. They include Members of Parliament, Speakers of the Houses of Parliament, Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Chief Justices, Army Commanders, Inspectors General of Police, civil society, academicians, women, youth, religious leaders and the private sector.  The idea is to have a cross section of the region to come together and set an agenda, not necessarily coming to solutions, but to think of a vision for tomorrow. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on a matter of the Order Paper for today. I note with great concern two items, which I expected to appear today, but are prominently missing. 

I have got two problems, but totally separate in terms of content. The first one pertains to the Ministry of Justice.  This country is signatory to a Rome treaty pertaining to setting up an international criminal court to deal with people who abuse other peoples’ rights. 

The reason I am raising concern is because we signed it in 1999, May the 14th. I am expressing concern because this Treaty is due to be ratified next week and yet the Ministry of Justice has not brought the bill to this House to make that Treaty a municipal law; in other words, for us to become signatories.  

Do I understand that the Government is reluctant to bring this matter because of the nature of this international criminal court, or is it a matter of being delayed bureaucratically? 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, not long ago, the Minister of Internal Affairs came to this House and read a statement pertaining to one of my colleagues in this House. I am specifically referring to Lt Gen. Tinyefuza. I was not personally offended, but that a Minister of Internal Affairs should come here and make a personal statement on a matter pertaining to an honourable colleague - a ministerial statement! And since then, we have not heard a response from my honourable colleague! 

Today, we are very lucky, we are very happy he is here. I want him to defend himself. We cannot have ministers making statements about colleagues, and we do not give them an opportunity to reply.  I am seeking your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Concerning the international criminal court, a member of this House, hon. Oulanyah, has asked a question relating to that matter. I believe it will be on the Order Paper on Tuesday, but since the Attorney General is here, he might wish to say something about it. But I am aware that on Tuesday they are due to answer the hon. Oulanyah’s question on the International Criminal Court. Hon. Attorney General, they would like to know why Uganda has not yet ratified, and time is running out.  

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that Uganda has or did sign the Rome Statute regarding the International Criminal Court, and what has not happened is to ratify the Treaty. By the time I went to the Ministry, the process of ratification had already been initiated. We are in the process, probably next week, of taking a Cabinet paper for Cabinet approval for the purpose of ratifying the Treaty.       

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, while I appreciate the good answer advanced by the Attorney General, I am not yet contented about the process which Government intends to use before reaching the point of ratification.  

The clarification I am seeking from Government, including the Attorney General, is, when will the representatives of the people, Parliament, have the occasion to fully debate the proposal before ratification?

MR AYUME:  According to the Treaty, or according to the Act for Ratification of Treaties, if an agreement or Treaty does not require the amendment of the Constitution, it is only Cabinet which is required to ratify it. But there is no problem in making known to Members of Parliament that Uganda has been a signatory to this Treaty, and that it has ratified it, when the time comes to do so.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I appreciate your concern for a member of this House, but I have not received any request from him to make a personal explanation. So, I cannot force him to do it, unless he wants to do it now.  Lt Gen. Tinyefuza. 

LT GEN. TINYEFUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not intend to make a statement of personal explanation for several reasons.  

Maybe before I go into that, I should first of all really appeal to members that, at times they should be a bit cautious in using people’s names in petty politics for advancing petty political interests, for this hurts the country. This hurts! 

I have heard, and I will come specifically to some of these cases, especially in regard to the honourable member from Samia-Kenya -(Laughter)- I beg your pardon, Samia-Bugwe. I beg your pardon, Madam Speaker. I have heard, over a long time, sustained attack on my name by the Press and some honourable members of this House, which I think is very unfortunate. 

As leaders, we should not base ourselves on rumour mongering and gossip. First of all, I am a Member of Parliament. If there was any statement to be made, I would have made it on the Floor of this House. Nobody has a right to make a statement on my behalf. There is no way a person can come here on the Floor of this House to give a statement on un-researched facts. If there was anything that took place, they should have waited to come and present concrete facts to this House, but not to depend on what appears in the Monitor, in the New Vision, in the Red Pepper! You do not act like that. That is not how leaders of this country act!  

Kabalagala Police Station is not in Karamoja; it is just in Kampala. I wonder how many Members of Parliament have gone to this place to even ascertain what happened. When you hear things like, “Tinyefuza overruns a police station”, these are very unfortunate things I did not want to go into! 

First of all, not a single policeman or policewoman of Kabalagala Police Station - it is on record - was arrested or disarmed. You can imagine how unfortunate this thing is.  How can you overrun a police station without arresting the people there, or disarming them? This has been the song!  

I was not in the bar, I was not on the road; I had lost my vehicle because of undisciplined drivers! I went to get a police escort because I decided to go in a taxi. When I was getting out, a 999, which is not part of Kabalagala Police Station, comes and a boy runs out with a gun, holding it and pointing it towards us. 

Even if I was not an army general, you know policemen are members of the armed forces, they are not members of the clergy; therefore, a policeman must never point his gun at me, not even at a mwanainchi. And if you do so, I will arrest you, absolutely! Anybody who misuses a firearm will be arrested. That is the law.  

When you even hear this business of what they say about apologies, there was no such thing. What I agreed with the Inspector General was - I think anger took the better part of me. Maybe that corporal should have been arrested and taken to Central Police Station (CPS), not to Makindye Military Police! That was the point that I thought was unfortunate. He should have been locked up in CPS and charged, and I lodged a complaint against that corporal. The scuffle was between my escorts and that corporal, not me. Members of Parliament came here saying, “Tinyefuza did this”! I even do not know who the complainant is. Is hon. Awori the complainant? I do not know. I do not know what I should state!  

The Minister of Internal Affairs came here, he gave his version. I have my version, and the police have their version. I think we should let the authorities that are concerned handle their work other than engaging in gossip.  

One Member of Parliament here went to Hotel Africana and he stood and agreed that he killed 820 RCs. This is on record; that he killed them because they were RCs of the National Resistance Movement. They were unarmed civilians and their crime was just because they were RCs! I did not hear Uganda Law Society calling a press conference, instead the chairman of Uganda Law Society clapped. And that hon. Member is still in this House!  

In this House, we have Members who are out on bail on murder charges. 

Recently in Kampala there has been a crime wave. I have not heard some of these people coming to give statements on behalf of others. 

I am not mad, I am absolutely a very serious person, and I know what I am doing. Madam Speaker, I humbly ask the hon. Members of Parliament to know that this matter was unfortunate because it was blown out of proportion, and I cannot in any way be accountable for actions of unruly escorts. If escorts, for instance, arrest a person and assault him on the way, they are answerable for that. But I would not want to be dragged into this because the Police know what happened.  

What I would request is that when these things concern names of some people, especially honourable members of Parliament and so on, it would be good that before something – for the Press, it is understandable. They have their own agenda, they have their own need to sell newspapers and so on, but for us leaders we need to be a bit humble and also to know that –(Interjection). Therefore, really, I do not see any complainant. I have anyway clarified that fact. 

Should anything else crop up, there are people who are supposed to handle that. I was not involved in overrunning a police station, I did not beat anybody and the Police are in a better position to handle such matters. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to lay on the Table Supplementary Schedule (I) of October 2001, February 2002 for the Financial Year 2001/2002. I beg to move.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, NORTHERN UGANDA RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMME (Mr Agard Didi): Madam Speaker, I wish to apologise to the House. During the time when the Parliamentary Committee dealing with the Office of the President and the Office of the Prime Minister met, some questions were raised concerning the northern telecommunications which was started under NURP I.  

Some of these questions were to do with exactly what this NURP telecommunications is; whether Government support is still relevant to the company in the now liberalized economy, when there are so many players in the field; whether supporting one service provider will ensure equity and justice when provision of services in those areas is requested by other service providers; whether indeed the funds were being managed in a transparent and acceptable manner.  

In view of the wider scope of the above, the Prime Minister did request that, perhaps to clear the air once and for all, I should make a Ministerial Statement to the House covering the whole statement. Unfortunately, the statement was prepared by my office. With your indulgence Madam Speaker, I intend to circulate to Members the background information, which speaks a lot about the project, but it does not answer the specific questions that Members had raised. So, rather than waste Members time reading a 8-10 page story, I will request that this is circulated to Members so that sometime next week when I come, I speak specifically on the concerns raised by Members. I think that makes sense.  

With that, I beg to apologize to the House that although this is a comprehensive statement, let them give me a chance; I will do that next week.  It is now my privilege now to lay down –(Interjection)- the document, which was prepared so that it can be circulated to Members.  Thank you.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I wish to express my concern- (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not given you permission.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What rule has been breached for which you want procedural guidance?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dombo is uncomfortable; hon. Awori is uncomfortable, what rule has been breached?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The subject matter on which I wanted to move at that time has been surpassed because of the Order Paper, but when a Member raises a point of procedure, he is either seeking your guidance of the House on the interpretation of any law or he is stuck because of a situation, and he wants the guidance and interpretation of the chair.  Procedure is not moved under any rule of Parliament, it is just seeking the procedural guidance of the chair, and if a Member is stuck and the chair cannot help him out of a situation, then where shall we go if Parliament is reduced to a court-martial? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Where are you stuck?

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, at the time I rose on a procedural matter, I was seeking your guidance, and a clarification from the Leader of Government Business, because last week, under the Rules of Procedure of this House, the Minister of Internal Affairs came here with a statement ;and the Rules of Procedure, under the interpretation of the Speaker, allowed Members of the House to ask explanatory questions arising out of the statement made by an honourable minister of Government. 

Out of that interpretation, an honourable member comes today to say people were moving on petty reasons.  There is no member who would have moved on this floor if the Minister of Internal Affairs had not come up with a statement! And if we are going to proceed in such a manner that we move procedurally according to the interpretation of the Speaker, and then somebody who was not in the House comes and wishes to interpret the situation that people were moving because of petty issues, yet they were responding to a statement that has been raised by a government minister, I think that will undermine the procedural issues of this House. 

So, we must be guided so that in future, when an issue has been debated – really, it could be that Aggrey Awori, for instance, demands that hon. Tinyefunza explains that he is procedurally wrong. But for Members of Parliament to respond to a statement and the Minister explains the issues that were raised, I think we must be honoured as Members of the House so that the procedural issues of the House are respected, for us to promote the parliamentary democracy under the rules and the Constitution which we swore to uphold.  That is the issue I wanted the Government to clarify; whether when the Minister moved a statement on the floor of this House, it was out of a petty difference between him and an honourable member.

MR EDWARD KAMANA WESONGA: Madam Speaker- (Laughter)- I do not know what is wrong with that other name but take it as it is. 

Madam Speaker, while I agree with the previous speaker on the point of procedure, I also seek clarification from the member who opted, after one member had asked something to do with his personal statement and after we had heard from the Minister of Internal Affairs what exactly happened to him, voluntarily to come up and give a statement, but somewhere in the middle he mixed up himself. 

I call it a mix-up, Madam Speaker, because he was talking about other Members of Parliament here who are murder suspects. I wonder whether we sat down somewhere and we agreed that I would do the murder and he will do the beating –(Laughter). That is a very unfortunate thing!  

I want to inform Ugandans that I have never committed murder; I am a mere suspect and I do not think any judge is to be informed by Lt Gen. Tinyefuza that Wesonga or some other person is a murderer!  I demand that the Lt Gen. Tinyefuza does compose himself to answer his own charges but not to jump over to others.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, when the Minister of Internal Affairs made a statement last week, Members asked questions subsequently and the matter ended there. That is what happened under rule 37.  Today, hon. Awori was inquiring why Lt Gen. Tinyefuza had not said anything, so I said, “he has not asked for it and so he is not on the Order Paper”. But he stood up and he said what he did. And you know that personal explanations are not subject to debate, so that should have ended the matter. 

As for hon. Wesonga, I didn’t hear anybody’s name in that discussion being mentioned, so I do not think that –(Laughter)- you are the subject. Please, proceed.

MR AWORI: I would like to thank you once again for this opportunity to seek your guidance.  Actually, for me I did not want to address this matter of my colleague, Lt Gen. Tinyefuza, as a matter of fact; the matter was not personal to him. I was simply saying I did not want the Front Bench, for that matter, a minister, to make ministerial statements about an honourable colleague of this House. And that was not specific to him at all. It was for the general coverage of all members of this august House. I only mentioned him because he was the subject of the statement. 

However, my substantive inquiry from the Chair regards the statement from the Minister responsible for the North. He made a statement, which was incomplete, incongruent and left much to be desired. Why did the honourable minister come to the House to make a statement when he was not ready? We did not ask him to come, why did he come when he was not ready? I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was as surprised as you are to receive the statement. It was not given to the Speaker in advance. I did not get it. What he has brought is the statement. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR KIDEGA DANIEL (Youth Representative, Northern): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for putting the situation right. The youth of Northern Uganda and those of Uganda at large who are suffering from fatigue of campaigns are very happy about this opportunity. 

Following the recently concluded Local Council elections, many councils have embarked on programmes of swearing in the new councillors and constituting executive committees without the representatives of the special interest groups. 

Could the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to inform this House: 

(i)  Why Section 119 of the Local Governments Act, which provides for the elections of  the special interest groups, is not yet effected?

(ii) The causes of the delay of effecting this important provision, and to indicate to this House when this provision will be effected. 

The youth of Northern Uganda and Uganda in general are looking forward to a positive answer. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Felix Okot): Madam Speaker, on behalf of Government, I would like to apologise that the Minister to whom the question is addressed is not in the House. I am reliably informed that she is on her way coming. I request that you allow us to skip this item and go to item No.6 so that when she comes, the Member asks the question. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! Hon Members, I think this is not fair to the House. The opportunity for Members to ask questions is one of the few opportunities they have to get clarification on Government Policy. (Applause). We have an understanding, and the rules are very clear, that within 14 days or soon thereafter, all questions asked the Executive must be answered. So, we are not satisfied with the explanation. (Applause). 

MR OKOT: Madam Speaker, this morning we were in Cabinet which ended at exactly 2.00 p.m. to allow us to come to Parliament. The Minister informed me that she was going to collect her papers from the office and that she would come and respond to these questions. Unfortunately, she is not with us now. But I want to apologise on behalf of Government because we have not lived to our expectation. We have performed, but it is only today that we have let you down, and we apologise. We are not going to do it again.  Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. The question will be placed again on the Order Paper for Tuesday, and I hope there will be no other excuses next week.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what?

MR BYABAGAMBI: On what he has been saying - (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr. Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence and the indulgence of the honourable members, to allow me to say something brief. 

I have just returned from Lusaka, and when I arrived at the airport - I had gone to represent the President. He sent me to represent him in the Summit on DRC in Lusaka. I left Lusaka this morning, and I found a screaming headline of the Monitor from hon. Aggrey Awori saying that “UPDF’s time in Sudan up” -(Interruption). 

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I do understand the fondness of the hon. Minister of Defence in calling out my name on the Floor. I understand his concern about “screaming headlines” but is he in order to imply that I am the one who reported the story, who printed it, who made a headline and circulated it and sent him to Lusaka? (Laughter) Is he in order?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday hon. Awori wanted to know whether the UPDF could remain in the Sudan beyond the 2nd of April. I think that is the matter which gave rise to the headline. So that is what the Minister is responding to. Proceed.

MRS MUSUMBA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am really very worried at the way we are moving “rule-less-ly”. I know that the hon. Minister, under our rules, can opt to suspend a rule to give an explanation without notice, but that he chooses just to talk off-cuff, it really worries me. I really want to hear what he is about to say, but I want us to move systematically. 

Is there no rule, honourable Minister, which you can quote and move so that this House moves in an orderly manner? (Applause)  Otherwise, we are turning ourselves into an LC (I) court! We are hearing anything and I do not think it is right.  For democracy, it is wrong, Madam Speaker.  So, I would like the minister to quote some rule in order to move, because otherwise, anybody will walk here and say anything.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, earlier this afternoon, I raised the same matter that when you are calling for procedural issues, can you quote the rule under which you want us to proceed?  But Members do not want to do that!  What is good for the goose is good for the gander. So, we should all learn to use the rules but nobody is using them to move their motions today. The minister asked for clarification and I said let him seek his clarification.  But hereafter, let us go by the rules. You can get your clarification.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling as usual.  I simply wanted to say that I was surprised that this information came from hon. Aggrey Awori, because when the President met the parliamentary committee against my advice, he gave hon. Aggrey Awori a full text of the protocol that was signed between Uganda and Sudan on the matter of UPDF operations against the terrorist group called LRA in Southern Sudan. And I saw hon. Aggrey Awori reading every paragraph very keenly. So, I was therefore, surprised that he got the dates wrong, and I would like to take this opportunity to give information specific to this question that was raised by hon. Aggrey Awori.  

In the protocol, which was signed on 4 March, it was agreed that UPDF would deploy in Southern Sudan in order to achieve this mission, which I will read in Article (2): 
“The mission of the operation shall be;” - this is what hon. Aggrey Awori read – 

“(a) To search for and destroy all the military forces of the terrorist LRA led by Joseph Kony inside Southern Sudan in accordance with some annexes.  

(b) To search for and rescue all the abducted children and other Ugandan captives by the LRA in Southern Sudan in accordance with other annexes.” That is the clear description of the mission.

“The H-hour shall be – this is in Article 3 - agreed upon by the parties, but in any case, not before 18 March 2002.

Article 3(3): 

To achieve the desired objectives of the mission, a co-ordination committee composed of senior UPDF and Sudan Peoples Armed Forces shall be set up.”  Also there is a detail.  

Now Article 4(4) reads as follows: 

“The UPDF shall withdraw back to Uganda by the 18 April, 2002 in case the mission as stipulated in 2(1) is not completely accomplished. Any further extension shall be subject to the consent of the Government of Sudan upon recommendation of the joint co-ordination committee referred to in paragraph 3(3).” 

So, it is clear from this that the time we agreed upon has not yet expired. I do not know where hon. Aggrey Awori got the date of 2 April, I have never heard of it except maybe in newspapers.  

Secondly, we have kept very close liaison with the Sudanese. I was talking with the Minister of Defence on this matter, and we were in total agreement that our mission will be accomplished without tying our hands with timeframes. So, I would like to assure this House and the country that –(Interruption)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, since you have quoted extensively from that document, you are required now to lay it on the Table so that it becomes a property of the House.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  I had not finished.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, you have quoted from it.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I have no problem, Madam Speaker! I had actually said to this House before, when I correctly stated that I will address Parliament, and only hon. Aggrey jumped on me -(Laughter).  I had said that I would make a statement to Parliament about this matter, and in fact, this afternoon at 4.30 p.m. I hope that I will be able to meet Members of Parliament from the North, to give them details of the current operation; and when we are ready, I intend to seek your permission to allow me to come and present all the documents, plus details of the operation so far.  Thank you.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I appreciate that the hon. Minister of Defence has just returned from Lusaka and just met a “screaming headline”. But he only saw one; there was another “screaming headline” in the New Vision, “Museveni defends executions.” Would you like also to explain this for the President? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! Hon. Members, the “screaming headline” touched matters in the Sudan.  The executions, I have no idea where they have taken place; so, you are not required to answer.

MR MALINGA JOHNSON: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to give some information to the hon. Minister of Defence.  

Hon. Minister, when you were in Lusaka and as our UPDF are busy pursuing the LRA, a security situation has arisen in Katakwi District. Nearly all the LDUs that were recruited to defend the lives and property of the people have been taken away.  Where to, I do not know!  Information originating from the chairperson of the district indicates that there is no single soldier in Kapelebyong constituency as we speak, and nearly all the people are on the run with their children and property.  

While you were away, I am told some soldiers were brought to some parts of the district, but unfortunately they cannot speak Ateso, they cannot speak Swahili, they cannot speak English and they are finding it difficult to cooperate with the civilians to help in the security situation of Katakwi.

We are also reliably informed that these soldiers are very miserable. They have not had salaries for three months, they have no food, and they are operating in a district where people are in camps, and people are unable to provide them with any help. 

Because of the poor security situation, while you were away, hon. Minister, raiders took advantage, maybe because of your absence, and in a record time of one week, drove away 300 heads of cattle from Katakwi without any intervention. This situation is worrying us. I do not know how to proceed to save my people from this security situation.

The people of Kapelebyong, and the people of Katakwi, belong to this country and they have a right to be protected, according to the laws of Uganda. I am now seeking information from you, through the Speaker. How do I save my people, given that you have been absent and the security organs have left my people in disarray?

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I too would like to seek clarification because indeed, while the hon. Minister was away, soldiers in Makenke Barracks in Mbarara Municipality, who had not received their salaries, who were starving, left the barracks and went to the neighbouring village of Rwentondo and started begging for food from the residents of Rwentondo village. The people, in fear and also in sympathy for the soldiers, gave them their matooke on credit. They are now wondering when they are going to be paid, and they are feeling threatened by this situation of soldiers who are starving and who are leaving the barracks to look for food around the barracks.  

While he was away, Madam Speaker, we also read in the papers about soldiers who were sick and had received no money. They were lying in Mbuya, commandeering vehicles and driving to the headquarters in Bombo to demand for their salaries, and leaving their stretcher beds at Mbuya Hospital. 

In short, there is a worrying situation. Our armed forces seem to be poorly taken care of. And while he was away, we got alarmed at another deployment of troops in a foreign country without having a law to regulate the deployment of troops abroad. We are concerned about their welfare; we are concerned that there are no rules to govern their deployment there. When is the hon. Minister planning to bring a bill here so that we establish some guidelines for the deployment of our troops? It is now seven years since the Constitution was made; this law should have been in place immediately! 

While he was away, did he reflect on this important matter, and when does he plan to put in place a law that will govern this important aspect and other aspects concerning our troops? Could he use this opportunity to allay our fears that our troops – our sons and daughters - are not out there in Sudan being mistreated and suffering without any protection from the laws of Uganda? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, obviously the matters raised from Kapelebyong and Mbarara Municipality and the surroundings are very important, and perhaps some of them would require substantive questions. But, Mr Minister, I do agree with the members that the issue of the law really has taken a bit of time. Can you please give a firm answer to this House when the law will come so that members can debate it and the rules and parameters are established?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have carefully taken note, and to be sure, I will get a copy of the Hansard on the points raised by hon. Malinga about Katakwi.  I had not heard about them, and I will inquire about these soldiers who cannot speak Swahili or English, and are, therefore, unable to communicate with the people of his area.

These LDUs that you are talking about whose whereabouts, according to you, are not known, is a matter on which I will require further and better particulars for me to follow it up seriously.

It is obviously not possible that we can have a unit that has had no food, and their salaries not paid for three months.  That is not possible in the UPDF; it cannot happen! It has not happened, and I can bet my head here that it has not happened. And that goes for hon. Byanyima’s point as well about our troops. I saw it in the Monitor and in fact we responded to that article to say that it was not true.

The question of the comprehensive bill is a matter on which I have given a substantive statement. It is hardly two weeks since I gave this statement here. I know hon. Byanyima was not present that day, but I would encourage her to read the Hansard, or if she does not mind, to tell me if she prefers a copy of my statement, which I will, of course, readily avail her. I do not have anything new to add. I made a very clear statement on the question of the comprehensive bill under Article 210, and I have nothing new to add.

Let me make this point again. I made it in that statement, but it is important for me to repeat it as often as possible so that I leave no room for confusion. There is a law governing the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces. It is not true that there is no law.  There is a law called - which I was even citing here last week when we were talking about the executions in Karamoja. So, I urge the House and the country at large – (Interruption)

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Point of clarification, Madam Speaker.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No, I want to finish my sentence then you can seek clarification. You know there is nothing hon. Winnie Byanyima can ask that I am unable to clarify (Laughter). I will give her an opportunity if you give me time to do so. 

I was just making a statement. My sentence was that there is a law called “The NRA Statute”, which was saved by the Constitution, and it is the one that this Government uses to regulate the conduct and management of the defence of this country. I will take the clarification if you allow it, Madam.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Ben Wacha): Thank you Madam. I propose that I present to the House the abridged version of the report, and immediately after that, we proceed straight to handle the proposed amendments rule by rule. I am suggesting that there should be no debate on the report because the report itself does not have any debatable issues.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, just before you start, what should the Members do with the rest of the documents that were distributed yesterday?

MR WACHA: I am assuming that since you ruled yesterday, Members will have come with the big document which is entitled “The Interim Rules of Procedure”. I am also assuming that they have brought with them this big white document. It does not have a name but starts with “Elections and functions of Deputy Speaker”. There is proposed Rule No. 5.  

I am also assuming that they have in their possession two explanatory notes, one dated 9 July 2001 and other one, which was circulated recently, dated 20 March 2002. I am assuming, of course, that they have the report.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do Members have all these documents, in particular the report? 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I think there is a problem with the distribution of reports in the House. If you are inevitably out of the House, you do not get documents because they are distributed in the House or are left outside the Chamber, rather than in our pigeonholes. 

Members of the Select Committee on Election Violence have missed many days of debate here. As a result, the majority of us will not have the documents being referred to by the Chairperson. So, we are disadvantaged. We do not have the big white report, which I understand was put on the table outside the Chamber yesterday, and Members picked all the copies. We never had the opportunity to pick any. So, there is a problem about these reports, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I request the Clerk to avail us more copies. I believe the majority of Members have this big book. It was distributed a long time ago and this white one, which does not have a name. Probably what you do not have is the abridged report. Can the Clerk avail them? In future, can the Clerk arrange that the documents are put in Members’ Pigeonholes.   

MR WACHA: Thank you Madam Speaker. The Committee on Rules is charged under our Rule 124:

(d) to review from time to time these rules and make to the House such proposals for amendment of the rules as the committee considers necessary for the satisfactory functioning of the House and efficient transaction of business of the House; 

(e) examine and advise the House on amendments proposed to these rules by Members or by other committees of the House, which are referred to the Committee”.

The process of reviewing the Rules of Procedure started during the 6th Parliament and continued with the present Committee. 

During the process of reviewing these rules, we interviewed a number of honourable members. We also received written memoranda from other members and a number of ideas generated therein have been incorporated in the proposed amendment to these rules.  

The areas the Committee dealt with start on page 3.  The Committee dealt with the issue of Election of Commissioners as provided for under The Administration of Parliament Act. It also proposes methods of removing Parliamentary Commissioners. 

The Committee also dealt with the rules of procedure for election of Ugandan members to the East African Legislative Assembly and how they will report to this House.  

The Committee, because of a number of ideas generated on this area, has proposed that a code of conduct be incorporated in the new Rules of Procedure. Under the rules that we are now amending, there was no rule for the impeachment of the President under Article 107. The amendment now incorporates the constitutional requirement for this.  

We had a problem in the 6th Parliament on whether or not ministers could be censured because there were no rules for censuring them. The Committee now proposes methods and rules for censuring of ministers. 

The House is, of course, aware that recently we passed the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001, which, inter alia, provides for the recall of a Member of Parliament. There was no rule for such a procedure. In the proposed rules now, there is a specific rule for recalling a Member of Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, one of the problems that we face in this House and in the committees of this House is that Members absent themselves from the business of the House or of the Committee without either informing the Speaker or chairperson of the Committee.  There is a provision in the constitution that states that if a Member absents himself or herself from the business of the House for more than 15 days, he should lose his seat.  There was no provision under our Rules on how to effect this constitutional provision. The Committee proposes how this should be done. 

Madam, the Committee looked at the committees on the National Economy and the Budget.  There was a consensus that the two committees are merged and their roles be played by one committee.  The new committee that is being proposed is the Committee on Budget and National Economy.  The Committee did have discussions with persons and chairpersons from these two committees.  

At first there was a general consensus that the committees could be merged. Later on, the chairperson of the Budget Committee, I think on reflecting, presented the Committee with a document which proposes that the two committees could remain apart and then the various roles of the committees could be rationalised.  When we come to discuss this part of the Rules, I beg that she be allowed to present those ideas.  

The Committee also proposes that committees on Government Assurance, Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises should be merged into one, and it proposes the introduction of a new committee on HIV/AIDS and other related matters.  

Madam Speaker, you will remember that last year a resolution was passed by this House that this committee is formed and the Committee is just implementing the decision of the House.

Madam Speaker, it is also suggested that we have a committee on Equal Opportunities to deal with matters related to equalisation of opportunities and improvement in the quality and status of all persons.  We also propose that a committee on Science and Technology be introduced.  All these committees are supposed to be standing committees.  

We also dealt in detail with matters relating to the Committee on Appointments.  A number of views were received to the effect that this committee is too big to function efficiently.  Members also expressed that there should be a way this particular committee could refer some of its disagreements with the President to this House to resolve.  

Members also expressed that it would not be proper for the Speaker, who would be presiding over Parliament to consider the above appeal and referral, to be the same person to chair the committee since the matters related to referral issues which the committee finds itself unable to resolve - the chairperson of the plenary would be the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker.  The Committee proposes as follows: - 

(a) That membership of this committee be reduced;

(b) That membership be based on regions other than districts;

(c) That certain interest groups be represented on this committee; and 

(d) That the chairperson of this committee comes from amongst members of the committee.  

Madam Speaker, the Committee was informed that Parliament is going to introduce a parliamentary press unit, which will, among other things, record and broadcast the proceedings of this House.  This is a tricky matter, and the Committee proposes that in telecasting the proceedings of this House, certain rules should be observed by the unit.  The rules for telecasting the proceedings of this House are attached to the new amendments as Appendix (d).  

Madam Speaker, I may not say that these Rules will guide all the proceedings of this House. We have been using what is generally called “Rules of the 6th Parliament” which have been found to be having some shortcomings.  The proposed Rules are an extensive amendment, and re-editing of these Rules will make them easier to follow and operate.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman.  Honourable Members, I propose that we move directly to the proposed amendments and we shall debate them as we go along instead of having a full debate and then going to the text like we normally do. So I will ask the clerk to move to the proposals.

MR WACHA: Let me explain, Madam Speaker; Members may be confused as to why we are having two documents related to amendments.  Now this blue or green document is actually a reproduction of the old Rules of Procedure, the small one, and it incorporates amendments as then suggested by the committee on Rules of the 6th Parliament.  

Now the new committee looked at those proposed amendments and came up with these new amendments; this is therefore the up-to-date proposed amendment. Okay?  So we will be following the new one rather than the blue one –(Interjection) – let me finish.  After the Committee has finalised with this, any member of the House should be free to raise any matter that he or she feels should be incorporated in the new rules.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, having listened to the chairperson of the Committee, I have a problem because we are looking at the end of this exercise to be able to say this is the rule we have passed which will form part of our Rules of Procedure.  Instead of going by the amendments, we start a proposed new Rule 5. I propose that the document we want to adopt at the end of the day is this one, and therefore, my thinking was that we would go rule by rule here, we debate it, pass it, and if there are any amendments that the chairperson of the Committee wants us to consider, he will then come up. After 1,2,3,4, when we get to 5, he will say, “I have a new 5”, and we will be able to debate the 5.  Madam Speaker, I thought that you should help us on this.  I thank you.

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU: Madam Speaker, just for a matter of interest and procedure, shouldn’t we first adopt this report before we go on to the rules? I just wanted your guidance on this one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Adopting means that we need to debate it. And if we start debating, it means we will not be able to go to the text. So, as we move clause by clause, we shall also refer to the text of the report. 

Hon. Wacha, I understand these rules here are not the same as these other rules. They are not the same as the rules of the Sixth Parliament.

MR WACHA: That is right, Madam Speaker. That is why I say that it incorporates amendments that were proposed by the other committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they substantially different from what is here?

MR WACHA: They are not; the smaller document is an improvement on those same amendments. But I have no problem in adopting the procedure the hon. Minister wants us to adopt.  It might be laborious, but maybe it is more exhaustive.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that it would be unfair, especially for the members who did not participate in creating these proposals, which I am told are now an improvement under this document. It would be unfair to simply move without those members addressing themselves on this one. So, I think the basic text is this one; the improvements are the other ones. 

MRS ZZIWA: I seek your clarification. We have the rules we have been using in the House, which are adopted, which are legitimate and which are legal. I thought by moving, this should be the starting point. And any amendments should be starting from that point of view whereby this, which the chairperson is proposing, will be based on the original which we have been using as a House. The other one hon. Musumba is putting up was never adopted.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this process is going to be laborious, but I think it is in the interest of this House that everybody moves and agrees rule by rule. So, let us proceed.

Rule 1:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, in the definition of “Minister”, we propose that we remove, “and Deputy Minister”, so that in the definition, “Minister means a Minister of Government and includes a Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, and Minister of State.” I raise this following our constitutional provisions, which did away with deputy ministers.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First of all, I had initially intended to pray that we stand over the interpretation rule until the very last. What happens is that as you go through the main body of what you want to interpret, you get to be able to understand the context in which the various terms are being sought to be interpreted.  

However, whatever the decision is on that, I want to say that the Constitution does not say, “Prime Minister”, or “Deputy Minister”, or “Minister of State”. The Constitution says, “Cabinet Minister and or other Ministers”. And if we are going to go by the Constitution, I propose that we stick by the provisions in the Constitution – “Cabinet Minister and or other Ministers”. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, can you tell the House what your position is?

MR WACHA:  I have no problem with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that proposed Rule 1 remains part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 2:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the proposed Rule 2 remains part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 3:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the proposed Rule 3 remains part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 4:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the proposed Rule 4 remains part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 5:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Chairperson, you can now look at the amendment.  

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, we propose that the marginal note should be “Election and Functions of Deputy Speaker”. And then in sub-rule (6), we add after the word “Speaker”, which is at the end, “and carry out such other functions as the Speaker may assign or delegate.” I propose.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the proposed Rule 5 be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 6:

MR WACHA: Madam, the proposed rule 6 breaks off the numbering of the old rules. So, we pray that we insert in between 5 and the original 6, the following new rule: 

Marginal note to read:  “Election of Parliamentary Commissioners: “The three members of the Parliamentary Commission referred to under Section 3 of the Administration of Parliament Act, 1997, shall be elected by the Members of Parliament from their number.  

(2) A person shall not be qualified to be elected a Commissioner if he or she is Vice- President or a Minister.

(3) Election of the Commissioners shall be held at the first sitting of a new Parliament.

(4) The mode of election of Standing Committees under Rule 127 shall apply to elections of  the commissioners with such modification as may be necessary.

Madam Speaker, the justification for holding elections on the first day of the first sitting immediately after the election of the Deputy Speaker is that each Parliament ends with its commissioners. So, the functions of Parliament should not stop because in the absence of commissioners, the administration of Parliament becomes a problem. We therefore propose that immediately after the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, the three commissioners should also be elected. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard the proposal.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I think this is a good proposal. However, I have two problems. First, I want everybody to think back. On the first day that new Members of Parliament come to this House, the first thing they do, after a lot of high level campaigning amidst tension in the House, is to elect the Speaker. If we are going to have two or more people proposed for the position of Speaker, we will go into secret ballot, after which, the Speaker takes over the Chair and after that, a lot of beautiful speeches, praising the Chief Justice and so on.  

When the Speaker takes over the Chair, he or she presides over the election of the Deputy Speaker. There are nominations and a lot of tension again. If we have more than one person, we again go into secret ballot. 

The Committee says that on the same day - and I appreciate the defect that they want to cure - but I am trying to visualise what actually happens on day one in this House.  The Committee is now saying that after this, the new Members, who hardly know each other, now have to select three people who will be dealing with them on a person-to-person and day-to-day basis for the next five years.

Madam Speaker, I see there a problem of timing, a problem of fatigue, a problem of being overwhelmed by the circumstances of that day. But even more importantly, rule 6(3) says that election of commissioners shall be held at the first sitting and that the mode of election will be under Rule 127. 

When you read Rule 127, it is not even talking about election on day one. Rule 127(2) refers to the mode of election of the Standing Committees and says: 

“The Speaker shall declare to the House a period of one day in which nominations of names of Members to be elected as Members of Standing Committees may be submitted to the Clerk.” 

So, technically you cannot, under the proposed rules, have elections on that day because under Rule 127, the Speaker must give a period of at least one day in which people will get nominated, over 20 signatures collected and so on. It will be difficult, even practically impossible, if we are going to follow a proper procedure of nomination and people interacting and getting to know each other. 

I therefore move that the election of the commissioners shall be held on the third sitting of the new Parliament so that time is given for the process to mature. An amendment can be made to say a month or something, but I think as it is now, it has to be amended. The third sitting is my proposal, Madam Speaker.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Okumu Ringa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support my colleague, hon. Musumba, in opposing the current amendment as presented by the chairperson of the Committee.  Judging by our own experience of electioneering, you are new in the House, and on the first day of sitting, you are faced with an electoral processes. I think that would be unfair to the many new Members who will have joined the August House. It will be more advantageous to those who will have been around for more than one or two terms and have already created the poll.  

That being the case, and also looking at the provision which states that in the first sitting of Parliament, election of Speaker and Deputy Speaker will take place, the first sitting of Parliament should be left for those two functions only. If there is any other electoral process or business to be conducted in the House the way we saw in the Sixth Parliament, I think we –(Interruption)

MAJOR KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, we are being disturbed by the Members in the lobby, yet some of us want to follow the debate. They are making a lot of noise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Sergeant please ensure that the Members in the lobby either lower their voices or come back into the House. They should come back into the House.

MR OKUMU RINGA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. In short, I am emphasising that the first day of the first sitting of Parliament should be left for electoral processes, which are crucial for the functions of this House. That is, the election of the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and possibly, as was the case in the Sixth Parliament, elections of Members of the Appointment Committee in order to undertake the other processes which are important to ensure the House is in place. But for the purpose of this rule, I would like to propose that we amend it.  I thank you.

MR WACHA: I accept hon. Musumba’s amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the proposal is that there be an amendment, instead of third sitting - is that what you have accepted chairperson?

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not comfortable with the proposed rule 6(1). I am of the view that we insert or we make it clear that of the three parliamentary commissioners, one should at least be a female Member of Parliament. I do not know why the ladies are silent about this. Uganda is becoming so gender sensitive that in anything we pass, at least it should be made compulsory that females are accommodated. But if the ladies can take all the three seats, then it is okay, it is even much better. My view is that, one of the three commissioners should be a female Member of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not know whether that will not require amending the parent Act. It would require amending that section of the parent Act itself.
 
MR WACHA: Madam, you are right but I think this thing can be done here. We always require the goodwill of the House to amend, because if you say they will be elected according to the - you know, the section deals only with a specific number.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why do you want to limit the women to one-third?

MR WACHA: That is also another problem. The danger of saying, one of them shall be a lady might restrict, but if you are silent, all of them could be women.

MR ISANGA MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, for me I think we are spending more time on this issue than necessary, because if we must look at a law to determine how many we should elect in positions based on gender, then we should look at the Constitution, and it is very clear on that matter.

However, for me I want to look at it from a bigger picture. In this Parliament, or in any other Parliament, where Members have to be told that in a Parliament that has men and women, of the three there must be one of either sex, I do not mind if it is two ladies and one man.  So for me I want to summarize by saying this is a good issue but it is already addressed by the Constitution. We do not have to go into it, we should leave it as it is and we move on to other rules.  I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on rule 6(3). When we talk of the third sitting, Madam Speaker, I am foreseeing a problem. 

When we came in the 7th Parliament, the President took time to bring out the list of ministers so the people who were interested were all the time on their toes saying “will I appear on the list, will I not appear? If I do not appear there, I will now stand for commissioner.” Now, somebody may be elected as a commissioner, then later appears on the list of ministers. This means repeating the process of electing to replace that person. So, I think we would be wasting more time because that will be another day wasted on election. 

I am of the view that let us have one month so that the Executive list is out, and then we go for commissioners to avoid wasting time. Thank you.

MRS  ZZIWA: While the issue my sister has raised is also pertinent, I am coming in to express my support on what hon. Onzima raised on the floor. 

It is true that the level of sensitization on affirmative action is quite high, and I commend this Parliament and I commend this country, but at the same time, I do not know whether it is guaranteed. I do not know whether it makes or it sounds verbose - if that is the word - to add in that phrase which does not even contrast with any provisions of the law just to make sure - even if we do not say women, but maybe gender - that at least we are certain there is balance as the case may be. So, I want to move by seconding hon. Onzima’s motion.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, with regard to rule (6), there are now two areas of contention; proposed rule 6(1) and proposed rule 6(3).  So, let us begin by pronouncing ourselves on proposed rule 6(1).  There is a proposal that there be a specific insertion of gender in this rule.

I now put the question that proposed rule 6(1) be amended as proposed by –(Interjection)- there are still objections? 

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Madam Speaker, certainly I do support these issues of gender as you are aware, but I was wondering whether we have agreed without putting in this issue of gender balance. Because, in the Constitution which I participated in making, we made it very clear and said that the principle of gender balance must guide us when we are appointing or electing leaders in positions of responsibility. 

We have trusted our senses of judgement and direction and we have been able to get a Vice-President and a Deputy Speaker, and last time you got Madam Margaret Zziwa there. So for me, I would take this consistency of promoting this principle of gender balance by entrusting our understanding and responsibility, because this provision which you are bringing is saying at least a woman, what if now they are all - what about men, we want to balance the two interests!  So, either, Madam Speaker we take the judgement of our wisdom or we draft it in a way that it will cater for both gender.  I thank you.

MR KATUNTU:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I think the Attorney General should come in and help us at this point, because the substantive Act of Parliament handles the issue about parliamentary commissioners, but now we are looking at Rules of Procedure. Can the Attorney General at least advise this House?  I would have done it but let the Attorney General do it for us. (Laughter).  Advise this House whether we are doing the proper thing to make a substantive rule when there is an Act of Parliament under the Rules of Parliament.  Thank you very much.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume):  Thank you Madam Speaker, I hope the honourable Member is not threatening to take my job. (Laughter).  I think the issue of giving numbers in our Rules of Procedure when the Administration of Parliament Act talks of three numbers without making any distinction that one or two should be women, we have already discussed it here. And I think we agreed that for the time being, we should leave it as it is.  But if the worry is about how to proceed with gender sensitiveness, we have Article 32 of the Constitution, which makes a general provision, and it reads as follows: 

“Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them”.   

What this really means is that when it comes to making laws such as we have done with the Land Act and other Acts of Parliament, we should take into account gender in the case of what we are about to do. We are dealing with rules and we cannot do so here by providing these rules without addressing what is in the Administration of Parliament Act.

Well, my attention has been drawn to another Article, 32 (4) of the Constitution, which provides that: - 
“Women shall have the right to equal treatment with men and that right shall include equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities”.  

This in fact reinforces the earlier provision that when you are making laws or taking decisions, then you should take this into account. And in order to do that we have to revisit the Administration of Parliament Act.  In the meantime, my advice would be that we leave it to the wisdom and gender sensitivity of the House when it comes to electing these people.  Thank you.

MS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am just wondering what principle we are following in debating this, because I think if we say we will prescribe one third for Parliamentary Commission we will be required then to prescribe one third for chairing committees, and I think that will lead us astray.  I would like to leave it to the House so that we are not caught in a situation, which we cannot manoeuvre. Thank you very much.

MRS BABA DIRI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I think the amendment honourable Onzima has brought is very important and it is in line with the Constitution.  That is on the understanding that we are not gender sensitive and very often if it is not indicated, we take all the positions.  We are assuming that our honourable men here are gender sensitive and they will give us one or more assistance. 

We assumed that the President was gender sensitive and how many substantive Ministers who are women are there, and how many state Ministers are there?  And if you go down to the local government, the executive of the local government is neutral about gender; you see that there are very many men.  

I would like us really not to have double standards, because one time we would say we want affirmative action, another time we say we do not want it! I would like these things to be put in place; one third is for women and if the women feel there is already gender sensitivity, I would like that one to be given to a disabled woman. (Laughter). Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Members we have been guided by the Attorney General that at this stage it is not necessary or appropriate to make that amendment since we have not touched the Administration of Parliament Act, which we enacted ourselves. So the matter, which is now in contention, is 6(3) and there are two positions.

LT COL KATIRIMA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I think what is intended in 6(3) is to ensure that we do not have a Commission where there are no officials to run the business. But at the same time, we must take into account that every time we have a new Parliament, we have many new members, and mainly in the majority.  Like this time round, we had 168 new members. 

But in my mind, as a member of the Sixth Parliament, I would find it very difficult to vote a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker who are new members. I would have to look from the old members I knew from the Sixth Parliament. So, it becomes very clear that every time we are going to elect a Speaker and Deputy Speaker, we shall most likely dwell on the old members we have interacted with previously. 

To balance in favour of the new members who may come to the House, I want to appeal to the members that we do not elect the parliamentary Commissioners on the third sitting of Parliament. If we sit on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, it means that we are electing the Commissioners. And in those three days, the new members of Parliament will not have campaigned enough. We shall not have identified their potential and abilities to be able to elect them to the Parliamentary Commission.  

I want to plead with the members that we allow at least a week for these new members. And the week will not kill the business of the Commission. The Commission office can remain without an official for a whole week. We could use that week to identify talent even among the new Members of Parliament whom we may not have known before.  

In view of that, I want to move an amendment that we vote for the parliamentary Commissioners at the fifth sitting of Parliament. The fifth sitting is in the second week, and that one week will have given us time to know the new members.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are now two positions regarding when to elect the new Commissioners.  We have a proposal from hon. Kasule Lumumba that it should be at least one month to enable members interact, participate in the debate, and know each other. 

There is also a proposal that it be done at the fifth sitting. The difference between the third and fifth sitting, to me, is very small, but it is up to this House.  Are there any other proposals on this one?

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Whatever period we agree upon, I would imagine that the Commission would still be in existence.  Should there be business requiring the Commission to transact before we elect the three members, are we saying that the existing members - the Prime Minister, Minister of Finance, the Speaker, Deputy Speaker - would carry on the business of the Commission until such a time as the one month or one week or whatever period we agree upon, when we elect our three representatives. 

Or, if some of the Commissioners are re-elected, can we say that they continue performing those duties until we have elected new members? These are some of the things that we need to consider.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The law provides that the old Commission would carry on until such a time that a new one is appointed. So, it takes care of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, head of Government Business, Minister of Finance and any returning surviving Member of Parliament.  The provisions are there within the law.  So, there will be no vacuum as such. 

Hon. Mwandha’s question is really part of the law, which is in place. I wish the chairperson would read it to take care of the transition so that everybody is in the know.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I did not want us to be misguided by what hon. Mwandha put forward. It is true that there are other Commissioners besides our three representatives, but members should know the importance of having our three representatives in good time.  

If we had our three representatives early enough to put forward the ideas, for example, on our emoluments, there would not have been public outcry on increasing our salary, because you did not increase salary as members of the Seventh Parliament. So, the earlier we have the three members of the Back Bench on the Commission, the better, so that right from the word go, the packages of Parliament are presented to the Executive, and that wrong impression is not given to the public that there has been “x” and now they have increased to “y.”  

Much as we have the Speaker, the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, it is very important, in the interest of Parliament, to have our members on the Commission as early as possible. I have no problem with hon. Katirima’s amendment, taking into account knowing each other and giving a chance to the new members to get to know each other and to campaign and get elected.  Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are two proposals; one is that the elections of the Commissioners takes place after one month. The second one, which is closer to the proposal of the Committee, is that it takes place at the fifth sitting. That is what hon. Katirima has proposed.  

We need to start with the amendment that is furthest from the proposal. So, I would now like to put the question to the proposal by hon. Lumumba that the election of the Commissioners takes place one month after the opening of Parliament.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the circumstances, we have the proposal of hon. Katirima, that the election of the Commissioners takes place at the fifth sitting. I now put the question -(Interruption)- Please, can you allow me to put the question before you start voting. That vote is not valid. 

I now put the question that the elections of the Commissioners be held at the fifth sitting of a new Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proposed Rule 6 has been amended to read “fifth sitting” instead of “first sitting”.

MR AKAKI: Madam Speaker, are we talking of the first sitting or fifth sitting? I think there is confusion between ‘sitting’ and ‘meeting’ as defined in the definition section because ‘sitting’ is actually a period (Interjection). Yes, there is.

Madam Speaker, I would like us to draw the attention of this House to the definition of the term ‘sitting’ according to the proposed Rules of Procedure, page 3. 

“Sitting means a period during which Parliament is sitting continuously without adjournment.”  

When you talk about fifth sitting, it means Parliament will have to be adjourned five times. But I think what this House has pronounced itself on is on meetings -(Interruptions). Madam Speaker, first of all, I need your protection.  

Secondly, I would like Members to talk from an informed position. We are looking at the Rules of Procedure and in the definition section, ‘meetings’ and ‘sittings’ are defined. These are two different things (Interjection). But I am helping you my friend. I am just helping you –(Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order basing on Rule 53 of our Rules of Procedure which says: “No Member may speak on any question after it has been put by the Speaker, that is, after the voices of Ayes and Noes have been given to it.” 

Is the hon. Member in order to contravene Rule 53 of our Rules of Procedure, and take us back and waste our time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Member needed clarification.  If you look at the definition of ‘meeting’ - “meeting means any sitting or sittings of Parliament commencing when Parliament first meets after being summoned at any time and ending when Parliament is adjourned sin die.”

When you look at the definition of ‘sitting’ –“sitting means a period during which Parliament is continuously sitting without adjournment and includes any period during which it is in Committees.” 

For instance, we have been sitting without adjournment since 2.30 p.m. This is a sitting. So there is no problem. There is no confusion at all.  Proceed, Rule 7.

The proposed Rule 7: 

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, we inserted a new Rule 6 but we did not deal with the old Rule 6. I propose that we retain the old Rule 6 and number it accordingly. It says: “In case of any doubt, these rules may be interpreted by the Speaker.”  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you state the sequence of your numbering?

MR WACHA: It is going to confuse me, Madam. I think we leave it to the drafting people to do the renumbering. Now the new rule 7 –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let me put the question to Rule 6.  I now put the question that the proposed rule, as amended, remains part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Proposed Rule 7:

MR WACHA: The proposed Rule 7 deals with election of Members to the East African Legislative Assembly and reads: 

7(1) Members of the East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be elected in accordance with the Rules set out in Appendix E.” 

Appendix E will be the Rules we passed here sometime last year, I think in October, and were published as Legal Notice No. 8 of 2001. It is a long thing; I do not know whether Members want me to go through them again. I am sure Members still recollect what they passed.

(2) Members of the Assembly shall report to Parliament on the activities of the Assembly at least once in a year in accordance with the rules set out in Appendix F.” Appendix (F) is self-explanatory, Madam.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the proposed Rule 7 does form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)

Proposed Rule 8:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, the proposed Rule 8 is taken from the old Rule 7 and deals with procedure in the House in cases that are not provided for correction of precedence. 8(1) reads: 
“In case of any doubt” – sorry it seems to be a duplication, Madam Speaker, I am very sorry it seems they have duplicated the whole rule 6 and the – (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Whole 6 in this one?  

MR WACHA:  So, I do not know what to do, can you advise me on what procedure I can take?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, it seems that when we were dealing with this rule you reinstated this position; so we have actually passed them under rule 6 and there is no need for rule 8(1). 

MR WACHA:  But rule 8 has other matters.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The new rule 8(1) is what we have already passed.

MR WACHA: It is what we have already passed, but can I finish my sentence - and then 8(2), is there any question of procedure that is not provided for? (Mr Musumba rose_)

MR ISANGA MUSUMBA: I think we are getting into a little bit of confusion, and it is going to become difficult to follow.  We have these documents and you have ruled that this document is going to be the master copy.  What I expect to read is the numbers as they appear here.  If there has been an insertion, it is not for us to re-number them, that will be redrafting, otherwise we shall not be able to follow.  

Now what I expect, Madam Speaker, is the Clerk should be calling out draft Rule No. 7, which is entitled “Procedure and Precedents” in case it is not provided for, it is upon which the Chairperson will say whether he has any amendments before that or after that then we will be able to follow.  Otherwise if we shift from this draft plus the numbering as done, we will get confused and we shall never be able to follow.  

May I propose that the Clerk sticks to this original draft of calling the numbers as they appear in the draft, regardless of what insertions we have made; it is the only way we will be able to follow in a logical manner.  Madam Speaker, I seek procedural guidance on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can the Clerk henceforth read the page and the section in the Interim Rules, and then we shall get information from the chairperson whether he has a proposed amendment on the page and section.

PROF. KAMUNTU:  We have the rules which have been operating as inherited from the 6th Parliament; these are the rules we have been using.  Therefore they are the rules we are really amending because – (Interruption) Madam Speaker, I need your protection. 

The green book which hon. Isaac Musumba is pointing out was distributed to Members and was never adopted by the House, and therefore it cannot be a master copy.  The master copy must be the rules as they have been adopted, and the amendment must be to the existing rules. That is where the confusion is; we must amend the existing rules, not the one that was distributed and never adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think in the chairman’s introduction, he informed you that this has been a continuous process.  There was a stage already reached by the 6th Parliament in amending these rules.  They are contained here, and I decided that it was unfair for you to jump from this directly without going through what had already been proposed, why these are amendments. The work is not starting today.

Proposed Rule 7:

MR WACHA: Madam, on page 10, we had already pronounced ourselves on rule 6.   I propose that we delete rule 7 and then continue with rule 6 with the following formulation - Rule 6, will now be 6(1). We are now following this book as advised by hon. Musumba:  

6(1) In case of any doubt, these rules may be interpreted by the Speaker. 

(2) Any question or procedure not provided for in these rules shall be decided by the Speaker, whose decisions shall be final .

We propose that interpretations of these rules and any decisions made under sub-rule (1) shall be compiled by the Clerk to form precedence to be followed by the House or committees in subsequent meetings.  I beg to move, Madam.  

MR ISANGA MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, the proposal that whatever rulings are made in this House, they are going to be compiled and they form precedents in this House, is not new.  This proposal did come up earlier in the discussion of these rules and some of us had a problem with this particular proposal, which I now want to share with the Members.  

You see, Madam Speaker, the way the House operates under the direction of the Speaker is that one is an arbiter, but of a type against whose decision you cannot appeal to another authority on matters made by the Speaker in his or her Chair.  Now, when you start documenting whichever ruling the Speaker has made, you are expecting that these rulings will form part and parcel of precedence that will be binding upon somebody.  

Now, the first question is; will the Speaker be bound by his/her own ruling?  Supposing the Speaker ruled one way yesterday and today she rules or he rules a different way, will a Member stand up and say “Madam Speaker or Mr Speaker, last week you ruled one way and now you have ruled another way, therefore you are bound by your previous ruling?”  

If that is the position, then when will the Speaker clear his position? If the previous ruling was wrong or was erroneous, what opportunity will the Speaker have to make a better ruling if he is going to be bound by the original ruling?  Now, that is even more interesting.  

If you read 6(1), can you use 6(1), which says that in case of doubt the Speaker’s ruling is final? The Speaker’s ruling yesterday was final, the Speaker’s ruling today is final; which of the two final rulings, if they are in contradiction, will you apply? 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I have a problem documenting precedents of the Speaker’s rulings because you tie the Speaker’s hands; one to cure the defects of a previous ruling if they were erroneous, but also two, you are undermining the Speaker’s right to rule, which has been created or which is inherent in 6(1). I do not know whether Members understand my problem, but my problem is real and present.  I thank you.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, maybe, I should clarify before other Members come in. We are talking about cases of doubt which arise under 6(1). The cases of doubt arise because there are no provisions set in these rules. The reason why we are trying to pass these rules, and the reason why these rules apply in this House is because we want some amount of certainty in the operations of the House. If there were no rules, then we would not know what we are going to do next week or tomorrow.  

The new rule is saying that if there is any doubt, the Speaker will resolve it, but it is only fair that if such a doubt arises again next year, the person who is presiding over the House must be consistent. That is all that this rule is trying to say. 

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this raises very fundamental questions - (Interjection). Can I be protected?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you address the House through the Speaker, not from where you are seated.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I think we need to be very careful about the position held by the chairman of the committee.  A lot of decisions made by the Speaker are made on the spur of the moment.  I think if a decision is going to be binding, it ought to be a decision over which someone has taken considerable time of thinking, research and so forth.  

I can understand what hon. Ben Wacha is saying, but we should also understand that these decisions are made in a very short time. The lawyers refer to some of these as ‘heats of passion’ and what have you. Now, if you have not gone back to your chambers and referred to the rules and said this is how it should be, it would be very unfair for the Speaker to be bound by this decision. 

I want to totally agree with hon. Musumba that really the Speaker should be allowed, even to go back and say “wait a minute, yesterday I think I made a terrible decision; today I must improve on what I did yesterday”.  So, I think we should not allow this binding thing. And in any case, these decisions are very highly political, they are not legal and politics changes every minute. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS DORAH BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring the attention of this House to three salient points. First, when we are talking about fundamentals in law or rules, the issue of certainty is paramount. It is very important for us to know that if the Speaker ruled like this today, tomorrow he is likely to rule like this. And we presume that the Speaker will rule on the basis of principles.

Secondly, precedents are not binding, they are persuasive, and therefore, if the Speaker comes across a vital point or principle he should have addressed but never addressed, he is free to go ahead and explain to the House why there is a deviation. Therefore, the fact that we have precedents will not bind the decision of the Speaker at any given time.  

Thirdly, the latest final decision of the Speaker is what holds. This is how we interpret the law.  If yesterday the Speaker decided a, b, c and he comes across another principle of law or issue and decides that ‘d’ should be added, then a, b, c, d will be the new position. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two issues here and they should be distinctly addressed. First, we are saying, should the Speaker be consistent in his or her management of the House in case of some doubts which are not cleared by the rules? What the honourable chairman of the committee is bringing forward is that that consistency is very important and it should be there.

Secondly, what hon. Musumba is raising, I think, has been responded to by my honourable sister Byamukama. I am not a practising lawyer, but what I studied is that whereas the decisions of a higher body can bind the lower one, this body which takes the original decision, can at any particular time be influenced by different circumstances and environment, which it can justify and depart from that decision.  

Therefore, I would go along and support what the honourable chairman is saying, because it is in no way endangering the principle of the Speaker departing from his decision. And I think hon. Musumba’s fears surely should now vamoose.  

MR FRANCIS AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can understand the concerns expressed by my colleague, the hon. Musumba.  I think he has got very genuine concerns.  Now, my proposal is that in order not to appear to be making this precedent binding, we could re-structure this particular one to simply provide for such a precedent as a guide to the House and its committees. In which case, you are not really saying ‘precedents which will bind’ but which will ‘guide’. And this may or may not be changed as you go along the line.  That is my proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, what the Attorney General is proposing is that we probably delete the words “to be followed by the House or committees in subsequent meetings”. Is it that right, Attorney General? Would that make you – (Mr Ayume rose_) 

MR AYUME: That is correct!

MR MWONDHA: I thought the Attorney General was saying: “to guide the House and committees in subsequent meetings”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Instead of “followed” we substitute “guide”.

MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, the operative word really should be “guide” rather than “to be followed”.  You see, when you follow precedents, then it is like you are bound.  That is my proposal.  But I think it can be left for the draftsmen to find –(Mr Wacha rose_)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I have no problem with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No problem?

MR WACHA:  No problem!
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, the difficulty which was looming on the horizon was the binding element of the provision. But it has been proposed that instead of “followed” we use “guide” and I think that should leave everybody happy. So, I now put the question – (Interjection)

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of Members to the fact that, in making these rules of Parliament - I am a member of the Committee - we should bear in mind that we are making rules to expedite the legislative process of this House, and we should not make rules that should actually fetter the process through which we make the necessary rules and laws in this House. 

I am saying this because there may be lack of in-depth or serious appreciation of terms used. For instance, when we say that the Speaker’s decision shall be final, final to what extent? There are even laws we pass in this Parliament saying that the decision of this and that body shall be final.  What it actually means is that for as long as that body or person is acting within the four corners of that law, you cannot challenge that body or person. But for as long as that person goes out - you remember the UCB saga when we were saying that it seems the power went outside the ambit of the mandate, then we questioned.  

We have also procedure for questioning the powers of the Speaker when the Speaker becomes ultra vires. I wanted to clarify that, but most important, and I am appreciative of the Attorney General’s proposal that in order to quicken the process through which we make laws, we should not fetter the discretion of the Speaker. 

The Speaker can make decisions for as long as there is certainty that today he or she has done this, tomorrow he or she is likely to do this, so that whatever is done is predictable. That is all we are looking for, and that whatever he or she does becomes a guiding rule in future, not necessarily binding.  Thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  In decision science, not all precedents are binding, only to the extent that they are rational and consistent. Therefore, a precedent which is not rational, which is not consistent in the new circumstances that are being faced, cannot be binding. If it was wrong, it cannot be binding when the right situation comes. That is why, in the development of science, if at a certain stage the world was supposed to be square and science shows that it is round, you cannot say we are bound by precedent, therefore, it must continue to be square. No!

Therefore, here I would go along with the Attorney General’s advice that the precedents are only a guide to the extent that they are consistent, to the extent that they are rational with the previous decisions. If they are not, we take new decisions as well.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, I think let us leave this point. I think everybody is in agreement that one does not want to tie the hands of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker for the future, and that the word “guide” is sufficient to give leeway to the Speaker or Deputy Speaker to handle business.
  
MR JACOB OULANYAH: I thank you, Madam Speaker. From the onset, let me state, I do not agree with the word “guide”, and these are the reasons. What we are talking about here in these rules are interpretations of the rules where there is doubt, not just any other decision.  We are talking about the rules, in which case if the Speaker pronounced himself on this area of the rules where there is doubt, it becomes an extension of the rules to that extent. And to that extent, it is binding on the House, it is binding on the committees. It is not binding only on the Speaker who has made the decision. 

I will give you the same situation, which has been talked about by hon. Dora, of the courts.  The High Court can make a decision, and it is not bound by that decision but anybody else is bound by that decision.  So, it is not guiding the House.  There is a rule that is made, if there is doubt in a particular rule that has been released significantly, and the Speaker pronounces himself or herself on it, it becomes an extension of the rules, and therefore, binding on whoever will have applied that.  

If circumstances, however, arise of a similar nature, which will force the Speaker to make a new decision based on the new circumstances, then a new precedent is set. No precedent is fixed; precedents can be changed. So, the guide cannot substitute the situation foreseen by the proposed rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What do you propose?

MR OULANYAH: I am proposing that it remains as it is!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think we have had sufficient debate on this matter; let me now put the question -(Mr Musumba rose_)
 
MR MUSUMBA ISANGA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. As the Member who initially raised the flag on this matter, I am happy with the way the debate has gone. My concern has been articulated; the guidance of the Attorney General has been very good and very enlightening. It is going to save this House even a controversy as to how we define the “Speaker” because if a matter is being interpreted by the Speaker, and in that Chair is seated the Deputy Speaker, is that binding on the Speaker who is the Speaker and so on?  So, to get all these questions, Madam, I am happy with the guidance as set out by the Attorney General. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, the rules we are making are the rules that are going to guide the House for the rest of the years of the 7th Parliament; and I would like everyone to go home happy with the rules we are making. In the circumstances, I propose that we adjourn at this stage. Let us reflect further on this particular provision and we resume on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. ready to proceed with the rest of the rules. So, the House is adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.25p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 April 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


