Tuesday, 6 April 2010

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am very happy to welcome you from the brief recess we had after hosting His Excellency, Zuma, the President of South Africa. I would like to thank you for the reception that you exhibited. I was not able to be with you because I was away on duty.

I hope that you have come with extra energy to cope with a lot of important work that we have to finish before Parliament is prorogued. Normally Parliament is prorogued at the end of April but because of the much work we have to finish, I may have to extend this to mid May. However, it would be useless to extend it if you are not going to be available. So, I really appeal to you to at least concentrate, for this month and the two weeks of May, on parliamentary work.

As you know we have important Bills that are intended to reform our electoral laws. These are very important and very relevant to what you are currently doing in your constituencies. Please, spare that time for that business.

During the short break, two of our Members lost their dear ones: hon. Sekikuubo lost a mother and hon. Ben Wacha lost a brother. I suggest that we observe a moment of silence in honour of the departed.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

2.47
MR MILTON MUWUMA: (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Mr Speaker, three months ago, we lost one of our own, hon. Henry Balikowa, and while we were paying tribute to him, this House resolved that the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister of Internal Affairs do restrain the sugar cane trucks from moving at night using the main road. The trucks have got alternative routes within Mabira Forest. We thought that would solve the problem, but of recent these trucks are back on the road.

Last week, one of the presidential advisors in charge of Eastern Uganda was involved in an accident caused by one of those trucks. As I talk, he is still hospitalised in Jinja Hospital. I have a fear that if no action is taken soon, we are most likely to continue losing serious citizens of this country.

My concern is to find out how far the Minister of Internal Affairs has gone as far as implementing that parliamentary resolution is concerned. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, unfortunately neither the Minister of Works and Transport nor that of Internal Affairs is here. But since the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business is here, let us see whether he has anything to say about what you have presented.

2.49
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Well, I have only partly heard the statement, so I am not in a position to provide a response. What I can say is that we shall investigate and report within 13 days.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, on Thursday.

2.50
MR CHARLES GUTUMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of importance to our farmers – I do not know whether it is of national importance, but in Lango sub-region, we have complaints from almost all the commercial farmers who planted hybrid sunflower seeds supplied by Mukwano Industries - that they have failed to germinate.

The farmers are complaining about the loss they have incurred. This also includes the agents who received the seeds from Mukwano. For example, one of them, Esther Ikura had bought 210 sackets of one kilogramme each at a total cost of Shs 2.3 million and after supplying them to the farmers at Shs 1,000 each, they failed to germinate. The farmers are now seeking redress because their efforts to have this issue addressed by Mukwano Industries have not yielded any results.

Several farmers in my constituency approached me on this matter, among others, Otim Martin, Okello David, Okello Anoch and Opio Opitu who had planted some acres with sunflower seeds, but which have failed to germinate in this rainy season. Our farmers have incurred loses during the season for the first rains. I wonder what the House can do to help these farmers. 

Here is a sample of the seeds –(Laughter)– which I would like to lay on the Table. Mr Speaker, this is one kilogramme of sun flower seeds. It is labeled “Hybrid sunflower, Pana Quality Seeds”. It is a one-kilogram bag No. 7351. I would like to lay it on the Table.

I think the issue here is that the committee concerned should immediately move to help these poor farmers who have already lost during this first season. They have asked me to draw the attention of the House to this matter for which they were doing their best to also address poverty and what we call Prosperity-for-All. They welcome His Excellency the President in Lango sub-region but with this negative tendency, they wonder how long it will take them to become rich. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This is an important matter that requires investigations. You may not get the answer now, but we will ask the Minister of Agriculture to carry out an investigation and report within two weeks. Parliament has decided to release the exhibit to you so that you can use it in your investigations, but return it as soon as possible. Yes, hon. Kikungwe.

2.54
MR ISAA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Thursday last week there was a disaster in my constituency in which over 220 homes had their roofs blown off. Two churches also experienced the same problem. Many people are right now homeless. 

Yesterday, the Red Cross extended help to the people, but the kind of help they brought was not need-oriented. While people were busy looking for somewhere to stay, they were giving them plastic cups and plates. This means that the problem is still a big one. I would like to sound a call to the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to know that something wrong has happened and to respond accordingly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. I think the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness has heard. However, I think we must express appreciation to the Red Cross, what they had is what they gave although this does not stop others from making other efforts. Otherwise, your concern is noted. Although the responsible minister is not here, the Prime Minister has heard and I think this is something upon which Government should take immediate action to assist.

2.56
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In accordance with the provisions of the Budget Act, by 1st April, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on behalf of His Excellency the President, is supposed to have laid the National Budget Framework Paper, which embodies a three-year macro-plan and estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2010/2011, on the Table.

Of course this was not possible because the date came around Easter holidays. However, today is the 6th of April – you have just communicated that we only have a few days to proroguing Parliament, but at the same time the Act gives us only 45 days, from 1 April to 15 May, within which to submit a parliamentary report with recommendations on the National Budget Framework Paper. Today is 6th April, but I am not seeing such documents being laid on the Table for Parliament to begin its work.

I would like to know from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when this document will be availed to Parliament for Members to effectively start work on the National Budget Framework Paper before Parliament is prorogued. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Yes, Minister of Finance.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for her concern.

I want to inform the House that we did forward this framework paper within the law. It was up to the administration of Parliament to put it on the Order Paper –(Interjections)– it is not on the Order Paper, but it is in the possession of Parliament. That is the information I can give.

THE SPEAKER: Delivered to who?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, It was delivered to the Office of the Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall find out, but I have not seen it. 

Okay, we have exhausted the important points that were to be made. I personally want to take this opportunity to welcome the new Member of Parliament for Rukiga County. You are most welcome and congratulations. (Applause) I expect you to serve all the people of Rukiga County. You should not serve only those who voted for you. I also expect you to work harmoniously here with Members on both sides of the House; they are all your friends.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Reagan Okumu): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Forensic Investigation of National Social Security Fund of Uganda by the Auditor-General’s Office, covering the period January 2005 to November 2008. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee handle and report to the House after the study.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT, THROUGH THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, TO APPOINT AUDITORS FROM THE OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FROM THE YEARS 2005/2006 TO 2008/2009

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you are aware that Article 163(9) of the Constitution provides that the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General shall be audited and reported upon by an auditor appointed by Parliament. This very provision is replicated in the National Audit Act of 2008, which further provides that these accounts shall be prepared within three months to the end of the financial year and submitted to the auditor for audit.

We as ministry of finance, got communication from the Clerk to Parliament dated 22 August 2008 in regard to this. In that letter, the clerk requested the ministry to initiate the process of procuring an auditor for this purpose and submit proposals to Parliament for an appointment. These proposals would also include the fees that each bidder would have quoted for doing this job.

Mr Speaker, this motion is moved at the request of the Clerk to Parliament and the identification of auditors and submission to Parliament, and the request to appoint auditors to that office has been hitherto performed by the minister responsible for finance.

Section 36 of the National Audit Act is silent on who handles the appointment process, but given my duty as the minister responsible for implementation of the Act and in the absence of any provision to the contrary, I am under obligation to ensure that auditors are appointed for this purpose.

In addition, Mr Speaker, Parliament requested, as I have just said, that the ministry do identify for Parliament to appoint an auditor to audit the accounts of the Auditor-General for the three financial years ending 30 June 2008, and we have accordingly identified auditors for the three years plus another financial year, 2008/2009, which is also ended. 

During the four years ended 30 June 2009, the Office of the Auditor-General was financed under vote 131 to cover Headquarters, Directorate of Central Government, Directorate of Statutory Bodies and the Directorate of Local Authorities. Accordingly, the Office has an accounting officer, who is responsible for accountability of the funds appropriated for the office.

In the selection process, contracting for the audit has been undertaken through the Financial Management and Accountability Programme, FINMAP, and the following has been done in consultation with the Auditor-General:

i) 	The procurement process proceeded using Government procurement procedures applicable to FINMAP. 
ii) 	A request for expression of interest was advertised using the open domestic bidding method; six firms submitted their submissions of interest as follows: 

a)	M/S Johnson & Nyende Certified Public Accountants
b)	M/S JR and Associates
c)	M/S Springs and Associates
d)	M/S Mungereza & Kariisa Certified Accountants
e)	M/S FCK & Associates
f)	M/S PKF Uganda Certified Public Accountants. 

Out of the six firms, three were short listed and accordingly invited to submit technical and financial proposals for the assignment. Those firms are PKF Uganda Certified Public Accountants, M/S Mungereza and Kariisa Certified Public Accountants and M/S Springs and Associates.

Upon evaluation of the technical proposals, M/S PKF Uganda and M/S Mungereza and Kariisa qualified as technically able to undertake this assignment. 

The financial proposals of the two firms were evaluated and PKF Uganda Certified Public Accountants emerged the best evaluated bidder at Shs 40,179,000 compared to Shs 49,939,600 offered by the next bidder and consequently approved for award of the contract by the FINMAP Contracts Committee to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General for three years, ended 30 June 2008 at a contract sum of Shs 40,179,000. Contract negotiations were successfully held between the Government of Uganda and PKF Uganda and they are ready to sign the contract. 

Given that the Financial Year 2008 ended prior to conclusion of the procurement process, it has been considered efficient and prudent to contract the same auditors to audit accounts for this year as well. This was included in the contract negotiations and the auditors have offered to audit the financial year 2008/2009 at a fee of Shs 19,529,000 given the increased scope following enactment of the National Audit Act 2008, implementation of which led to the budget for the office of the Auditor-General -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can we - because there is a technical thing which I have seen, what do we do? Should we make some consultations with the - because I see an ethical and technical problem that is coming up. You know, the appointment of the auditors of the Auditor-General has been done before and there is a company which audited, forwarded the report and the report was submitted to an appropriate committee. Now, there is a problem. I think I should just suspend the proceedings so that we hold some consultations with you. I would like the Chairman of the Budget Committee, Public Accountants Committee and the finance committee to make some consultations.

(The House was suspended at 3.08 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.20 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister.

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, with leave of the House, I wish to withdraw this motion so that further consultations can be carried out and a proper procedure be identified on how the auditor can be appointed. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion withdrawn)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is withdrawn.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY

3.23
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Reagan Okumu): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the performance of National Forestry Authority from 2004 to 2007. 

Rule 154(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda mandates the Standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises to examine the reports and audited accounts of Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. 

The same rule further mandates the committee to examine whether their operations are being managed in accordance with the required competence, and where applicable in accordance with sound business principles and prudent commercial practices. 

Mr Speaker, I will not be going through the report in its entirety. I will skip the methodology, which is on page 1. 

On page 2, the establishment and mandate of the authority is also stated there; the functions of the National Forestry Authority are also there.

Funding and Financial Control

The funds of the Authority as provided for in Section 70 of the Act comprises of those appropriated by Parliament, fees charged from services rendered by the authority, revenue earned from activities of the authority, grants and gifts, donations from Government and from any other sources identified in accordance with the laws of Uganda.

The Board is required to perform its duties in order to ensure policy and strategic direction of the Authority in accordance with sound financial and commercial practice; and to ensure that the revenue earned is sufficient to meet the organisation’s expenditure.

Section 73 of the Act mandates the Board in consultation, and with the approval of the minister responsible for Finance to borrow money from any source as may be required for any purpose of the authority. 

On page 4, the status of NFA operations in sampled areas; they are all listed there.

One of the sampled areas is Kasana Kasambya Forest Reserve and one of the challenges in that area is encroachment. This is the main challenge faced by the National Forestry Authority officials in this area. 

The officials informed the committee that encroachment is aggravated by the lack of political support by the leadership in Mityana. They allege that hon. Minister, Vincent Nyanzi, the Resident District Commissioner and Brig. Kasirye Gwanga instigate the locals against National Forestry Authority officials thus putting them at great risk to perform their duties as required by law. They urged Parliament to work out a mechanism of protecting the staff of National Forestry Authority. 

The committee advised the National Forestry Authority officials to take people who interfere with their work to court and report Government officials to their minister who in turn should forward such matters to Cabinet or to the Leader of Government Business. 

Mr Speaker, on page 5 we have Matiri Central Forest Reserve and Mpanga Forest Reserve. Mpanga Forest Reserve is found in Fort Portal. The Fort Portal group of forest reserves covers 95 hectares. The reserve was meant to protect River Mpanga. However, the encroachment in the area is threatening the river. 

The committee saw buildings, a market, a mosque, Mpanga Secondary School and Kijaguzo Hotel, among other structures in the forest reserve. 

The committee further identified a sewerage tank for Kijaguzo Hotel built within the reserve and close to river banks. This meant that the water of the river which is used by other communities for consumption was getting heavily polluted. On the same page, there is Land Swapping. Members can read for themselves.

On page 7, Oruha Central Forest Reserve. Members call also read the activities and the challenges faced. 

On page 8, is the Budongo sector. I only wish to read the activities. The following activities are carried out in the Budongo sector:

1.	Forest protection through routine patrols and coordination.
2.	Eco-tourism as a non-extractive source of revenue earning.
3.	Research, training aid for Nyabyeya Forestry College.
4.	Sustainable harvesting through licensing. 
5.	Partnership arrangements with NGOs, government bodies, Uganda Wildlife Authority and local communities. 
6.	Forest improvement to include enrichment planting, climber cutting and general forest management.

Mr Speaker, on the same page is the Kagadi sector. The Kagadi sector is part of the Budongo system range; it is found in Kibaale District. It consists of 16 central forest reserves patrolled by 13 men.

The challenges faced by the Kagadi sector include: 
1.	Illegal activities which include encroachment for agriculture and settlement, timber harvesting and charcoal harvesting.
2.	Lack of standby National Forestry Authority security personnel.
3.	Tribal conflict, which is evidenced between the Banyoro and Bakiga.

The Executive Order of 2006 and the one of 2009 on Guramwa Central Forest Reserve to stop evictions in forest reserves have led to hostility of encroachers. 

The committee was informed that from 2006, approximately 3,000 families have encroached on the Kagadi sector, and the challenges that face this sector include encroachment. Seven out of the 11 forest reserves are heavily encroached upon. There are two cases already in court and there are a number of illegal title holders in the reserves. The committee was informed that some people even have land titles dated as far back as 1975.

The encroachers on Wambabya Forest Reserve, which is a catchment area of River Wambabya, claimed that they have permission from the district to encroach.

There is uncontrolled destruction of forests outside the central forest reserve and the rest hon. Members can read for themselves. 

On page 11, Arua Forest Reserve and the challenges are therein as well as the views of the National Forestry Authority and those of the Arua Municipality on page 12. 

On page 13, you can read the observations and recommendations for the Arua sector in particular. 

On page 14, Mount Keyi Forest Reserve, members can also read for themselves. Most of the challenges are the same except that there is a problem of smuggling of timber on page 15. The committee learnt that timber is purportedly smuggled from Congo, but some of it is from forests in Uganda. Such timbers are always impounded if discovered.

Concerning Gulu Forest Reserve, members can also read. On page 16, I wish to read the general observations and recommendations.

The committee made the following observations: 

The committee underscored the importance of forests as part of development and rejected the idea of planting trees and forests away from the town. 

The municipality does not have a physical plan for utilisation of Gulu Central Forest Reserve once it has been de-gazetted.

No intervention has been made by the Department of Physical Planning in the Central Government to guide the technical people in Gulu Municipality on how to prepare an acceptable physical plan for the town.

Gulu University was allocated land in the forest reserve but it has instead given it to an investor instead of utilising it as university land.

Recommendations

On page 16, the committee recommended as follows:
That the land identified for swapping with the National Forestry Authority should be in town and not a distant place from the municipality.

The greenery in the town should also be maintained.

That National Forestry Authority should agree with the municipality on the type of trees that should be planted. 

The National Forestry Authority should change the type of trees from Eucalyptus to other beautiful species, which provide a green belt for enhancing the eco-system.

Mr Speaker, for the rest of the recommendations, Members can read. I only want to emphasise recommendation six where the committee says that Gulu University should cancel the award of the National Forestry Authority land to a private entity to build a medical hostel and instead build a hostel itself to provide accommodation for the medical students instead of subjecting them to private hurdles. 

On the same page, Bugala sector in Kalangala District, Members can also read page 18. 

On page 19, I wish to read the challenges faced by the National Forestry Authority staff in that sector. Although power saw mills are illegal, they are widely used by the locals under the guise of clearing land for palm growing.

Massive clearing of private forest has exposed the government owned forest to greater danger as they remain standing in isolation.

Recent threats and attacks on forest staff have lowered the morale of staff.

Boats are not secure for use by the National Forestry Authority staff at the moment and this has affected the patrol system.

Control or regulation of timber cutting is difficult due to the numerous terminal points on the scattered islands.

There is an increase in illegal activities in Central forest reserves. The National Forestry Authority named five resorts that were occupying forest land illegally and had refused to pay licence fees to the National Forestry Authority. These include among others: 

(a) 	Pearl Gardens, which has 16 hectares owned by Capt. Birimumaaso.
(b) 	Panorama Camping Safari, which has four hectares owned by Major Kaka.
(c) 	Kingfisher Resort, which has one hectare owned by Mr Kisitu.
(d) 	Palm Beach, which has three hectares owned by Prof. Muyanda.
(e) 	Hornbill Resort, which has quarter an acre owned by a German man called Dick.

The Central forest reserves have unclear boundaries due to the high vegetation growth. The rest can be read on page 20. 

On page 21, there is a report on the relationship between the National Forestry Authority and Oil Palm Uganda Limited. Members can also read page 21. 

On page 22, we wish to note that while the committee visited and did not know that Oil palm Uganda Limited – we thought it was a private thing and we only discovered when we visited there that actually it is a Public-Private Partnership where Government of Uganda owns 10 percent shares and the 90 percent belongs to the investor. The Kalangala Oil Palm Trust was set up to oversee the activities of the company owing to the government shareholdings in the company. Attempts to find out the official shares from Government, from the Ministry of Finance, were futile, as we were referred to other ministries unsuccessfully.

Members can continue and read through page 22 and 23, and on page 24, 25 and 26, we wrote our general recommendations on what we have seen on the various forest sectors:

1.	The municipalities that would like to swap forest land with National Forestry Authority should follow the procedures in the law and should endeavour to maintain sufficient forest cover within the towns.

2.	Political leaders should support the National Forestry Authority to carry out its mandate and should desist from inciting the populace to take up land and encroach on forest reserves.

3.	The National Forestry Authority should carry out a dedicated programme to sensitise the people about the importance of forests and their benefits to the environment.

4.	The National Forestry Authority should start a programme where the locals neighbouring the forest reserves can acquire benefits from them, for example percentages of collections made as a way of giving back to the community. This will ensure harmony between the National Forestry Authority and those communities.

5.	Local authorities should not have powers on matters concerning any forest reserve. Forests should be centralised so that the National Forestry Authority is fully in charge of maintaining them.

6.	Like the Uganda Wildlife Authority, the National Forestry Authority should recruit and manage their own security guards to counter immediate encroachment and protect the central forest reserves instead of relying on the police alone.

7.	The National Forestry and Tree Planting Act of 2003 should be amended to offer protection to National Forestry Authority officials in the course of duty.

Mr Speaker, we now turn to the audited accounts of National Forestry Authority for the period ended June 2004 together with the opinions thereon of the Auditor-General.

Start-up Fund 

The Auditor-General reported that the Government of Uganda committed itself to provide initial budget support for the financial year 2002/2004. This was to help National Forest Authority (NFA) to start its operations in accordance with the terms of the Memorandum of Understanding signed with donors. However, by the close of the year, Government had not released the committed funds to NFA. This implies that failure by Government to provide counterpart funding would curtail the operations of the authority and would cause donors to withdraw all funding to the authority.

The Auditor-General advised management to put the case to Government to meet its obligation of the counterpart funding as agreed in the Memorandum of Understanding, to avoid the possibility of donors holding funds.

Management response

The accounting officer responded that the matter of Government failure to provide annual counterpart funding to the amounts indicated in the Memorandum of Understanding signed with donors, had been raised with both the government and the donors. However, Government support was expected to commence from the first full year of the NFA operations commencing in July 2004. 

The period to June 2004 was an interim period during which the National Forest Authority commenced its operations after being launched in April 2004. Since this was towards the end of the financial year, there were no budget provisions for financial support from Government for this fiscal year. NFA has since received minimum subvention from Government commencing in July 2004; NFA expects that the total amount committed by Government Ugshs 1.65 billion would be provided over the four year period covered by the Memorandum of Understanding.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that Government should always adhere to its contribution to fulfil the counterpart funding in order to avoid distortion in the flow of the committed donor funding.

Purchase of stationary 

The Auditor-General reported that Ugshs 12 million was paid for supply of a range of stationary items. Scrutiny of records, however, reveals that the stationary items were not recorded and taken on charge in the stores ledger. Furthermore, a record of issues and balances was not availed for audit. This implies that in the absence of documents like receipts and issues, the auditors could not confirm whether the stationary items were delivered and put to proper use.

The Auditor-General advised management to provide the missing documents and ensure that the guidance relating to receipts and custody of stores are followed.

Management response

The accounting officer responded that the said procurements were made in the initial period before NFA had a proper stores and stock system in place. The items were received and issued without being recorded in proper store ledgers.

Recommendation

The committee having verified the papers recommended that NFA should adhere to an established system so that issues like these do not arise again.

Withholding tax

The Auditor-General reported that withholding tax amounting to Ugshs 15,587,160 was not deducted from a payment for supply of goods and services to the authority totalling to Ugshs 389,678,984 contrary to the Income Tax Act 1997. The failure to deduct the 4% Withholding tax is an offence. Besides that, the offence attracts penalties such as fines by the Uganda Revenue Authority, which may subsequently affect the operation of the Authority.
 
The Auditor-General advised management to comply with the Income Tax Act, to deduct withholding tax from payments to suppliers of goods and services and remit the funds to Uganda Revenue Authority to avoid unnecessary penalties.

Management response 

The accounting officer responded that Section 36 of the Memorandum of Understanding that set up the fund, states that, “Donor funds cannot be used for the payment of import duties and taxes other than the local VAT”. All payments made to the suppliers in the period prior to 30 June 2004 were made from donor funds availed from the start-up funds. NFA did not make any payment to suppliers from revenue collected or subvention received from Government, hence no withholding tax was deducted from the payment made during the period, which was entirely from donor sources.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that National Forestry Authority should make a follow-up with the supplier and recover the said money within one month from the presentation of this report.

National Forestry Authority accounts for the period ended June 2005 together with the opinion of the Auditor-General:

1.	 Non-deduction of Withholding tax:

The Auditor-General reported that Withholding tax totalling Ugshs 61,179,824 and US$ 7,479.18 was not deducted from various payments to suppliers for goods and services. This contravenes the Income Tax Act 1997 and implies that NFA risks penalties from URA. The Auditor-General advised that the requirements should be complied with to avoid penalties. Management is also advised to recover Withholding tax from companies it did not withhold the tax from.

Management response

The accounting officer responded that most of the payments made to suppliers on 30 June 2005 were from donor funds availed through the start-up funds. Donor funds cannot be used for payment of import duties and taxes other than local VAT. NFA has since sought clarification from URA on the matter and is withholding taxes on all qualifying payments that it makes under the Income Tax Act 1997.

In the meantime, the Authority is discussing with URA an amicable solution to handle the matter of the taxes not withheld during the year.

Recommendations

The NFA should claim the money from the suppliers and inform the committee within a month from the presentation of this report.

The National Forestry Authority accounts for the period ended June 2007 together with the opinion therein of the Auditor-General:
1.	(a) Sawmilling, (b) Timber wastage (c) Price per cubic meter (d) Transportation.

I think honourable members can read the issues raised by the Auditor-General.

Management response

The accounting officer responded as follows:

This, I think Members can also read on page 32 and 33. On page 34, our recommendation is that the NFA should adhere to the PPDA rules where applicable.

On page 34 issues of governance were raised and I wish to read this. The Auditor-General reported that the NFA and Tree Planting Act Section 55 require the Authority to have a board of directors consisting of seven members, two of whom should be female. However, the board during the year of audit consisted of eight members which contravened the Act.

It was noted that the board expenses increased from Ugshs 76.7 million in 2005/06 to Ugshs 258 million in 2006/07, an increase of about 336%. Much of the expenditure was incurred in a period of about eight months. This implied that the board expenses had gone out of control due to increased meetings.

The Auditor-General advised management to ensure that the minister implements the provisions of the Act by reducing the number of board members to the required number.

Meanwhile, management was advised to control board expenses by guiding the number of board meetings. 

Management response

The accounting officer responded that the management had already put in place a mechanism to control the board’s expenditure, but the expenditure was high due to various meetings that were required to handle Mabira and Bugala forest reserves that had come under public scrutiny. Since these issues were resolved, not much expenditure beyond the approved budget should be expected. 

The issue of appointment of the extra member of the board was forwarded to the Minister of Water and Environment. The committee met the Minister in charge of Environment and she explained as follows:

•	She agreed that the number of board members should have been seven as provided for by the National Forestry Authority and Tree Planting Act. She further explained that at the time she appointed the said board, the previous board was well, as the executive director of the National Forestry Authority had resigned and there was a gap as some of the board members’ term of office had also expired.
	 
•	She had not received a handover report from her predecessor in the ministry and there was a need to put things right; and that after appointing seven people and noting that none of them was a professional in the field of forestry, she appointed Dr Buyinza, a forestry specialist, making them eight board members. She informed Members that the law allows the minister to bring in the required expertise. The Cabinet, she said, endorsed the board as appointed by the Minister of Water and Environment. 

•	The number of eight board members was not an issue at the time, but the need to ensure continuity and survival of the institution amidst the prevailing circumstances. The minister, however, took responsibility for her actions and apologised to the committee and the nation for the mistakes she made.

General observations 

The committee noted that the National Forestry Authority and the Department of Forestry are very independent from each other and further recognize the importance of utilising research to improve the functions of the National Forestry Authority.   

All seized timber is taken to the National Forestry Authority head offices for auction; whether it is from Arua or Kabale, they must all first be ferried to the National Forestry Authority headquarters in Kampala. The committee noted that this prevents potential buyers in different regions from accessing this timber.

The committee was also informed that timber cut with a power saw is contraband and if found, is seized. This is because about a third of the timber cut is wasted when one uses power saws.

The National Forestry Authority desires to demarcate its boundaries with pillars that can easily be identified and as a means to limit encroachment. However, it is a very expensive venture as the areas that would need to be covered are vast.

The committee noted that National Forestry Authority has carried out repairs and maintenance work on most of its facilities around the country.

Recommendations

The National Forestry Authority should work closely with the Department of Forestry at Makerere University to get further insight into forestry research.

The regional timber yards should be established on a case-by-case basis so that people in those regions where timber has been seized can take advantage and purchase it.

The National Forestry Authority should construct pillars to demarcate their boundaries. Although it is expensive, it will be a worthwhile venture in the long-run.

The National Forestry Authority should verify the status of all its structures in different parts of the country and provide Parliament with a report.

Conclusion

The committee notes that although the National Forestry Authority has endeavoured to carry out its functions and objectives as enshrined in the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act of 2003, it is engulfed by a number of challenges. Most important is the persistent problem of encroachment in nearly all the central forest reserves, coupled with the desire to do away with the forest reserves in most of the major towns around the country. This is further aggravated by lack of political support from the local leadership in a number of areas. Thus the issue of encroachment needs to be tackled systematically by Government.

The staff of the National Forestry Authority should be protected and well-equipped to protect the forest reserves in order for the nation to reap from their benefits. The management should also ensure that the National Forestry Authority is run in line with sound business principles and in accordance with the governing laws in place, which emphasise on the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act of 2003 and the National Forestry Authority and Tree Planting Act.

Mr Speaker, and honourable members, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I must thank you for efficiently presenting this report. We have followed it. Although I was fearing a 37-page report, you have been able to do it. I thank you very much and the members of the committee. Hon. Members, this is the report and –

3.56
MR JOHN LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very comprehensive report. 

On page 2, the first functions of the National Forestry Authority are to develop and manage forests. A matter which is of great concern to people in the rural areas is that as of now, you find the National Forestry Authority signpost in any cluster of trees – they are putting their signpost everywhere. Even on bamboos, which are really the main source of building materials for some of us – because some things we have used since time immemorial - you find these people putting their signposts there stopping people from utilising this natural asset. This is a very serious matter for people in rural areas because they cannot harvest what they have been harvesting for years. What is the alternative? I think they should develop their own forest and manage it, but if you find what God has given us, then you come with your signpost and then you say, “Now this is mine,” I think it is most unfair!(Laughter)

Secondly, on peri-urban and urban forests, about 20 years ago, the World Bank gave this country US$ 5 million for urban and peri-urban forests. There was a deliberate move to protect the towns by planting trees – there was an argument as to whether Namanve should be destroyed or protected and the part of the money given was supposed to develop Namanve into a very good forest to protect Kampala; but now it is gone. I am saying this because land for building in urban areas is becoming no more and most urban councils have gone into negotiation with the National Forestry Authority to destroy existing forests within towns – buying land outside. 

A case in point; we have a very good teak forest in Kitgum Town, and this forest is more than 10 years, but the town council has negotiated with these authorities and they have bought land some eight kilometres away - they want to destroy these beautiful trees! When I received this information, I tried to intervene, but they are saying that they have already bought the land and the trees must be cut down - very beautiful trees! I hope the committee will help me and intervene in this matter.

Mr Speaker, I do not know how sa millers are given licences to cut forests. I do not know what percentage goes to the Authority and how much the saw miller gets. Last year, I was building and the nearest source of timber was Abera Forest in Gulu. There were seven companies with power sawmills. Out of the seven, only one was selling timber to the locals. The rest were telling us that their timber was not for sale; yet they were felling the timber and bringing it this way.

The worst thing I discovered is that even some of the forest officers have machines that fell trees and get timber. If you allow game wardens to start poaching, there will be no game. I think the forest officers are there to protect the forests. They should not indulge in this practise of converting themselves into businessmen and women. I think the Authority should deal with those who fell trees from upcountry and deny the locals the right to buy.

I have seen the report talk about taxes.  Donor funding is not used for payment of taxes, including VAT. They do not allow their money to be used for paying any taxes. The argument is that they are not taxpayers of Uganda. I see VAT is not being exempted here, but VAT is the main one to which they say, “No, our money cannot be used for paying VAT.” 

I think it would be of interest if the committee finds out the proportion of money the Authority gets from one tree that is given to these sawmillers. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.03
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report just presented. 

But, Mr Speaker, I seek the guidance of the chairperson of the committee. I listened attentively, but I also know that I have been in this House a little bit longer. I have also had an opportunity to serve as a member of the Committee on State Enterprises. Why I am a bit at a loss is because all along, I thought we have the Committee on Natural Resources, which in most cases deals with the policy aspects of the ministries and state enterprises. Then we have the Committee on State Enterprises, which is the equivalent of the Public Accounts Committee for the parastatals. I expected the chairperson and the committee, after having considered the Auditor-General’s report regarding all the malpractices within the NFA, which have resulted into suspension of the officers and the prosecution of others, to have concentrated more on financial aspects, failures and the breaches, which has been the practise of this House. 

But when you look at this committee report, whereas they delve into the other affairs of the committee, it looks more of a narrative of what transpired between so-and-so said this, so-and-so answered this. It does not give me, as a Member of Parliament, proper information to make real informed decisions. I would have expected that the honourable member, having been a member of PAC, but could be without the experience of the State Enterprises Committee, to have delved a lot - for instance, Mr Speaker, let me raise the issue of pricing. One area, which has been abused by NFA is the pricing of the logs. It has been recently investigated by the Auditor-General. Recently, he issued a fresh report, which has resulted into the prosecution of the current leaders of NFA.

But when you read this report, you can see that either the clerk of the committee is an amateur and did not give proper guidance to the committee or the committee chose to concentrate more on issues of policy, rainfall, research, Makerere working with – when we should have got a little bit more information about why NFA is not working like it is supposed to work; whether it is following the laws and whether all the accounting issues as raised by the Auditor-General have been complied with. 

Maybe the committee would have gone ahead to find out whether what the officers were reporting about the pricing was true or not. What the committee has only done is to become a mouthpiece of NFA before this Floor. This does not help this House to make an informed opinion and make further recommendations. I am at a loss and I would be glad if I am helped. I thank you, very much.

4.07
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

First of all, I would like to thank the committee for giving us this information as Parliament. And as a Member of the Natural Resources Committee, I also realised there are so many issues they are raising, which the committee, for the last four years and I think before I came here, had raised.

In 2007, as Members of the Natural Resources Committee, we moved here, on the Floor of Parliament, a resolution of Parliament urging Government to operationalise the very good Tree Planting Act, which was put in place by the Seventh Parliament. I was the mover, hon. Florence Ibi the commissioner was the seconder and hon. Faridah Najjuma. It was the sector minister that day, hon. Namuyangu, who made an assurance before this committee that they had enough money to operationalise this and to date, we have not seen this –(Interruption)

MR OLENY: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance based on the contribution that has been made by one of the honourable colleagues, and which obviously has put in doubt the capacity of this report that is before us to inform this House adequately for further discussion.

Listening to what hon. Mukitale is coming up with, personally I feel that, Mr Speaker, you needed to guide us on the report – I think it is lacking in the areas of its core mandate - so that based on your guidance, we would see how to  proceed.

THE SPEAKER: This is a report of the committee of Parliament. The committee made its report. So, you have to assess the report, adjust and approve on it as the case may be.  When the question comes, the committee report will be approved subject to the comments you will have made.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I was continuing to demand that as Parliament, the sector minister should tell us how much money and this report should have actually indicated for us how much money has been put in the operationalisation of the Tree Planting Act, which is a very good Act. At this point in time, when we are having the reality of climate change, when we are having bare mountains of Bududa becoming a disaster, I do not think anybody needs to over emphasise the point and the need to plant trees in this country. 

When we move down as Members of Parliament, urging our people to plant trees, they ask you, “Where are the planting materials?” You get stranded and look funny before the public. I also expected the committee to have looked at the performance of the Farm Income Enhancement Project, which is under NFA – (Interruption) 

MR OLENY: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. I want to be guided. We are here looking at the National Forestry Authority and I think it has been formed under a particular Act: The National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003. Is there another tree planting Act which my colleague is referring to apart from the one which the NFA is working on?

THE SPEAKER: I think you should have sought that information from the Member.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did mention that the Seventh Parliament did pass a very good Act, the Tree Planting Act, 2003 and it does exist. I would like to add again that the Seventh Parliament passed a loan – there is a component of tree planting called Farm Income Enhancement Project, and this component is being implemented by NFA. So, I expect that Parliament would be briefed in this report on how much this project has been delayed, because when we had just come here, it had problems. The Committee of Natural Resources has always been bringing issues about this project – the other component being agriculture. 

I would like also to agree with the committee that those of us who lost our ancestral land to create forest reserves are at times at a loss to explain how we benefit from these neighbours we host. The relationship is not symbiotic; it is more parasitic and more of enemity – as hon. Okello-Okello has put it; even getting timber for a school is not easy. Buliisa now hosts the bigger part of Budongo Forest, but I want to tell you that my community is a very distant relative of Budongo Forest. 

I would like to urge NFA to have a more human face that can work with the communities, and we strongly think that we the neighbours who host the vermin from these forest reserves would do better if they created boundary roads so that the neighbourhood became more of a symbiotic relationship than when you become very remote and inaccessible, which makes us pay a high price for being the neighbour and hosts of the forest reserves. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.15
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report which is a bit comprehensive. In the conclusion, we can see that the biggest challenge is encroachment. The second outcry is that they need political support to ensure that these forests are reserved. 

My concern is that we are talking about the God-planted trees, which should be reserved. But the ones which we have planted are not there. If they are there, they are still very few. In my constituency, I endeavoured to ensure that tree planting is given priority. But since then, Government seems not to be listening to me by supporting that initiative. I wonder when Government will come in to support that important initiative. We have not been concerned about the population increase in these areas. The population has shot up so high that the land which used to belong to NFA has been encroached upon due to population increase. 

In fact, some of these forest reserves in some towns, like those mentioned here, for example, we have one in Lira sub-county, which is in Lira Municipality called Terwa Forest Reserve. This is a case which, if you are to be the political leader in the area, you would really sympathise with the community. When you look at the functions of NFA, the community should participate in the tree planting process, but there are even no tree reserves – some people come from elsewhere and plant trees in this area when the community around is just watching. This has caused disrespect among the community and some of the community members have been thrown into prison for lack of cooperation.

So, we request Government through the ministry to come out and meet the community at their point of need and forge a way forward on how they can live together. If we want new forests to be planted there, then this is necessary. 

I have three forest reserves in my constituency, and we have tried to reserve two. But one of them has been a serious problem; and the committee also went there. To my surprise, we met the community without the committee going there to see what is on the ground. And when it came to the recommendations of the committee here, I think there are four recommendations, but they do not follow a case-for-case basis, and we do not understand how the committee is going to manage that. So, my appeal is that let the committee address them case by case, so that the communities in those areas are sensitised to understand the importance of the trees we are talking about. 

In some cases, there are no trees at all, but only gardens and houses. Now it is not easy to convince the people to leave such an area, except if you get for them land elsewhere, so that they leave these places which were planned for forest reserves. 

Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that in some areas, the staff of NFA are the ones involved, and we have discovered that in one of those forest reserves. The staff use some names, which are not even their true names. So, how are we going to manage these; because if you search for them using these details, you cannot find them, and these areas were left to “Whom it may concern.” 

For some areas, the past governments had given them to the communities to produce say cotton. Like in my area, it became a cotton project area, and those who were to cut down the trees, planted cotton and continued farming in these areas. Now, how are we going to manage this kind of area? I still believe that the recommendation given by the committee here should be implemented and then the committee should also involve the community in these areas if we are to succeed. If we ignore them, then we must plan as to where these people should move, because some of them have lived in these areas since time immemorial. 

My concern is that some of these areas need serious attention and need tree planting - I think for my area, we have already resolved that. At least every farmer should plant some trees along the lawns of their gardens and then spare some, about a quarter of an acre, where they can plant trees, but the challenge is that it becomes too expensive for the local community unless Government comes in. I think that is how we can best manage this disaster which we are causing ourselves. Thank you very much.

4.21
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the work done so far in bringing out some of the problems faced by NFA. I listened attentively to hon. Dombo’s contribution questioning the lack of statistics, arithmetic acumen, the curriculus and all the gymnastics, but I am also a member of the Natural Resources Committee and we have been visiting central forest reserves since 2007.

I have not yet signed a report brought to this House recommending or for a resolution of Parliament to de-gazzette or whatever, to sort out the problems of national forests we have in this country. So, whichever committee moves fast, out of their vigilance should not be blamed, they should be helped with good recommendations to make Uganda a better place for us all.

This brings me to question the issue of the board of National Forestry Authority. I am instigated to ask myself whether National Forestry Authority has become a fertile ground where politicians go to rest. Take the examples of some of the board members we have at the moment. We have hon. Baguma Isoke, Major Matovu, we have hon. Amongin Aporu; all were once in this House I think barely five years ago. When you see a board made up of politicians, I do not know what much we really expect - not that I doubt their leadership or their credibility, but you check the challenges being met by NFA. Some of them are being engineered by politicians. In fact, most of the challenges of encroachment are being beefed up —(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I was once a chairperson of this committee and one of the statutory authorities which experienced a lot of problems was National Forestry Authority. For one reason, Parliament established the Authority with a vote. Out of their own defiance, the board and the accounting officer chose to ignore the vote in preference for subversion. In this case, they would prefer that they get their budget from the ministry and leave whatever revenue they generate from source to run their own businesses. That is one of the reasons why the accounting officer has now landed in problems because he was getting the proceeds from the forestry authority and not declaring it, and not respecting the vote. 

We reported this anomaly to the House and Parliament directed that National Forestry Authority should be reverted back and the vote status restored. We do not know whether this happened, because short of that, it will be difficult for this statutory body to be held accountable, because one will not be able to trace how much money they have generated from their source; how much has been put to use properly; and to what extent the Auditor-General has been able to access the documents and the records of revenues generated. 

I, therefore, think that either the minister or the chairperson should be able to help us know whether the National Forestry Authority has been able to honour the resolution of Parliament to restore the vote status of National Forestry Authority. Because with this, we may end up looking at the policy component only, leaving out the core activities of the main report which should have occupied us at this moment really. Thank you.

MR ODUMAN: I just wanted to give information that the Member was questioning the capacity of the NFA board to function. That is actually why you find instances like if you go after Banda towards Jinja, there is a wetland on your left. Along the road you find two signposts standing side by side. One is reading: “NFA, this is a wetland. No encroachment” and then another one next to it is saying, “Private Mailo land, plots for sale”. (Laughter) So, who has the authority? (Laughter)

MS EKWAU: I thank my colleagues for the constructive information, but all this would still come back to what I was trying to explain. When I mention the issue of the board, it is not because I put the performance of the board members in disrepute, but one of the challenges really facing NFA is encroachment and most encroachments are coming out of political interference. Honestly, you have politicians heading the board and instigating the settlements in the forest reserves. What do you come with at the end of the day? This is food for thought; I do not want to open debate along these lines, but to me, I feel this is one of the reasons why we have performance of NFA in disrepute.

In fact, I sympathise with the Ministry of Environment and I give particular instances where hon. Jessica Eriyo has really been fighting so hard. Take the case of Mpanga Central Forest Reserve. I have seen the recommendation of the committee about swapping. I only have one problem with the questions of swapping. Most of the gazzetements that were done were to protect fragile ecosystems; now we are talking about swapping. 

We have just had a case of landslides in Bududa and this is not the only place. There are very many other environmental hazards coming out of the way we are handling the environment. When we end up swapping some of these areas, we are going to interfere with the fragile ecosystems. The beauty of Mpanga Forest Reserve to the people of Fort Portal is immense; one cannot really go ahead to provide the details, but it would affect the water levels, the drinking water these people are having and at the end of the day, I find a difficult problem with swapping because another good example is the bare hills of Rakai. Most of the hills are very bare and yet NFA would have come in full swing to engage in tree planting and cover the beautiful hills with trees. But what do we get there? Hills are bare and there is a lot of soil erosion. The gazetting was done to protect the fragile eco-system and this is an area around Lake Mburo National Game Park and will interfere possibly with Lake Kijjanibarora. It will possibly dry up because I do not think it would - most of the run-off and the waters are the ones that are protecting the beauty and Lake Mburo National Game Park is a result of - most of the animals are surviving on the water from this lake. When we go ahead and swap some of these areas and say, “Ok, NFA give us some land,” and then you do this, we are going to interfere with very many activities that would affect other creations that were meant to be the beauty of this country.

So, when time comes and the parent committee which is the Committee on Natural Resources brings recommendations to this House for your resolutions, I want the issue of swapping to be very clearly looked at because we are going to interfere with very many things that were predetermined and premeditated and at the end of the day we are going to have environmental hazards that will be very bad to our grandchildren. 

Possibly, on the last issue here, I want to be guided. Mr Speaker, Government has gone ahead and set up very many social services that the population demands in the forest reserves. You get very many schools, boreholes, health centres and roads. I do not know - NFA is a body that was constituted by Government. We are supposed to defend NFA, protect its activities and see that it performs well. But Government has used the forest reserves to sort out possibly the issue of encroachment. Now, where do we put the activities of NFA and the people who have settled in the forest reserves? This is a very big problem and it is continuing, not that it will stop today. And when it comes to times of politics like now, definitely there will be more activities and boreholes and schools will be constructed in forest reserves. What happens at the end of the day when Parliament now, through the Committee of Natural Resources, says, “We want to resolve to de-gazette or send off these people from the forest reserves?” What is going to happen? 

I am requesting Government to come up with a position. Either they stop putting in more developmental activities in the forest reserves or we resolve now and protect the forests and then we just make the place good for us all. 

I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Forest reserves should be protected and Uganda should be helped to remain the Pearl of Africa and it should not be helped to disappear. I thank you very much. 

4.34
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we should thank the committee for this good report because there are very many issues that have been brought out. There are very many issues that we did not know as Parliament.

According to this report, NFA has not done much to protect the forests in this country. According to the National Forestry Policy of 2001 and the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act of 2003, NFA has not satisfied us in as far as protecting forest reserves is concerned. There is a high rate of deforestation in this country and forest destruction now is recognised as a major factor that is leading to climate change. Remember what happened to Bududa recently? 

This country is part of the UN Agenda 21 and the Millennium Development Fraternity. Being a member of the UN Agenda 21, Uganda is expected to protect all existing forest reserves in this country but the rate at which forests are cut is alarming. Why should we kill our forests? This economy is environmental based and all our economic successes are based on the unique natural resources that we have in this country. 

There is a lot of corruption in NFA, which needs to be investigated. So many forests have been cut. If you move in Mpigi, there was once a very big forest reserve but as I speak, the forest has been cut; you cannot find any tree. In Mityana, many forests have also been cut and to our surprise, no replacements have been made. It is not only in Mityana but there are a number of areas where forests were so thick but now it is very surprising that you cannot find any tree. 

The National Forestry Authority has also not done much to sensitise communities. According to page 26, recommendation 3, it says that NFA should sensitise communities about the NFA roles and the benefits of environment conservation. NFA has not done that. In fact many communities do not even understand what National Forestry Authority means and what it does. 

Recently in Mpigi, the community was very angry. They were about to beat up these NFA officials. They were chasing them away saying, “Who has invited these ‘nfa’ officials?” (Laughter) They were referring to them as “nfa”, which means, “I am dying.” “Go away you “nfa” people, go away,” they would tell them. Such things happen because the community does not understand.  

Therefore, NFA should also strengthen the relationship between itself and the communities in the areas under the collaborative forest management. It should go ahead to set up local environmental committees who should deal with this hostile environment. These hostile communities should be handled by the local environmental committees set up by NFA. 

NFA should also consider the oil drilling project because if they do not set up measures, this holding project may affect the ecologically safe areas like forests. I think NFA should consider this as an important issue. 

Government should also observe the national tree planting day annually; it should declare it a public holiday to enable everyone participate in tree planting as it is in Rwanda. Rwanda has done a very good job in as far as tree planting is concerned.

Women should also be brought on board. Government should support their initiatives for sustainable adaptation to climate change because women have a very important role to play in as far as reducing the risks of climate change is concerned. It is the women who interact more with the environment than the men. 

Finally, we need a select committee to investigate National Forestry Authority’s performance. And this select committee should work hand in hand with the Natural Resources Committee and the Standing Committee on Statutory Authorities.

We also need another report on the performance of the National Forestry Authority because we are not satisfied with this one. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  The Chairman of Chairmen! (Applause)

4.43
CAPT. JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you very much. Since you have called me chairman of chairmen, allow me to join you, Mr Speaker, in congratulating my colleague, hon. Hudson Kakuru for having recently become one of us in Parliament. He was one of the chairpersons of the districts while I was their chairperson. 

I would like to make a few comments on the report. And one of them is on swapping. My sister, hon. Ibi, has just been talking about problems in the swapping of forests, which are in the municipalities with forest land outside. This has been a very big problem; we can see it even from this report that there is nowhere that the chairman and his team were able to find swapping properly done. It was not done in Arua; it was not done everywhere they went. Swapping of land between municipalities with forest land outside municipalities has not gone very well. 

The Ministry of Environment should come up with a very clear policy on swapping because it has failed to work. It has completely collapsed in Soroti because there are now plots in the forest area but there is no land that has been put aside for planting an ideal forest. And I am sure that when the committee went around, they could have found that also happening in many other areas. We were in Gulu a few weeks ago and the forest is being encroached upon but there is no land that has so far been got for swapping. 

The Minister of Environment should come up with a very clear policy on swapping of this land. The minister will tell us how clear it is because it doesn’t seem to be working. A clear policy would definitely work; it could be clear but not working at all. And the minister of course can also give us areas where swapping has worked because if it is clear, then it must have worked in some areas. That is a very serious matter because the committee rightly reported that it was a very big problem everywhere.

On the issue of encroachment, I would have loved the committee to have come up with a recommendation like, “Because of such and such a reason, such and such a forest reserve should be upgraded to a higher status for better protection.” There are forests like Budongo, which have got very rare animals like the white and black monkeys, chimpanzees, and rare African orchids – of course the committee could not have gone into those details but having interacted with the local governments, they should have come up with one or two areas that could be upgraded. 

If you look at Budongo Forest and the way it is being encroached upon - I am reliably informed that it is being encroached on at a rate of 15 percent – within the next 10 to 15 years, we shall no longer have Budongo and all the forests that have been upgraded to national parks have no safety. So I thought that the committee could have recommended that a forest such as Budongo be elevated to a national park status for better protection.

I am happy with the way the chairman has suggested that the security personnel in forest reserves should be trained like those of UWA. But it could be protected better if that area itself was turned into a national park.

On the issue of timber logging – timber sawing in forest reserves is where the biggest loophole is. One of my colleagues indeed mentioned that it is where the biggest loophole in NFA is because the forest officers and whoever is in the Forest Department have their own logging system. How else, Mr Speaker, could you have imagined that a forest officer had petty cash of Shs 900 million under his pillow if it were not because of such things? 

This goes back to policy; if there is no clear policy on timber logging in forests, then we shall have a lot of revenue being lost through timber logging. If you normally go to a forest in, for example, Bukwo in Kapchorwa there is a lot of timber just wasted most of the time. And there is no other policy that defines how that timber which is being wasted can be controlled. 

The issue of protection of forest staff; a lot of forestry staff have been demoralised. I am saying that because I interact with them quite often. Before I went to local government, I used to work with the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA), which works very closely with NFA; the other one was “wuwa!”, and this one is “nfa”. (Laughter) What a coincidence! “Nfa” with “Wuwa”.

The ministry concerned with the management of NFA should make sure that there is enough protection for the staff of NFA otherwise we shall continue seeing forests being depleted at a fast rate. The morale is very low. If you went to the headquarters of NFA now, there is total chaos there; you wonder who is who there. I sometimes go there to find out what is happening but there are all sorts of cases – witchcraft - I found a tail of a monkey had been put there – the ministry needs to do something about it. 

Lastly, on the issue of tree planting, which was brought up very eloquently by my colleague, hon. Mukitale, the Act is very clear on tree planting but it is very difficult to see where there is evident tree planting all over the country now.  When you go to Eastern Uganda, all the trees that you see in Mbale, Soroti, and everywhere were planted by Kakungulu. Kakungulu is long gone but you no longer see a tree planted by hon. Oketcho, hon. Otekat, hon. Mukitale - you can’t see those trees, which we can be remembered by. What has happened to us? 

Again it comes back to us. We are Members of Parliament. How can we help the Ministry of Environment to ensure that we plant trees along the highways of our roads so that we shall have something? Otherwise, climate change will sooner than later catch up with us.

We have a very big problem of deforestation. In Uganda, the rate of deforestation, I think is the highest in East Africa, again at the rate of 15 percent per year. So I would have loved for the committee to come up with forests, like the one I have mentioned, and Mabira, to be upgraded to a national park.

By the way once Mabira is upgraded to a national park, it will be very difficult even for Government to tamper with it. Sometimes when they remain forest reserves, it is very easy to de-gazette them but when they become parks, it becomes very difficult even for Government to tamper with them. So we have to be very careful with forests otherwise sooner than later, we shall lose our forests. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Haven’t we sufficiently handled this? We have a lot of business to handle and we only have one month before Parliament is prorogued. Most likely the minister would like to make a statement. We shall continue monitoring what is happening.

4.52
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. This report has two parts; the sampling by the committee and the reactions or report from the Auditor-General.

I want to emphasise that we need to assist the National Forestry Authority in as far as encroachment on forest reserves is concerned. The only way to address this problem is by opening the boundaries. Unless we open the boundaries, this problem will continue because many landlords do not have the money to open their boundaries. So the moment a person owns land near a forest reserve, he continues selling and many people have suffered.

I thank the committee that they sampled many National Forest Reserves across the country. I thank the minister because of recent they are opening boundaries in my constituency but many people have been affected. That is where the problem comes in, that many leaders don’t have the political will to assist the National Forestry Authority. Whom are we going to blame? People have been in the forest for 10 to 20 years. I want to appeal to this Government that even if we are to borrow money, let us do so such that we can open the boundaries and make sure that the problem is solved once and for all and we address the other problems -(Interruption)

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, my colleague is eloquently arguing that we need to open boundaries. I want to draw his attention to page 19 on the challenges faced by NFA staff, point number six. I don’t know whether these people who are occupying forest reserves are doing it because they don’t know the boundaries?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, maybe the minister will address that because I have ever visited Kalangala and I know that those people are just encroaching on the savannah part of the forest. They never destroyed any forest because even savannah is part of the forest reserve so when you build in the savannah, you have not really affected the trees but the minister will address that further.

Another issue that I want to address is that of environmental economics, which means sustainable utilisation of the forest reserve. I think the minister should come up with proper guidelines on how communities near these forest reserves will benefit from these forests. This is because everybody knows about oxygen. These people look at these forests and nurture them but when it comes to time for harvesting - and hon. Okello-Okello has actually raised this - all the timber is sent from upcountry to Kampala. How can a person from Buvuma again come to Kampala to buy timber and then take it back? 

Issues like firewood - if somebody has gone to the forest to collect firewood, why do you arrest him? Medicine - even if the country is developing, we entirely depend on these herbs, which we get from the forests. If somebody is digging for the roots of a tree and you say this man is destroying our environment - we should really come up with proper guidelines on how the communities near these forests benefit. This is because if the communities are assured that they can get a pole and put up a grass thatched house then this problem of encroachment will not be there because you can go, fetch firewood, timber, poles and you survive.

On the audited accounts, I thank the committee but there is one issue on which I want to advise; the withholding tax. This report is for the Financial Year 2003/2004. If Uganda National Forestry Authority by then didn’t withhold the tax, there is no way a committee of Parliament could advise NFA to go and get the money. It can’t work! 

The Income Tax Act is very clear. The moment you don’t withhold, it implies that the supplier submitted his accounts at the end of the day and paid. So what we should do is urge NFA to write to Uganda Revenue Authority –(Mr Oduman rose_)- I will not take it, to make sure that those firms can be audited. The only thing is just to audit those firms but not to make them pay after three years.

On page 34, I want the committee to assist us. The Act is very clear that the board is supposed to have seven members. The minister contravened the Act and appointed eight people. The chairperson was telling us that the minister apologised. This is not apologising because that appointment is irregular and it will remain so. How do you address that?

I would have loved that the committee went further to investigate how much money has been spent on that director such that the minister can refund the money. That is the only thing because if everybody is going to apologise and the crime continues, it can’t be this Parliament to allow that. Why can’t you submit an amendment to the Act and we amend it? If you want eight or 10, submit the amendment and Parliament will support you but you can’t say you accepted the apology. We can’t be party to that.

Parliament wants to hear that you gave sanctions to whoever made a mistake. We do not want mere reporting. I have a lot of respect for the committee; we want real action taken. We want to hear that you are deducting people’s salaries. This country is still poor and we want to save every coin if possible -

THE SPEAKER: There is just information, which the hon. Member from Kalaki wants to give.

MR SIMON EUKU: There is one pertinent issue which I feel has not been included in the committee’s report and that is mainly on the commercial tree planting. In 2003 an Act was enacted and thereafter individuals, NGOs and corporations were licensed to carry out activities which were in line with sustainable forest management in central reserves. During the same period, 550 companies and individuals were licensed to plant 50,000 acres of trees over the next ten years - that is say from 2003 to 2012. 

Unfortunately, I am wondering why the report about this has not been included in the report of the committee. I will ask the minister to give us clarifications on that. Let her give us a breakdown because in 2003, Euros 1.9 million was invested in this project after two years, they added more Euros 2.5 million and within that period, they gave up to Euros 12.5 million. That is what I would have expected the committee to point out. Fortunately or unfortunately all the forests have almost been de-gazetted by implication. 

But what is the role of NFA because Government claims that we have to plant trees on commercial basis, what is the ministry doing to implement such a project? 

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): I would like to thank the chair and the committee for this report and members for their contribution and issues that have been raised. I am sure most of the challenges raised in this report are not new to this House because they have been raised and emphasised before.

I thank the committee for taking time and trouble to visit some of these forest central reserves to actually see what is happening on the ground. I would expect some of my colleagues here to take interest to understand issues in those forest reserves particularly those that are closer to their constituencies but also when they visit the country in other parts, they should take trouble to understand the issues and advise the leaders.

I would like to agree in general terms that most of the challenges raised here as far as political interference is concerned, are true because we usually find problems even when we have reached understanding with the communities. We have sensitised them and we have agreed on how to proceed with management of those forests. You find that the local leaders turn around and encourage people to continue in the forests growing crops instead of planting the trees or instead of going into the collaborative forest management arrangements that need to be developed between NFA and the communities.

This has been a big challenge and I call upon my colleagues to support NFA because as Members have said, the role that forests play in our economy is very big and most of these roles are not tangible. We realise the results when disasters occur and sometimes it becomes difficult to reverse the unfortunate disasters. 

Just last week, we had a retreat as a ministry for a technical review in Fort Portal together with the donors and we divided ourselves into three groups visiting specific areas in that Rwenzori region. One group went to Kamwenge, another one to Kasese and another one remained in Fort Portal. All the groups came back lamenting about deforestation because we visited to check on environment core issues and also water. National water in Fort Portal and in Kamwenge, and in Kasese all have very serious challenges because of the degradation from the forests. 

We also have other issues that affect the hydro power sector because the water levels keep going down due to deforestation.

Deforestation is a very serious problem not only in the central forest reserves but also in the country in general. Perhaps not to dwell so much on the general issues, let me go to specific issues that have been raised by my colleagues.

I would like to thank hon. Okello-Okello and let him know that bamboo is a very important tree specie and particularly in absorption of carbon dioxide. It is one of the best species that is supposed to be promoted. There are certain forest reserves that are predominantly bamboo and those ones must be protected because bamboo grows very fast and supports communities in different ways. Together with Uganda Industrial Institute, we are trying to do more research in different products from bamboo.

In China, their economy depends more on bamboo. Most of these trees that you see in the forest whether they are shrubs or what have economic importance and what we need to do is support research in those areas so that we can produce those products locally.

We have furniture that can be produced out of bamboo, food and everything including computers. I would like to urge Members to support all these initiatives. 

We have so far gazetted in this country since 1922, 506 central forest reserves. The NFA came into existence in 2003. Most of these forests were managed by the forestry department which had a lot of challenges and actually when research was done and recommendations were made, then the NFA was established specifically to handle the central forest reserves which cover only 15 percent of the forestry estate in the country. Seventy percent of the forest cover is managed by districts and local communities.

The National Forestry Authority has to take charge more critically on these 15 percent. The UWA has to also manage the other 15 percent mostly for tourism. So this 30 percent is managed by these two institutions and if they are not properly managed, then the rest of the forest – the 70 percent are already threatened – most of that is already cut down and our only hope is what the 30 percent is covering. 

Many issues have been raised about the peri-urban forests. These forests play very important roles in this town but unfortunately most of the urban authorities are simply thinking about giving out plots and getting money from rent and rights which is very unfair. 

Alternatively, we have been advising them because you can still benefit economically from these forests in the urban centres by promoting eco-tourism facilities, sports like golf and so forth. The forest may not be managed the way the natural forests are managed but they are managed in such a way that you still have the trees but you can still have other activities going on there sustainably. Unfortunately, people do not want to understand this but for the benefit of this House, I would like to emphasise the process that is normally followed in degazetting forest reserves. 

People still continue to say, “We are going to swap. We have found alternative land.” It is not just a question of swapping. I am not going to read the whole section in the law but the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act section 8, sub-section 4 provides that; “An order declaring a central forest reserve shall be revoked” - which means degazettement, can only be done where;

a)	Soil, crop or other water shed conditions in the area will not be irreversibly damaged. Now if you get land to swap very far away from the town, is that going to help in ensuring that the water shed in the town is managed? It cannot.

b)	An Environmental Impact Assessment carried out in respect of the proposed new land use of the area finds that the same area can adequately be reforested within five years after harvest or clearing of the land should the area subsequently be the subject of a new declaration as a central forest reserve. This means that when you change the land use here and the next one is - also the area that has to be swapped with this one must also be subjected to an Environmental Impact Assessment. 

If the new area has less environmental benefit than the area that you want to degazette, then that means you cannot degazette.

So, before thinking that we have got alternative land we are going to swap, first subject these areas to an Environmental Impact Assessment to understand otherwise you will buy land elsewhere, waste your money and the assessment will not be approved and the degazettement will not take place. We have always advised these urban authorities but they do not understand and that is the law. 

Members of Parliament, the responsibility to degazette is yours - it is ours. Once the process is followed, finally it comes here but so far, we have Mbarara, Nebbi, Kalangala and Ibanda that have somehow systematically followed some of the preliminary processes and the EIAs have been approved by NEMA. We are now compiling all this pending submission to Cabinet. After Cabinet discussing it, it will then come here to Parliament. 

So, a few steps are still remaining and unless you follow those steps and the EIAs are approved to be in accordance with this law, it cannot be done.  

I would like to inform Parliament that saw milling is done according to the PPDA Act and the staff of NFA are subjected to a code of conduct and if they are found to directly or indirectly participate in saw milling, then the law can catch up with them –(Interjections)- people are not giving us information and that is the problem. If you have information on specific individuals ­– (Interjections)- who have these problems, then you can please bring their names forward. 

A lot of money has been put in tree planting. First of all, I do not have the total figures here but the National Forestry Authority has been engaged in a lot of tree planting – enrichment planting in some of the natural forests that were degraded – which means you plant a few scattered trees so that the forest can naturally regenerate but you boost that regeneration process. 

In the forest plantations - because we have two categories of forests - the natural forest and then the plantation forest that have monoculture – only one species of trees which NFA is planting but also some of this land was given out to private tree planters to plant and manage under a license –(Interjections)– not selling. No forest land has been sold to anybody but licensed with terms and conditions. 

Actually some people who are not doing well, their licenses have been cancelled and those who are doing well and those trying and staggering, management is supporting them by giving them advisory services. 

We also have Uganda Tree Growers Association – it is an association mainly formed by those who are planting trees in central forest reserves but also on their land –(Interruption)  

DR BAYIGGA: I thank you very much for the clarification you are making. I wonder what happens when somebody is given a forest to manage and cuts down all the natural trees to sell the timber and then establishes a new forest. Isn’t that one contravening the law?   

MS ERIYO: Thank you colleague for asking that question. Whatever happens in that forest must be laid down in the terms and conditions of the licence. If the forest is for plantation purposes but no trees were planted before - there were natural trees. If you are going to plant a monoculture forest, then you have to clear the forest completely and plant those trees and they have to grow simultaneously. You cannot simply clear and leave other trees there because the plantation will not do well. That is why I said that for the plantation trees, we work with private tree planters and there the forest has to be cleared and the person agrees with the National Forestry Authority what happens with the trees that are cut down. They have to pay to the National Forestry Authority for this. 

There is a process and if you want to get more information, the National Forestry Authority is just nearby here and you could visit them and ask. But we also do not just allow people to go and simply cut trees and get away with it. There are also people who are licensed –(Interjections)– I will give you time, just let me conclude this statement. 

There are also people who are licensed to do selective harvesting in the natural forests because there are trees that are good for timber. Once they are mature, they have to be harvested. If you do not harvest them, when they go beyond their maturity age, they do not become useful for timber. Probably, they can just fall down and rot and form part of the manure in the forest.

So, in some of the forests, you see that a few trees, which are marked, are supposed to be cut in a selective manner.

THE SPEAKER: I think she has given a clear answer to hon. Lulume.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank my sister, the honourable minister. Over the last few years, many people have been encouraged to venture into tree-planting. Indeed, they have embraced it because they know that the trees are useful to them as a source of income and even as a source of timber for their domestic use.

The clarification I wish to seek from you, hon. minister, is: If I, Wadri, have my private land, which can be customary or mailo, on my own, if I decide to plant Musizi or eucalyptus and the trees mature and I am dying of poverty; I want to send my children to school, so I get a saw, fery down a tree or two to sell in order to send my children to school, yet the law requires that I must seek permission from you. You who has not even made any input –(Laughter) - you have not made any input at all. (Laughter) It is my tree; it is on my land. You have not given me any seedlings. How sure are you that you are going to further encourage other people to plant trees when after all that labouring, they are not allowed to even make use of them for the purpose for which they intended to harvest them? 

Please, I am just seeking your clarification.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, I think it would be useful if Members are informed that outside NFA, there is the Sawlog Production Grant Scheme. How would our constituents – and I do not think it is also wrong for MPs to access the grant and become champions in tree-planting – how would they access the Sawlog funds? 

The other clarification I am seeking is about where permits were issued. People had interests in either getting permits or collaborative forest management. But when you stopped licensing new people, you actually stalled the process of commercial tree-planting. I think it would be important if the country and more so Parliament, is informed about that.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Minister. Last time when you were in the House seeking for a loan for the environment and tree-planting, you promised us that you would come to the House in regard to tree-planting in Karamoja. As you know, one of the functions of NFA is to ensure that they develop new areas. Karamoja has no forests and you promised to bring another loan request to develop forest reserves in Karamoja. So, may I know from you where the loan is or when you are coming so that we help NFA do this work adequately.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for raising more issues for clarification. First of all, I would like to inform my brother here, hon. Wadri, that if you, your grandfather or your father planted trees on your land and you are poor, you can make money from these trees. No one has stopped you from cutting the trees, but you ought to seek permission. (Interjections) Let me explain why. You ought to seek permission and have documents so that wherever you transport this timber or sell it, the source is known.

This is because there is a lot of illegal timber in the country. If you cut yours and take it for sale in the market and it is confiscated, no one will prove where it has come from. 
It is for your own benefit that you get documentation after seeking permission. “I have my trees, I want to cut them down.” [Hon. Members: “Do I pay?”] Of course, you pay for the stamp, but it is not much money and it helps you, as a citizen of this country, to ensure that we fight illegal timber-cutting. 

So, I appeal to you, my brothers and sisters, to talk to our constituents and sensitise them so that they understand this.

It is unfortunate that sometimes, we discover that even a church has cut down a tree to roof the church and this timber is confiscated and brought to Kampala. The church maybe in Arua, Gulu or Karamoja. It becomes difficult for me to say, “This is your timber; it should now be selected and given back to you.” 
You know that ignorance of the law is no defence. So, please, let us advise our constituents.

And then - what was the second –(Laughter)- Sawlog Production Grant  Scheme is a grant provided by the European Union. It is not managed directly by the ministry nor the National Forestry Authority. However, they have an office in Bulogobi. The Sawlog Production Grant Scheme supports individuals: whether you are a Minister, a President, MP or local village person as long as you have the capacity to plant at least more than 25 hectares. (Interruptions) They do not support less; it has to be at least more than 25 hectares. (Interruption) 


But now, we are discussing with them so that they can start supporting smaller – because you can also form groups. As long as you are in groups and you have your land; you can prepare a forest management plan according to their requirements and  benefit from the grant. If you could manage these trees according to – you do not have to go into the tree-planting before you seek their support. First go there, get clear information about how you can proceed then –(Interruption)

MR OYET: I thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. I want to provide information regarding the Sawlog intervention. I was in touch with them. I even mobilised some people in my constituency; but their conditions are not favourable, especially for the poor. They want to physically see 25 hectares of your tree plantation before they can give you any support. 

I want to appeal to you that maybe, in the course of your discussions with them, you can tell them to consider the local peasant farmers whom we are talking about because for somebody to raise 25 hectares of tree plantations is not easy – or to plant. Actually, you have to raise 25 hectares first; they come and see them physically, then they give you money to manage. I think that is a very difficult condition for the poor. Thank you.

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, colleague. But colleagues, tree-planting is a very expensive venture.

THE SPEAKER: Please, let us wind up.

MS ERIYO: It is very expensive and technical. For a donor to give his money or to support something, they would like to see results. So, if you do not have the capacity –(Interruptions)- to manage, I am sorry they cannot give you the money. But within the ministry, we are struggling to raise some money. It is really hard within the budget and the Committee on Natural Resources knows this very well. We are struggling to raise money  so that we can support communities with some seedlings and they plant. But under the Farm Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project, which hon. Mukitale raised earlier on, that does not fall under the NFA’s mandate. So, the committee would not have put that in the report since it is the mandate of the Forestry Department within the ministry, not  NFA.

Therefore, the ministry and the districts are working on that. But NFA receives at least Shs 200 million every year as subvention from Ministry of Finance. And as hon. Odit mentioned earlier, it was NFA that chose not to accept a vote because they manage their own resources – (Mr Odit rose_) – your submission was taken and received in good faith and we have discussed that on this floor before. So I want to thank you very much for – (Interruption) 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I am sorry but I should be very firm on this matter. This report was debated here by Parliament at the end of last year’s budget and discovered two statutory bodies that had abandoned their vote status. One of them was NFA and the other was UNBS. And a lot of non-tax revenue is generated from NFA and they would want to spend it without any over-seer. So, if the ministry has chosen to ignore that resolution, they should report back here that they have found difficulty in implementing that position so that the vote is given to another statutory body.

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, the issue of creating a vote is not a mandate of my ministry; it is the mandate of the Ministry of Finance and as a statutory body, NFA also meets our Committee of Natural Resources and meets with Ministry of Finance. So, until Ministry of Finance creates that vote – but if they do not put it in place, we can handle that issue outside. 

I want to thank Members for raising issues about the alarming tree-cutting, encroachment issues. Mr Speaker, the issue of encroachment is recent but also historical. It is historical because – you see, opening the boundaries of central forestry reserves has become a problem because over the years, Government had allowed people to cultivate, particularly in the grassland forests where we did not have very thick trees, under the double production scheme. So, you would have trees there, but people would be allowed to plant some food. After some years, people took this to be their land because there was no proper management of this land. Actually, people started settling there. By the time NFA came into being, some of these areas had developed into villages, parishes, sub counties  and almost districts. 

Unfortunately, there are people creating sub counties or even districts and putting the headquarters in these areas, and they are supported by some Members of Parliament. Some times, I feel like picking up arms, but I do not have the arms to pick. (Laughter) This is a serious matter; we may laugh over it, but it is very serious. 

Now, in places where you find people who are already encroachers, they would like to have more people joining them so that they can have the mandate to request Government to allow them to stay in those areas. As a result, people are selling land illegally and over time, thousands of families have settled in those areas. Some people are even trading in these areas. Unfortunately, they are not very easy to get. Even LCs and other leaders facilitate this process. A similar thing is happening in swamps.

Mr Speaker, definitely, as someone said here, the issue of population increase has a hand in this. However, we have problems with this also; we may agree, even with some of the colleagues here, to go and talk to the encroachers. But when we leave, something else happens; the leaders are intimidated. Even our opponents use this information to intimidate us; they say: “Do not vote for so and so and when you vote for me, I will ensure that you stay in this area”. This makes even the MPs who understand these issues or LCs not to evict the people because their political opponents can use this against them. That is another big problem that we have. So, I appeal to my colleagues to ensure that we support tree planting and protection of the forests. 

On Karamoja, the loan that we requested for was specific; we are still developing a project to see that we go strictly to Karamoja. Under the Farm Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project, we have some sub counties in Karamoja which we are looking at as pilot regions to ensure that we scale up tree planning in Karamoja areas. And it is doing well already under the Farm Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project. So with that, I hope that it will be a spring board for us to look for more money. 

I should tell you also that there are staff who fear to go and work in Karamoja because of the difficulties there. But I hope that we will work hand-in-hand with other Government departments that are handling the issue of security. As you may be aware, even Namaru Prison has failed to grow crops because of the intimidation that is going on there. So, it is very challenging to work for Karamoja, but we will try our best to do so.

I would like also to thank hon. Susan Nampijja for requesting that we declare a public holiday for tree planting so that all of us can go and plant trees. We have already declared four days – (Interjections) - you can plant a tree even in your compound, you can plant on your boundaries, you can plant on your avenue; it is very important that we take these issues seriously. If we do not, it is our country that will suffer. And of course, tree planting should not replace the conservation of our natural forests, which have also specific bio-diversity conservation purposes. 

I would like to thank the committee and I hope the recommendations herein will be approved and passed by Parliament. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, the report was presented, considered and it has been improved on by your contributions. This should not be the end of handling this subject; various committees of Parliament, in line with what is being handled here should continue to monitor and constantly report. 

Now, what remains is for us to adopt the report subject to the comments and observations made. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

Hon. Members, I thank the committees and the chairperson for the work done. Now, you heard this morning, when we were starting business, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee was asking where the documents from the ministry are. I understand the minister has got the documents which he wants to lay on Table. I think we adjust the Order Paper to allow the Minister to lay the papers so that those concerned with scrutinising the policies, can do so. 

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. In line with section(3) and (4) of the  Budget Act, 2001, I beg to lay on Table the National Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2010/2011 and this paper is covering part one; the government Medium Term Macro-Economic plan and Indicative Revenue Framework. Part two; Government Programmes for Social and Economic Development and part three; Details of the Proposed Sector Plans and Expenditures. I beg to lay and advise that Members will get their documents in their pigeon holes by tomorrow morning. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I just want to advise honourable members that we are going to do important work of examining what is there. A lot has been said about deficiencies in money supply to various ministries and various activities; you take this opportunity while considering this to propagate what you have been saying previously in the various debates we have had. Apparently, you start the work and you heard from the chairperson, there is a timeframe within which to handle this matter and that is up to 15th. By the 15th, we must react and therefore, please, again I appeal to you to be there where you are supposed to be. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY FOR THE FY 2009/2010

5.43
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I now present the report on the performance of the economy of the first quarter of the fiscal year 2009/2010. I will start with the macro-economic overview. The report presents an analysis of the performance of the economy for the first quarter of the fiscal year 2009/2010 in lieu of Government’s macro economic goals and targets. The government’s main macro economic goals as highlighted in this financial year included the following:

1. 	Maintaining low levels of inflation at almost five percent per annum;
2. 	Ensuring an annual GDP growth rate of at least 8 per cent in real terms;
3. 	Ensuring a competitive exchange rate that is supportive of the export sector and ;
4. 	Maintaining adequate foreign reserves.

I will try to summarise, I hope the Hansard will pick the whole report to avoid missing the most salient issues. In previous analyses to Parliament, the committee has always underscored the need for stability in macro-economic targets or assumptions as a critical factor in ensuring Government efforts towards economic growth and poverty reduction. As such, any instability in the macro-economic targets can risk constraining Government’s efforts towards economic growth and ultimately failing the economy in its poverty reduction objectives.

The report covers various aspects of the Ugandan economy including monetary and banking developments, capital markets, prices, foreign trade and balance of payments in addition to other productive and service sectors such as energy, oil and petroleum, investments in agriculture, transport, finance, mining and real estate and others. The report also provides a summary of the latest global economic and financial developments as a background to the development of the Ugandan economy. The analyses mainly rely on official data which the committee obtains from Bank of Uganda, various Government ministries and agencies such as Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, URA and Uganda Investment Authority.

Last time, we had a challenge from my colleague on the other side whether  the data we give or the government is using is actually authentic; we want to say these are Government organs and I think we need to respect the information we get from UBOS, from Bank of Uganda, from Investment Authority, from URA and other Government organisations.

On the world economy, during the period under review, the global recovery was off to a stronger start than earlier anticipated although the recovery continues to proceed at different speeds in the various regions of the world. Following the deepest global downturn in recent history, world trade and market confidence are steadily recovering. However, housing markets and bank balance sheets are yet to register noticeable improvements. The level of unemployment remains high and is expected to continue along this trend holding back wages and household spending and consequently consumer demand. As such, in most advanced economies, the recovery is expected to remain sluggish by past standards whereas in many emerging and developing economies, activities are expected to be relatively vigorous largely driven by buoyant internal demand. 

However, policies need to foster a re-balancing of global demand remaining supportive where recoveries are not yet well sustained. According to the recent IMF estimates in 2010, world output is on average expected to rise by four percent which represents an upward revision of the three quarter percent; 0.75 per cent point from the October 2009 world outlook.

Back to Uganda, recent economic developments in the movement of prices. During the period under review, the annual headline inflation averaged about 14.5 per cent up from 12.6 percent recorded for a year ending August 2009. On the contrary, the annual core underlying inflation which excludes food crops, fuel, electricity and metered water from the basket eased to 9.7 percent for the year ending September 2009 from 9.9 percent for the year ended August 2009. For a very long time, core inflation continues to overshoot the government programme target of 5 per cent. We are really comparing this to what Government had earlier anticipated which questioned the continued use of the current Central Bank framework of quantitative money targets. Looking forward however, inflation was expected to fall towards the end of 2009.

(Full text of the report is to be found in Annex I of Issue 36.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, I would suggest - because we are not going to debate this because the copies have just been distributed and I know my brother would also like to make a response. What you can do is just to indicate what subjects are being covered in this report- definitely the report is going to be captured as a document of Parliament- so that you leave- then these Members will be given time to go and study the report in detail so that we come back, maybe not this week- I imagine they will take time because tomorrow we have other business lined up. You just tell us what the report is covering and then next week when he has also prepared what he wants to prepare we shall come back and debate this matter.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With that wise counsel, I can now even summarise - (Interruption)

MR OKECHO: And now are handling the report of 2009/2010.

THE SPEAKER: This does not prejudice what is there. What I am saying is that he is just presenting it today, then there will be time for considering it and adopting it. That is what I have said.

MR OKECHO: No, but I am talking about the years. The item is different from what he is presenting. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The other week before we went on recess -

THE SPEAKER: It was adopted and this is for the current year. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you. It is just a typing error on the first Order Paper but the second one had a correction. The source of the table on page 4 is UBOS. We insist we do not want plagiarism in Parliament and so we have to state the source of the information. 

On page 5, we talk about the monetary sector development, the net foreign assets of the banking system. On page 6, we continue with net domestic assets. We talk about the money supply. Possibly, I should read that paragraph on the net domestic assets. 

The net domestic assets of the banking system declined by 2.54 percent to Shs 128.66 billion during the quarter ending September 2009, mainly on account of decline in advances to parastatals. 

However, on annual basis, the NDAs of the banking system expanded by 5.7 per cent. The net saving position of Government is the banking system fell by 1.5 per cent equivalent to 12.4 billion to Shs 833.39 billion by the end of the quarter under review. On an annual basis the net saving position of Government is the banking system also fell by 5.6 percent or the equivalent of Shs 49.79 billion.  

Now, we continue on page 6 with money supply and the interest rate which has been of concern to this committee and Parliament. Movement on policy rates is on page 7, 2.21. The Bank of Uganda policy rates have continued to ease albeit slow. However, policy rates during the first quarter of financial year 2009/2010 were significantly low compared to the first quarter of 2008/2009. For instance, as shown in table 3, the discount rate on the 91 day, 182 day and 364 day TDs by the end of the first quarter of financial year 2009/2010 were 6.8, 10.2 and 10.7 respectively compared to 8.15, 12.34 and 12.81 by the end of the first quarter. The bank rate at which the central bank advance loans to commercial banks which consequently affects lending rates reduced on average by about 5 per cent over the reporting period compared to the same period a year ago as shown in table 3.

The committee welcomes such a development which ideally suggests that the stance in monetary policy is at least towards increasing liquidity in the financial sector and the effect of the economic crisis continues to wane out. Although easing the monetary policy stance would be paramount in influencing lending rates by commercial banks in the private sector, this still needs to be balanced with discounted rates of Treasury Bills to avoid banks using the same money to buy these securities. We have been complaining that the Bank of Uganda has been encouraging the commercial banks to invest in TBs instead of lending money to the business community which will in effect create more wealth and more employment. We want to see that this is intended now to benefit our business people and not just banks to invest in these policies. 

Page 8, 2.22, commercial bank interests continue. You will be able to read this but the committee continues to recommend that in addition to mitigating the constraints to doing business faced by commercial banks, Government should gradually reduce her dominant role as a player in the financial market through its issuance of Government papers to mop up excessive liquidity. It is possible that the central bank can develop monetary policy instruments that do not crowd out the private sector. That is the point I have been trying to explain.

On page 9, we have integrated foreign exchange markets. Since we have limited time Members, I hope you will be able to read. The committee commends the Central Bank for its effort towards leaning against an appreciation of the Shilling since this ideally cushions the country from losing its exports competitively. However, caution is needed in order to ensure that the depreciation of the Shilling does not threaten other objectives of microeconomic management.

The graph on page 9 from the Bank of Uganda gives us the foreign exchange rate movements. 

Page 10, development in the non-bank financial institutions - You can see the credit institutions. The committee has consistently reminded Government that its actions in the security market have a crowding effect on the private sector credit. That is the point we have been emphasising in all our other reports. Page 10 ends with the microfinance deposit taking institutions, the MDIs, and the source of table 5 is Bank of Uganda. The table gives us developments in the activities of credit institutions in billions.

On page 11, on the MDIs, the private sector deposit in MDIs decreased by 30.91 percent or by 15.3 billion. The committee appreciates the increasing role played by the MDIs especially in issuing liquidity to small and medium scale entrepreneurs who have continued to play a big role in complement ting Government efforts towards poverty eradication.

The committee realises that whereas we have been getting more banks in the country they have kept in the major towns. We still have a problem in our upcoming urban centres and it is only the MDIs who are going there. So, we commend the MDIs for taking that step.

The committee further notes that the banking sector especially in this category is faced with the problem of multiple borrowing which not only increases risk but has kept interest rates high. 

The Credit Reference Bureau full scale implementation has been slow. The committee recommends that the process be expedited so that the risks are minimised but also test the system earlier enough to make vital corrections based on experiences. We have been having cases where people borrow money from different banks and it is important both for the good of the business and for the banks to make sure that the credit reference bureau is fully functional. The current monetary policy has continued to leave out some cooperatives in the country that are conducting huge transactions. This, in one way or another, limits the economic policy transmission leading to distortion. The committee is of the view that Central Bank carries out an assessment to identify strong SACCOs that could be embraced under the supervision ambit. Bank of Uganda has been reluctant to overstretch itself and go into these smaller institutions but because of the central role they are playing, I think, as Parliament we need to give them more leverage and allow them and see how best we can do that. 

While this can further improve the capacity, it can also help expand the Central Bank’s penetration in the semi informal because according to them it is an informal sector, which also plays a big role in the development especially at a community level. They fall in that category and we need to bring them on board, and Parliament is the right place to do that. 

For effective financial deepening to happen, good laws and practices are crucial yet we still have laws such as the Bankruptcy Act, 1931, which are obsolete. In this regard, the Bankruptcy and Insolvent Bill should be given due attention as it is intended to correct excesses in the current law but also conforming it to the current business environment. 

In addition, the committee believes that insurance companies are part of the financial sector and are systematically linked with the banking sector and with strong linkages to investment. However, one of the big challenges in this area is limited products and coverage resulting in the mismatch with the rate of development of the banking sector. The insurance sector is largely a gray area to our business people and we need to really help them understand more of it and be more engaged in insurance policies. The committee is of the view that focused studies in this area could help reform the policy. There is a table in which the printout did not come out clearly but you can find it on page 13.

Real Sector Developments

Now, the real estate is a sector which has been steadily growing as you will see the details; the table is there given.  Then we also realised that Ugandans have invested a lot in real estates and if some of our elites and the political class who are investing heavily in non productive real estate could have invested in agriculture, value addition and cottage industry, it could have been possibly helping.

Uganda Securities Exchange

Uganda Securities Exchange is on page 13. The committee recommends that the Capital Markets Authority initiates programmes aimed at boosting consumer confidence, investing in the capital markets which are at the moment slow. In addition, the committee retaliates its earlier recommendation that Government fast tracks the implementation of the Security Central Deposit Act and urgently finalizes the Pensions Bill. We hope that these reforms will improve on the deficiencies in the securities market, shorten transaction costs and help to open up liquidity for private sector investment. However, in order to attain the long term viability of the Pension Scheme, it is also necessary that a comprehensive actuarial review of the entire pension sector in Uganda is done. Table 7 is from Bank of Uganda; 

Energy Sector

At the end of page 14 is the Energy Sector; we have given Table 8 on page 15 where Umeme power purchases and the different categories of consumers are given for the year 2008/09; purchases and sales are clearly shown. The source is the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA).  

Petroleum Exploration and Production (Upstream) Sub-sector

On page 15, again in 4.1 we talk about the petroleum exploration and the production upstream sub-sector. Petroleum exploration has been ongoing for sometime now and the results so far indicate positive prospects for commercial production. A number of oil wells were drilled during the financial year 2008/09 and investment is estimated to be in excess of $ 500 million. The optimism generated by the discovery of oil reserves call for transparency and openness in the way the oil production chain will be managed. Therefore, issues to do with disclosure of oil revenues and the role of other stakeholders should be made public. Government should work on putting in place a comprehensive legal framework. We have the policy since February 2008 but we are emphasizing on the legal regulatory framework. 

The figure of US $ 500 million is the one we give but we would also want to know the implication of the firm in – firm out close to 1.5 billion; what does that translate into in terms of the cost of this prospective? And we have been saying that Parliament should be more interested because according to the production sharing agreement, the money the oil companies have expended now will be paid by the Government of Uganda since the oil has become commercial. So, we should become interested in how they come to that cost in the first place. And I hope that at the earliest, the Auditor-General will furnish Parliament with what has been transpiring in the Energy Sector, otherwise we may end up with a lot of expenses when we do not even know how much local content of these transactions were given to our local suppliers and contractors and how much human resource and expertise did come from Uganda - (Interjections) - that is not the mandate of the Committee of National Economy but that debate has been on the floor of Parliament for sometime; the ministers will answer.

Downstream Petroleum (Supply and Distribution) Sub-sector 

The table’s source is Bank of Uganda and we also register concern about the management and restocking of the Jinja reserves. We are also concerned about the delayed construction of the pipeline and issues that go with it. The committee also hopes that with the planned refurbishment of Jinja Storage Tanks coupled with the extension of the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline will go a long way in solving the petroleum supply constraint. There are a lot of grey areas, which Parliament needs to know from Government. 

Investment 

The total planned investment amounted to $ 265, 765, 528 while planned employment was estimated at 12, 183. It is not proper to directly compute the cost of – the expected investment vis-à-vis the employment generated because here we are talking of private sector investment. Some of these investments could be in capital investment or technology transfer and does not necessarily give the quantitative numerical employment creation. Table 10, on page 17 gives planned investment and employment for the period July 2009 to September 2009. The source is Uganda Investment Authority (UIA).

We have another table on page 18 from UIA; planned investment sources by country. Here we are reporting the direct foreign investment from different countries; India, UK, China, Nigeria, Russia, up to the end where we have United States.

External Sector Development

We report about the balance of payment and the table on page 19 gives the summary of the balance of payments in millions of dollars.

Again down we have table 13; summary of exports by category in million dollars. 

On page 20, we have Table 14, showing developments in the import sector in million dollars; showing total imports – Government imports and private sector imports.

Again on page 20, we have a table on remittances. I think I should read that because it has been an important input into our economy.

In the period under review, the workers’ remittances declined by 13.5 percent, to US $220 million, from US $254.4 million. The continuation of the global financial crisis on employment in USA and Europe continue to affect the remittances by Ugandans working abroad.

We did report in the last report that we had, in the early days of the crisis, had a shock but in the last phase at the end of the year, we again had more confidence and more remittances. Now we again see a drop by 13 percent and we need to study that in detail.

External Debt

In our last report, we gave a full, detailed and separate report on debt sustainability. The shadow minister did make his rebuttal and also the Minister of Finance did give a response. 

During the reporting period, foreign support increased by 125.9 percent, that is, US $265.99 million, from US $117.6 million. This increment was due to increased budget support in that zone that rose from US $8.73 million in 2008 to US $110.9 million in the reporting period.

The overall budget support however increased to US $160 million from US $39 million in the previous period as shown in table 15.

We saw the external debt, donor inflows to Government in USD for the period 2008/2009, 2009/2010 and we gave a percentage change clearly showing the total foreign aid in grants, loans, budget support, grants and project support.

We have been getting reports and we did demand as a Committee of National Economy to be furnished by the Ministry of Finance (when the new minister Syda Bbumba came) with the performance of different loans, sector by sector. I now want to lay on the Table the detailed ten best performing loans and ten worst performing loans, which I can try to read. We are trying to send you a soft copy of this because it was highlighted in colour print and when we tried to print it in black and white, it failed to come out so we are going to give you soft copies so when you are responding, you will be able - 

Just to highlight, the loan of the Ministry of Education support to post primary education and training amounting to US$ 29.46 million was the best performing. The second one was Bujagali Inter Connection Project amounting to US$ 29.83 million. The third one was area-based agriculture modernisation program amounting to US$ 13.14 million. This is commonly known as AMP. 

The fourth one was Small Towns’ Water and Sanitation Project amounting to US $18.19 million. Next is Northern Uganda NUSAF Fund amounting to 100 million. Then there is Environmental Management Capacity Building amounting to US$ 22.2 million. 

They have also given comments and the challenges that these sectors have had. There is another Area Based Agricultural Modernisation amounting to US$ 11.9 million and then the National Transmission Backbone.

What we are trying to do is we requested Finance to declare which loans have best performed and why they think they have best performed. They have also given us, according to them, the worst performing and the list goes as follows:

Fisheries development project - the infamous landing sites amounting to 29. If you read it in detail, you will find that the project ended long ago but it is still under implementation. 

The second worst is still Ministry of Agriculture, National Livestock Productivity Improvement Project amounting to US$ 33.67 million.

The other bad performing is the Road Sector Support Project, which has challenges including the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana project. The other bad performing road sector support project is the second component of the Kabale-Kisoro project. The other one is the construction of the Kampala Northern Bypass. That is among the worst performing projects. The other ugly one is the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project, which has taken so long to make our borders one stop centres for our importers and exporters.

The other one of the worst performing is the Regional Trade Facility Programme. The reason we are getting this and we are insisting is we want the sessional committees to follow this up and tell Parliament what has caused problems in these projects so that in future when we are to commit more loans, we avoid these mistakes.

I now want to lay on the Table the two copies of the worst performing and best performing loans. I promise tomorrow you will get a soft copy of this. 

In conclusion and in respect to the foregoing, the country has continued to maintain relative stability in most of the key macro economic variables. However, the economy continues to register a significant mismatch between growth in exports and imports. 

Lending rates stubbornly remain high, inefficiencies in the energy sector are still unattended to, inflation targets continue to overshoot the programmed limits among others and as an economy that has remained largely subsistence based in spite of the registered high growth rates for over two decades, more needs to be done in order to move the transformation path.

What we would like to state here as a committee, because we got a rebuttal from the shadow Minister of Finance, is that the factor of economic growth in this country is a reality. The challenge, however, is that the disparity between the poor and the rich is also increasing and I think that is where, as Parliament, we need to urge Government to make interventions of wealth distribution; how can the other sector, which is missing out be assisted in wealth creation? And I think that is the intention of the Bonna Bagagawale program if it can be well implemented.

There was also a procedural matter. Last year in November, we presented the end of 2008/2009 report. It was not disposed of and the shadow minister did make a rebuttal and because of that we have been keeping this report since February. 

In our rules, there seems to be a lack of clarity as to whether a parliamentary committee report should get a rebuttal from a shadow minister. That lack of clarity has caused us as a committee the burden of having - we should have disposed of our work way back in November and it has remained on. We need clear guidelines. We have no problem with the shadow minister bringing in input as long as it can be disposed of immediately. Members debate it and the minister responds.

We would like to request, like you have been urging the Rules Committee or your desk to help us because for us to wait from November to last week was too much for the committee. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman and members of the committee for the report. The report has now been presented and as I said, we are not starting the debate immediately because you have to go and read the details. You may mark your points which you want to raise so next week it will come back again for debate and adoption.

Tomorrow we shall deal with the business which is indicated here. We are due to start electoral reforms, so now I give you the time to study them.

6.21
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I would like to say that we encourage our chairperson to make executive summaries. I am challenged by the fact that the executive summary includes so many things that are not written down in the report, which we will be responding to. So, Mr Speaker, as you provide us with an opportunity, we would probably need to be sure that the Hansard will have come out so that we are able to refer to those matters that the chairperson made in his executive summary which was not provided to the House.

I have been thinking about the two reports: This one of National Economy and the previous one of the environment, and I think that as a House, we should begin to live by example. We worried about the trees getting depleted because of them being cut every other day, but the way we print our work here is so extravagant. If you check all our reports, we just use one side of the paper and we do not use the other side. If we are really concerned about conserving our trees, it is about time that we commit ourselves as Parliament to print our work on both sides of the paper.

Can you believe that we would save half of what we use? There was a report here of 40 pages, we would have only used 20. If we could commit ourselves as a House, we would save more trees; we would live by example and we would not tax our taxpayers more just to pay for the other page which is not used. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have nothing against that. I want to ask the Leader of Government Business that I know tomorrow is Wednesday, but the ministers should be here by 2.30 p.m. so that we commence business. House adjourned to 2.30 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 April 2010 at 2.30 p.m.)
