Tuesday 6th April, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE AFFAIRS OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES.

                     (Debate continued)

THE PRIME MINISTER  (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi):  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, last Thursday, at the request of Cabinet, Parliament granted Government more time to study the recommendations in the Select Committee report on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Government undertook to make an appropriate response to Parliament after the Easter break. I am glad and honoured to present the Government response on the recommendations.

After studying the recommendations, it has become apparent that some of them call for an immediate response while others will require more time.  I will now outline the Government action on those which it considers require an immediate response.

Political leadership of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries: 
Members must be aware of the action taken by His Excellency the President in this regard.  The political leadership of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has been restructured.  Members of Parliament, and indeed the Committee, should take advantage of this new situation to interact closely with the new political leadership of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, with a view to establishing a small modus operandi.  

Livestock Services Project:
Government has studied closely the Committee's recommendation regarding this Project.  Members will no doubt appreciate that some conclusions drawn by the Committee - (Interruption) -

MAJ. J. KAZOORA: I am seeking your guidance, Mr. Speaker, on how Parliament is supposed to be informed about changes in the Cabinet.  Is it through the press?  Is it through the Speaker?  I am asking this, Mr. Speaker, because hon. Nsibambi, at least, I know him as the Minister for Education and you called upon the Right Hon. Prime Minister to respond.  Could I be clarified, Mr. Speaker, in which capacity hon. Nsibambi is responding on behalf of Government?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Nsibambi should at least have introduced himself in his new capacity but anyway, hon. Nsibambi was, until last night, the Minister of Education and Sports, and shortly past midnight, the appointing authority assigned him the duties of Prime Minister of this country. Hon. Nsibambi, can you proceed?

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, the Member holding the Floor is making a response to what he terms recommendations arising from the Committee's report.  Could the Speaker tell me whether this House has made any recommendations so far?

THE SPEAKER:  I did not hear him say recommendations of the House.  I think it was recommendations of the Committee.  At least, that is what the Prime Minister did ask.  He did say that when he was asking for time for Government to study them.  

MR. WACHA: Can I move a point of procedure Sir?  Mr. Speaker, last week this House was still debating a report which was presented to this House by the Select Committee of Agriculture.  As far as I can recollect, this House had not finished debating on the matter.  Is it procedurally correct for Government to assume to take action on matters which have not been finalised by Parliament?

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May I comment on the question of procedure raised by hon. Ben Wacha - (Interruption).  As a Member of this House, and also as Speaker emeritus, unless the Member rises on a point of order, I have the Floor.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I rose on a point of procedure and I sought guidance on a procedural matter from the Speaker. Is it in order for the hon. Member from Mbale Municipality to assume the Office of Speaker of this House?  (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER:  If the hon. Member actually intended or did assume the role of the Speaker, then he was out of order, but the hon. Member made it clear that he was commenting.  He was not making a clarification or he did not seek to make a clarification on behalf of the Speaker.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I do not think the Speaker is constrained from asking any of us to answer on his behalf on any matter which may be raised on the Floor, and I was not at all attempting and I will never attempt to usurp the office of Speaker. (Laughter).  I thank the Member for Oyam for that very appropriate reminder.  

The question is why is the Government responding now when the matter has not been finalised?  My understanding, Sir, is that we are operating a very sensitive Government here.  Member after Member, for the last three weeks, have been calling for Government action on certain matters.  Among those actions taken was by the President to get civil servants interdicted and a report was brought to this House.  Correct?  Then Members said, why only civil servants?  You must take action overall.  And the Government being a sensitive body came and asked Parliament that please, give us time to consider this very serious request from the House.  

That request was granted by this House on Thursday and Government said, we shall bring a response immediately after Easter and today is a day following Easter Monday, Sir and in keeping with that promise, my understanding is that a sensitive Government has come back to report action taken on recommendations because it thinks matters must be answered so that any further debate takes into account the action taken.  That being the case, I find no problem with the procedure that has been adopted and the Prime Minister, in my view, is correctly bringing back a response which Government promised this House last Thursday.  I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER:  Maybe let me again respond to what hon. Ben Wacha has said.  Last time, when we adjourned, indeed Government had sought an opportunity to study the recommendations of the committee.  That is how I understood it - not of the House - because the House had not really pronounced itself on the recommendations and, therefore, having done so and in the process of which Government accepted some of those recommendations and took certain decisions, I think it is proper and fitting for the House to know, in the first instance, was it true that the Government wanted actually to study those recommendations of the committee and if so, for what purpose and I think having done so, it is only procedurally in merit and correct that the leader of Government Business who is the Prime Minister should report to this House.  Mr. Prime Minister.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  It is on record that as Parliament was proceeding in the final stage of the report on Agriculture, Government sought for extra time to explain its case. Parliament was seemingly ambushed because the decision was never subjected to a vote.  The clarification I am seeking is, is it proper for the Government to assume that a reshuffle is the best solution to a standing problem in the Ministry of Agriculture?

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Government has studied closely the Committee's recommendation regarding the Livestock Services Project.  Members will no doubt appreciate that some conclusions drawn by the Committee are disputed as per the statement of the former Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in order to find answers to the issues raised with regard to this project.  Government has decided to engage a firm of consulting engineers with professional experience in designing and construction of valley dams and tanks as well as contract procurement.  

The firm to be engaged soon will carry out the quality assurance review of the Livestock Services Project; valley dams/Tanks Project with special emphasis in the following areas:  Designing, bidding process, evaluation and awarding of contracts, quality of work done as per specifications, payment for work done so far as tendered.  The firm will also be expected to recommend measures necessary to ensure that the remaining work at the sites is completed.  

The findings from the study will form the basis of action to be taken on some of the recommendations made by the Committee.  For example, the recommendations relating to the recovery of the monies from the contractors under Article 164 of the Constitution and from the project supervisor.  The Minister of Finance will make funds available for this exercise.  

With regard to the Poverty Eradication Action Plan on Seed, the Government has studied this Select Committee's recommendation regarding this project.  Government has also studied the response of the former Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries with regard to this project.  Government has decided that utilization of the money under this project should be a subject of a special audit.  I will soon be requesting the Auditor General to carry out a special audit and his findings will be made available to Government and Parliament.

Other Recommendations:
As pointed out at the beginning, there are recommendations which require further study by Government before a response is brought to the House.  A report of action taken will be made to the House in due course.  Once more, let me thank the Select Committee for its work and Parliament for its full contribution to the debate arising from the Select Committee's report. I wish to state that Government will continue to cherish and observe the spirit of cooperation that was engendered last Thursday between Parliament and the Executive. 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, let me thank my predecessor, the former Prime Minister, hon. Kintu Musoke, for his selfless service to the people of Uganda.  I wish him success in his retirement, but as the people of Uganda are aware, hon. Kintu Musoke will continue to serve the people of Uganda together with us in this House.  Similarly, I extend my thanks to former Colleagues whose services would emanate from the Back Bench and elsewhere for the work they did in the respective Ministries until yesterday.  We thank His Excellency the President for the trust he has put in us and wish to acknowledge with appreciation and humility your good wishes.  We need God's assistance to tackle effectively the difficult tasks ahead of us.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. AWORI AGGREY ( Samia Bugwe North, Busia):  Mr. Speaker, may I take this opportunity to congratulate, first and foremost hon. Prof. Dr. Apollo Nsibambi on his maiden speech to this august House as Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, notwithstanding the absence of oath, but he has been sworn in.  Mr. Speaker, I am told from the benches quietly that you do not need an oath for a position that is not Constitutional. 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to extend the same felicitations and congratulations to the hon. Members of this House who have been elevated to the Front Bench and much more so to my compatriot Brother and fellow Member from Busia District, hon. Gabriel Opio on being appointed - (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, this is the spirit of sharing the national cake - (Laughter).  

Notwithstanding what Government has told us through the speech by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, still he does not answer all the questions put to him, not only through the preliminary observations in the Report of the Committee on MAAIF, but also from the remarks of various Members on this important matter.  Mr. Speaker, I presume at a later stage and hopefully so, there shall be a Resolution to wind up or to adopt the Report.  

My concern, Mr. Speaker, is that should anybody - I hope nobody on the part of Government, the Executive branch, think that this Cabinet reshuffle is the answer to the concerns raised in the Report.  I note with great pleasure that indeed, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has touched on some of the items but the crucial aspects have not been cleared.  Mr. Speaker, one speech after the other in this House made it quite clear that indeed the three Ministers who are a subject of scrutiny or research or investigation were incompetent.  Mr. Speaker I note again with great displeasure that if these people - the three Ministers - were found to be incompetent in this Ministry, then it has just become a game of musical chairs for them to be moved to another Ministry.  It does not answer the question at all!  

We say these people were incompetent and they are still Ministers regardless of the portfolio!  We did not say these people were not qualified to be Ministers in MAAIF, we were simply saying they were incompetent as political leaders in that Ministry.  The capacity to carry out responsibilities of a Minister do not necessarily confine itself to a particular Ministry.  It is an overall!  So we note again with great displeasure that indeed, these three Ministers have just been moved around or the two have been moved around and one has even kept a more senior position notwithstanding the fact that she failed to supervise two Ministers.  And invariably, the bad blood which we noted in the Ministry while this investigation was going on, there is no way we see an antidote to cure it because the same two Ministers, and much more so, one of them, hon. Dr. Kezimbira Miyingo will still be under the same person as the Vice President.  I am not saying he is the Vice President but he as a Minister of Environment on many occasions is going to be attending Cabinet meetings to be chaired by the Vice President.  I hope and pray that the bad blood that existed in the previous position will not persist.  I am expressing that concern.  

There is a matter which the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister mentioned - the recovery of money.  We would like to see this matter handled with great experience - (interruption).

MISS. NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and I want to thank hon. Aggrey Awori for giving me way to give him information.  I just wanted to inform hon. Awori that in Cabinet, Members of Cabinet take decisions. We must develop consensus, it is not one person, the Chairperson of Cabinet because he was saying that since hon. Miyingo Kezimbira will continue to be a Minister and he will continue to attend Cabinet and yet Cabinet is chaired by the Vice President, therefore the problem would not have been solved.  I thought that I should give him information to know how Cabinet is currently run.  Thank you very much.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted clarification from the Minister who has just given us information as to how Cabinet works. Can she tell me, therefore, that maybe in this case we should not have actually zeroed on the two or three Ministers who are responsible in the Ministry of Agriculture, but rather tackled the whole Cabinet to get them all out because they were all responsible for the mess that happened in the Ministry of Agriculture?  

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, for the sake of the record of Hansard, I do not want to leave this particular question from hon. Ongom dangling like this.  So I would like the hon. Minister for Luweero to give us the insight on how the Government is run herself.

THE SPEAKER:  I think the information she was giving was relating to the relationship between the Vice President who will be chairing Cabinet and the hon. Kezimbira Miyingo who will be attending Cabinet as a Minister.  I think let us keep it there. Let us not open it up to know what goes on within Cabinet and the procedures there.

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also take this opportunity to advise my Colleague on the Front Bench, the Minister for Luweero that, that Front Bench is very slippery.  One has got to be very guarded not only in carrying out one's duties as a Minister, but also on what one says on the Floor because we mark every word. 

DR. EKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank hon. Awori for giving way.  A while ago, hon. Awori appeared to appreciate the fact that hon. Gabriel Opio was proposed as Minister and now he is saying that the Front Bench is very slippery -(Laughter)- and yet he proposed his name in Busia. I am seeking clarification from hon. Awori whether he really wishes hon. Gabriel Opio well -(Laughter)- to send him on a very slippery position where he might fall and crack his bones. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At a rally in Busia by His Excellency the President, hon. Aggrey Awori said he will oppose Government and continue opposing President Museveni unless he appoints hon. Opio to be Minister.  Can he now declare his support for President Museveni in view of this development. (Laughter)

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I would indeed be very glad to clarify on the two issues.  Let me start off with the first one:  For me to suggest hon. Opio's name to His Excellency the President, I said the following among others, that he is highly educated, very experienced, knowledgeable and very firm on the ground.  In other words, Mr. Speaker, he is not the kind of person who can slip on such slippery grounds. (Laughter). For me to say such kind words to a person who belongs to the Movement, it says a lot.  I meant it and I am sure he is going to be very firm on the ground.  It is a slippery ground but he is a very firm person, he walks very carefully.  

On the second point by the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality, I think he read a wrong report. When I addressed the rally and among other things told the President the following, I said; "why have you forgotten our District?  How come we are not sharing the national cake?  You are holding the steering but we want to hold that steering with you.  I do not see a single hand from Busia on that steering."  Among others, again I continued to say:  "Mr. President, I have no problem with you as an individual, but I have a problem with some of your policies and the way they are applied."  I never said at any given moment that day or ever since that "so long us you appoint hon. Opio, I shall agree with you."  No way!  For me, I go for issues and policies.  When I recommended or nominated hon. Opio, I meant to say this national cake also belongs to us, we want a piece of it.  

DR. KIYRAPAWO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think we had better be mature because I was there myself.  First of all, hon. Awori did not address the gathering like we are talking about here.  We were in a meeting and hon. Awori constantly told His Excellency the President that he will de-campaign him if he does not appoint hon. Opio. Now, what he is saying here is quite different.  I thank you.

MR. AWORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do agree with the hon. Minister who has just been on the Floor. I agree with him but note my words, I said "among other things". So one of the other things I did not mention is what he has mentioned. Indeed, it is true I told the President that "if you do not give us a little piece of the national cake, I will de-campaign you."  That I said and today I still say so.  If he does not change the policies, if we do not get a little bit of the bigger chunk of the cake, definitely -  Mr. Speaker, let me come back to my substantive contribution.  

My concern on this issue is the question of corruption.  When you look at this Report, generally it revolves around elements of corruption and, Mr. Speaker, this House is spending a lot of legislative time on investigation.  I know oversight is an important aspect of this House but at the same time, we should not spend so much time in investigating Ministries on what they have done and so forth. Unfortunately for us we have to leave or deal with this issue within the little time that we have left.  When you look at the various Ministries left, or even for that matter, MAAIF alone will still have 57 projects which are externally funded that need thorough investigation.  

Not long ago, this Government authorised a refund of 2.8 million dollars to the Japanese Government for money which was either stolen or misused in form of foreign aid.  Nobody has been brought to book to date.  There was one person, a Permanent Secretary who spent time in Luzira but, Mr. Speaker, that particular person, although the matter might still be sub judice, it was not so much really directed on that particular aspect.  So my concern, Mr. Speaker, is that we still have a huge burden.  In this House at some stage I have brought in the matter of the tanks, what not, in the Ministry of Defence.  It was brushed under the carpet.  Mr. Speaker, that thing is still pregnant.  One of these days it is going to produce -(Interruption)

LT.COL.MUDOOLA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way.  I would just like to inform the hon. Member that, that subject on tanks and helicopters has not been swept under the carpet.  It is under investigation in our Committee and we shall report in due course.

MR. PINTO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My understanding as we stand today is that we have made some progress having received the report of the Select Committee and having debated it, we have reached a stage where at some point Government has responded and the Prime Minister has made a statement other than reopening the debate.  As a matter of procedure - it is a pity that our chairman is not here now but I was wondering whether it would not be the right procedure for us to move into the stage of adopting the Report or a question being put and then watch the developments after the adoption of the Report.  Which way forward?  Otherwise, if after the speech by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister we come again to debate, I can see this now opening a new debate because not only are we going to debate the Report, now we are going to debate substantively what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has told us and possibly demand assurance and a time frame. But maybe as a matter of procedure, would this not be the right step to take, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  I take it that the Chairperson of the Committee is very much around.  If he is not around, he is ably represented. Maybe I would request the hon. Awori to wind up and come to the end of his statement.

MR. AWORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity once again, for me to wind up my remarks.  Basically, my remarks were actually directed towards the hon. Rt. Prime Minister's response.  So, I am not really debating the Report per se, but reacting to matters arising from his statement.  

I would like to wind up by thanking you and also by thanking the hon. Prime Minister and hope he can convey our gratitude to His Excellency, the appointing authority, the President that indeed we thank him for introducing new blood in the Cabinet, but we are a bit disappointed in the musical chairs that we may have noted among others.  Nevertheless, the matter of corruption is very very important and, Mr. Speaker, I request that the Leader of Government Business informs the appointing authority that even the people he has retained on the Cabinet, we are not yet through with them.  

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (Mrs. Joyce Mpanga): Mr. Speaker, following the very unprecedented statement the Prime Minister has just given to the House, the Select Committee on Agriculture would like to wind up this in the following manner - I would like to apologise for our Chairperson, hon. Kanyike, who has not been able to be here this afternoon.  

I am quite happy to speak for the marginalised majority of our population who cannot come to this House to demand for their rights when the people elected to lead them and entrusted with putting in place systems to improve the quality of life of the general public have ganged against them and are taking care of their own selfish ends instead. Mr. Speaker, ours is not a crusade to censure anybody as many people have mistakenly observed.  Our crusade is against inefficiency and ineffectiveness where public officials and politicians in high government offices reap benefits that go with those offices without delivering any services.  Mr. Speaker, we came here to tell the House of the incompetence of the managers as they were in that Ministry and today the peasants - the daughters and sons of peasants and the peasants themselves are determined to rid the government of systems of inefficient and inconsiderate officials.  

Mr. Speaker, ours is a crusade in search of food security, poverty eradication and rural development.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, as we debate this Motion, 95 per cent of the Uganda population is out there watching us to see if they have spokesmen and spokeswomen in this House.  This is the first time a matter probably very close to food security has been addressed in this House.  Mr. Speaker, the drums have been sounded and sons and daughters of the herdsmen and peasants are here and are demanding to be heard.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, we came to this House, we promised our people a better standard of life through modernisation of agriculture.  This Parliament has been accused of being censure-hungry or censure-focused.  I would like to assure the general public that this impression is not correct.  Parliament comes into censure because it finds itself in a situation where those supposed to take action do not act.  It is because Parliament finds no apparent remedy to what it considers shortcomings or wrong doings by political leaders and top Government officials. It comes in to fill the vacuum by applying constitutional provisions, particularly Article 118 of our Constitution.  

I must pay tribute to His Excellency the President for having taken action to remove the corrupt civil servants from the Ministry of Agriculture and to change the political leadership. If the political leadership in the Ministry had had eyes and ears, these officials should have been removed in 1997 at least and a lot of public funds should have been saved.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, as it turned out, the political leadership in the Ministry had their own ends to satisfy.  They kept on disagreeing with each other, protecting themselves against each other and in the end, public funds have disappeared and the country has lost direction and opportunities.  

We are waiting to see His Excellency the President complete the clearing he has started so that the Ministry of Agriculture can be given a fresh start and a proper political direction.  I would like to read that again that we are waiting to see His Excellency the President complete the clearing he has started so that the Ministry of Agriculture can be given a fresh start and a proper political direction.  

The population is disgusted with the political leadership at MAAIF.  The population is demanding policy and direction.  There are only two deliverance systems and both of them are complementary to each other. These are the Presidency and Parliament.  Our electorate gave us votes, let us use these votes to deliver to our electorate and to nobody else.

Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, now turning to the debate.  I must thank all those who have contributed and given an equivocal support to the Select Committee's Report.   I thank the Government and His Excellency the President for having responded even before we conclude our Report.  The Report has fortunately had fruits already.  I would like to congratulate the Committee for having survived ambushes here and there and I would also like to report that this debate on the Floor is a great victory of constitutionalism for democracy and the rule of law.  
What did the Committee find?  The Committee would like to remind you, because the debate has been very long, that the Ministry does not have an Agricultural Sector Policy Document despite what we were shown here last week.  This is only in the making and it is taking too long.  Individual Ministers are appointed to make their own policies.  There is a total lack of continuity and coordination as these changes come. Lack of transparency and accountability are rampant.  

Ever since 1990, most operations in MAAIF have been projects mainly funded by donors through loans and grants and this has led to uneven development. Some districts are marginalised and The Ministry does not seem to have a programme for coordination and harmonisation of loans and donor funded projects.  Mr. Speaker, many of the projects stand alone on their own without linkage to other projects.  In the majority of cases, the projects have had limited input from the beneficiaries and stake holders, while in other instances, they have not taken into consideration national objectives or needs, both long term and short term.  Most have not addressed the historical and political requirements in the country.  

Under the Ministry, there have been a total of 57 projects which have been funded by the international bilateral and multilateral funding agencies including UN, World Bank, USAID, DANIDA, the European Union and many others.  Over the past six years, annual funding for agriculture through these international agencies plus local funding have averaged 50 million dollars while in the fiscal year 1997/98, it was 54 million dollars.  According to the Ministry of Planning, nearly 700 billion shillings have been sank in the Ministry of Agriculture since 1987.  There is nothing to account for this money on the ground.  
When we talk about the input by beneficiaries, Mr. Speaker, the Select Committee has found that poor design of these projects, lack of input by beneficiaries and stake holders and the general lack of guidance to donors have been the primary cause of failure to realise objectives to address national priorities and it is our sincere hope that the new management will rectify this.

Project management: The expenditure of the funds borrowed and the actual supervision of projects in general has been dictated by the very people who have either loaned the money or donated the funds.  International donors and lenders have not necessarily taken into consideration the historical and political perspective of our country.  Our investigations showed that projects have been concentrated in certain parts of the country, leaving other areas with very few or no projects at all.  Mr. Speaker, our informed opinion is that this has happened because of lack of political and technical direction and capacity on the part of Ministry officials.  

Project distribution country wide:  Mr. Speaker, the Committee has found that although few districts had as many as five, there were districts which had only one or two while others had none at all.  These districts were excluded from even the projects that are said to be country wide.  Their impact could not be traced in certain districts and this has created an imbalance in agricultural development and, therefore, an imbalance in the economic development of Uganda. Mr. Speaker, the most disturbing feature is that the impact of almost all the projects cease to exist as soon as the project period expires.  Many projects which start as pilot projects end up being abandoned at pilot stage after colossal amounts of money have been spent.  Out of 57 projects that have been in the Ministry, 18 have now expired  after huge sums of money were spent but one cannot find an acceptable value on the ground for the money spent, neither is there plan to replicate these projects elsewhere.  

The project implementers have taken for granted the grassroots beneficiaries and stake holders. There has been very little consultation and involvement (Interruptions)

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank the hon. Mpanga for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, if I heard her correctly, she said that quite a huge number of projects in that Ministry have been executed as pilot projects and many of them have ended and apparently their evaluation is that even they have achieved very little.  But of significance is the statement that there are no funds to replicate them.  Very often, pilot projects are adopted, and we have adopted several here, on the pretext that they will be replicated and it is sad to hear that many of these have ended without any funds to replicate them, to the disadvantage and detriments of those who did not benefit from the pilot phase.  I have often said here, Mr. Speaker, oppose pilot projects.  May I find out from the Chairperson what is the ultimate definitive view and position of the Committee on continuity operation of pilot projects, not only in that Ministry, but elsewhere in ministries?  I thank you.

MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Speaker, I said that 18 out of the 57 projects  have been concluded, but we did not see any plans to replicate  them in other districts and we were lamenting that fact.  We hope they will be replicated so that where they have been successful they will be replicated so that other districts will benefit as well.  

The project implementers have taken for granted grassroots beneficiaries and stake holders.  There has been very little consultation and involvement of the local population where these projects have been carried out.  This has resulted into serious lack of transparency and accountability. The beneficiaries cannot act as watchdogs and whistle blowers since they do not know what is being done.  There is no clear provision in the Ministry of Agriculture or even at district level for education and training of farmers, that is; extension service and the disagreement between the political leaders did not help the situation either.  

The Project LSP is famed for having many vehicles plying the roads.  They were supposed to support activities which never took place.  This was another case of uncoordinated procurement of goods and services.  We saw in our tours up-country that expensive equipment was bought but stores which were supposed to hold them were not built.  So, these equipment were kept under industry stores and were getting spoilt.  This is similar to buying a harvester without buying a planter. There will be no harvest at all! This LSP had five components.  These component included forage development through provision of pasture and seed and pilot demonstrations. An additional one million dollars was set aside for vet privatisation, an extra one million dollars for vets and other Ugandans to set livestock enterprises like small butcheries, hatcheries, pharmacies and so on.  This component was not utilised and money is still lying idle in the Bank of Uganda.  

While explaining why there are more failures of this component,  Dr. Bamusonye blamed high interest rates, but our Committee would like to report that the Cotton Development Organisation has a similar credit scheme for farmers in the same Bank of Uganda from the same World Bank at the same time and that was used quite well.  The President had a vision that a dam or tank per parish would reduce cattle movement and stop spread of disease among cattle but there was no feasibility study done. We would have liked an answer from the Ministry as to whether there was a feasibility study done but we did not see it.  But the Ministry of Natural Resources gave the project coordinator LSP a preliminary survey of areas that need water.  

Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, we want you to remember that a pilot project was designed to determine the actual cost of dams.  Three dams in Mbarara district - Bujura, Rwenjubu and Nyakahita -were to be constructed and Kanyelyeru dam to be repaired using equipment from MAAIF engineering division based in Namalere near Kawanda.  Mbarara district council contributed 50 million shillings to this pilot project and the World Bank refunded 80 per cent of the money used.  

The execution of this pilot project proceeded well until the project coordinator, Fatokun, came as a consulting engineer.  Before his arrival, dams were in the region of 40 to 50 million shillings each.  When he arrived, the Nyakahita dam was under construction, after dam's costs rose to 150 million, then 300 million per dam or tank.  Nyakahita dam site was used just as a pipe through which tax payers' money was siphoned.  This evidence is available in the chapter on financial management in our report.  

Before the pilot phase of this project was finished, a contract stage was started on. They did not wait to see the results.  So, as a result, we have had quite a loss of money.  The Ministry was relying on Fatokun who had a blank cheque to design the project, select sites, conduct geological surveys, draw maps, approve them, draw bills of quantities, supervise the contract and then certify all payments. That was one person.  Although he had a generous salary and allowances as a consultant, he charged extra for most of the above tasks.  Mr. Speaker, this is equivalent to a driver being paid a monthly salary and demanding extra pay for reverse packing or parallel packing or a three point turn.  

Through correspondence between H. E.  Dr. Speciosa Kazibwe and hon. Dr, Kezimbira Miyingo, and through interviews, we made these following discoveries:  His Excellency the President wanted a programme that will result into each parish in Uganda where water is necessary having a water facility - either a dam or valley tank.  Secondly, that Dr. Miyingo Kezimbira wanted small cheap dams costing 5 to 20 million shillings sprayed along the cattle corridor to control disease.  Thirdly, that Her Excellency Dr. Kazibwe and the technocrats were for large dams and they had little respect for the opinion of Dr. Kezimbira Miyingo and Her Excellency authorised the Permanent Secretary, Mr. Opika Opoka and the Director of Animal Resources, Dr. Bamusonye to sign the controversial dam contracts.  

I would like to draw the attention of the House that Nyakahita dam which is only 20 per cent complete has cost this country so far a total of 187,473,240 shillings.  It is 20 per cent finished but already we have spent  over 18 million shillings on it.  Mr. Speaker, Her Excellency the Vice President told us that they followed the rules and that there was a way they could - there was a circular from the Ministry of Finance that allowed them to award contracts without reverting to CTB.  I want to remind the House that an act of Parliament requires that all Government procurement of goods and services be done under the auspices of the Central Tender Board. An elaborate procedure exists of how this is done.  Mr. Speaker, leaving out the final step of this procedure caused loss of money by appointing companies without due diligence done.  There is need to correct that circular from Ministry of Finance on IDA projects in order to comply with the law of the country.  

We are told that dams are there and that they do exist.  We are told that money has been spent and spent rightly  but despite the money spent, work in many instances is shoddy.  The money paid out and spent is about 3.3 billion.  The dams and valley tanks are 19 and out of this number, only three dams were in use as of March 1999.  These dams which are in use are Kanyalyeru, Migyera and Rwamulanda. All the others have to be completed somehow.

The Committee found that the accounts of LSP were mysterious in a number of ways. The Committee had difficulty in determining how many bank accounts LSP was opening and this was not commented on in the reply.  At first, MAAIF officially did not admit that they operated more than one bank account.  Then later, we were force to admit that the second account existed.  After thorough examination, the Committee found a third account, and in the final days of investigation, a fourth account surfaced.  We can only hope that there are no more accounts which we did not see.  We interpreted this withholding of information about bank accounts as an attempt to obstruct our investigations, hide the mismanagement of funds of LSP.

In the Vice President's - former Minister for Agriculture's speech, she did not explain the existence of these accounts, neither did she refer to the officers who operated them. Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, the following questions must be answered so that we may make a correct decision.  The President realized what was an urgent need of water for animals country wide, and was it his vision to construct structures that would take two or three years to capture water, if ever at all?  Let me repeat that question.   Did the President realize that we need structures that would take two to three years to fill, if ever?  Was this properly assessed to cover the whole country -  East, West, North and Central?  Does country wide stop at the six districts?  What about Teso, what about Karamoja, what about Lango, what about Acholi?  Was the purpose for this water component for control - (Interruption)-

DR. MALLINGA:  Mr.Speaker, when the hon. Member from Mubende who is holding the Floor was mentioning the areas within the cattle corridor, it is regrettable that Pallisa was not mentioned.  This is a recurring problem.  When there was cattle rustling, a lot of people in Pallisa lost their cows but when restocking occurred, Pallisa was again neglected.  So, I hope that hon. Members will realize that Pallisa is a cattle keeping area and when dams are constructed in future, Pallisa will be considered.  Thank you very much.

MRS. KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Mpanga for giving way.  I would like also to inform you that, Masindi is part of the cattle corridor and, actually, during the dry season, the cattle keepers had to wonder up to Apac and others were approaching Karamoja looking for water.  So, you can imagine the problem is even more grave in Masindi.  Thank you very much.

MRS. MPANGA:  Thank you very much for that information.  Can I clarify to hon. Malinga.  I only gave examples, I did not exhaust all the districts.  I only gave a few example and said, what about Teso because there is no district that is called Teso today.  We are talking about the whole cattle corridor and all areas where water is needed.  We are asking, by providing water only in six districts, was that considerate of the rest of the country?  Was the purpose for the water component for the control of nomadism and spread of disease realized?  Was it ever, or will it ever be realized at all?  

Mr. Speaker, 3.2 billion shillings was spent on contracts but were the contract properly awarded?  Did the contractors have the experience and capacity to execute the contracts?  Have we controlled nomadism and disease by constructing expensive large dams?  Do we have water for livestock now?  Shall we have water for animals before we go back to the electorate to give our political accountability at the next election?  Should we wait for two years to control nomadism and spread of disease?  How can the new leadership reverse this trend of mismanagement, and what is the way forward?  When we answer those questions, then we shall close LSP fairly.

Mr. Speaker, we were waiting for the former Minister of Agriculture to talk about fuel supplies, because in our findings, we found that fuel was a way of siphoning out money.  Mr. Speaker, the Committee found out that fuel for use under LSP was obtained from 13 petrol stations; six of them in Kampala, two in Entebbe, three in Mbarara, one each in Masindi and Hoima.  Fuel should have been bought directly from the oil companies at a lower price instead of paying for fuel advances. There was total lack of transparency and accountability. The Permanent Secretary and Director of Animal Resources must be held fully accountable and let them make good the loss to the public.  In the same way, there was nothing in the Ministry's answer. There was no comment on use or repair of vehicles although we found that those also were misused.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, I am sorry to disturb you.  I would like to request that you indicate whether your winding up is going to be equal to or exceed the presentation of the report.  Whether your winding up speech is going to equal or exceed the presentation of the report.  Can you guide me.

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I am just about to finish.  In the debate on this floor, Mr. Speaker, the discussion centred mainly on LSP water component, but I now want the House to focus on the 2 million shillings for capacity to avail high yielding improved seed at sub-county level throughout Uganda.  

Mr. Speaker, Modernisation of Agriculture Plan  1996/97 to 2,000 was initially developed in 1996 as a deliberate effort for Ministry of Agriculture to eradicate poverty.  However, both government and the donor community remained cautious about moving forward.  One of the major activities envisaged under this regional Modernisation of Agriculture Plan was the transfer of existing technology available at research stations mainly in form of improved, high yielding and disease resistant seeds.  The strategy proposed was to use the sub-county as the point of entry for seed multiplication and distribution and also as the focal point for the promotion of farmer sensitization and provision of extension services.  

The objective was to get maize and beans grain which would be produced by the Uganda Seed Project to be planted in February/ March 1998.  It was to produce this grain in Kasese and Masindi, have it treated so that people do not eat it straight away  and give it to farmers as a loan so that they pay back in kind - pay back in seeds. They also promised to sell some of the seeds to farmers.  This was to have a multiplier effect system which would continue in four seasons, that is two years by which time forty per cent or 2.5 million families would have adopted this high yielding maize and bean varieties.  

Mr. Speaker, you heard in the answer of the Ministry that this money was turned into purchase of beans and maize seed; was given to Kawanda and NARO for high value crops like coffee, like mangoes, like oranges, like banana, passion fruit, silk worm development, fish fly development, national bull scheme, national elite herd and national bull stud.  Mr. Speaker, this money should not have been diverted without referring back to the Ministry of Finance and Parliament for authorization.  

During our upcountry tours, Mr. Speaker, we visited 20 districts out of 45.  The population and the local political leadership complained of unavailability of seed, not only at sub-county level, but in the whole district.  Or if they were there at all, they were being sold by commercial farmers at prices that the farmers could not afford.  In the select Committee's view, therefore, the national technical Committee co-ordinating the distribution of seeds failed and neglected its responsibility for effective distribution of seed, and must, therefore, take responsibility and be charged for neglecting duty resulting into non execution of a government programme, in addition to failure to account for the public funds as we have already said.
The Committee would like to reiterate its disappointment at the defence of the ministers because most of the time, it was: "I was not a Minister then, I am not responsible for this, it is so and so, and so on",  forgetting a very important factor of collective responsibility.  The Committee says that it is fine to protect oneself but we must remember that we are investigating a Ministry and not particular  individuals.  

The Committee urges Parliament to recommend to His excellency the President that the necessary financial and engineering audit which he has promised should be done when all the Ministers that were involved are not in that Ministry.  You will note that if one of them still remains, it is difficult to investigate somebody when he is also in office.  Mr. Speaker, like I ended with LSP, I want the House to ask itself these questions: do we have water for animals after spending nearly 3.3 billion?  Has maize and bean seeds been distributed at sub-county level?  Who has been responsible?  The Committee confirms that it is the Minister and the Ministers of State as well as Ministry officials that led to this state of affairs.  Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn to the Committee resolution.

The Committee has already circulated a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the report of the Select Committee on Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the preamble goes: 
"In response to the public outcry in respect of the mismanagement in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; 
Reacting to the reports of financial irregularities; 
Committed to putting an end to mismanagement in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; 
Aware of the strategic importance of the Ministry of Agriculture, animal Industry and Fisheries in the economy; 
Conscious of the disagreement among the Ministers of the said Ministry;  Now therefore, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda duly convened constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 6th day of April 1999; 
Having considered the report of the Select Committee on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and taking into account the debate in this House; 
Parliament resolves as follows:  
1. That taking into account the evidence adduced by the Report of the Select Committee, Parliament recognises the changes taken by His Excellency the President on the top political leadership of MAAIF and the statement to this House made by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.
2.  That due to the intention of government to undertake further investigation into the Livestock Services Project and the Poverty Eradication (Seeds) Project where hon. Kibirige Sebunya was involved,  Parliament demands that those involved should not remain in office while investigation is going on.  
3. That because of the importance of MAAIF to this country, whoever holds the portfolio of agriculture should not be assigned any other responsibility that will divert his or her attention from the full time concentration on the Ministry. 
4. That Parliament deplores the manner in which the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries executed projects, especially the Livestock Services Project(LSP) and Poverty Eradication (Seeds) Project and calls upon the Executive to follow up specific cases of abuse of office leading to financial loss mentioned in the report with a view of prosecuting and, or recovering those moneys from the persons responsible in accordance with Article 164(2) of the Constitution.
5. That all officers of the Ministry who have been identified as part and parcel of the conspiracy to cause financial loss be interdicted from services if they are still employed, and that Public Service follows the normal procedure to dismiss those found guilty.
6.  That Parliament urgently considers establishing a standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to probe the performance of the remaining 55 projects to closely supervise the sector and ensure implementation of resolution of Parliament.
7.  That Government considers lifting the ban on semen importation.
8.  That the Ministry revitalizes the project for seed multiplication and distribution down to sub-county level for the benefit of all Ugandans.
9.  That special programmes to re-stock and provide water for livestock in Teso, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja and other Northern areas be put in place.
10.  That Construction of smaller valley dams and tanks spread throughout the country to reduce nomadism  and to control the spread of livestock diseases be embarked on.  
11.  That funds meant for projects be decentralised to districts for effective management and supervision of the project in accordance with the policy of decentralisation.
12. That an Agricultural Commission be set up along the lines of the Odoki Constitutional Commission to recommend to Government ways and means of providing a balanced agricultural development and an equitable nation-wide agricultural sector programme, food security and modernisation of agriculture in accordance with article 172 (3) of the Constitution.  
13.  That Mr. Jeremiah Fatokun who misled MAAIF and escalated the prices for the dams be prosecuted and all contracts which he executed nullified and public funds paid to him be recovered. Further, that the pay-as-you-earn (PAYE) which he evaded be recovered from him with a fine.  
14.  That the Permanent Secretary MAAIF makes a follow-up of the LSP with a view to making it attain its original objectives and streamline existing activities to ensure that LSP equipment is secured and finances accounted for and that the dams are completed as originally planed.
15.  That the Attorney General reviews the contracts signed with Basangira Building contractors 1977 Ltd.  and Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (Uganda) Ltd. with a view of recovering the money fraudulently paid to them and prosecution of the officials of the companies for possible offenses committed.
16.  That Shs. 4.169 billion diverted from LSP by MAAIF as a supplementary expenditure without approval be verified by the Auditor General and recovered from the Ministry's  budget in order to finance the provision of water countrywide. 

17. That the Executive reports to the House action taken in respect of all the above within two months of adoption of this report."

Mr. Speaker, I want to move that this House adopts this report and the resolutions attached to it.  I beg to move - (Applause).

DR. JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara):  Mr. Speaker, I stand to second the Motion.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to second the Motion, a Motion which I think is important; a motion that follows the public outcry about the management style in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries which is popularly known as MAAIF. 

I salute this august House for the support given to the report which we are now sealing with a motion. A  Motion moved by an hon. Member I respect highly, a Member for Mubende District, hon. Joyce Mpanga.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Her Excellency the Vice President and former Minister in MAAIF and her two Ministers of state, hon. Dr. Kezimbira Miyingo and hon. Dr. Kibirige Sebunya.  I would also like to thank the benevolent gods of our ancestors for removing the "bra bra" from hon. Kibirige Sebunya's memory since the time he came to our Select Committee on the 3rd of March 1999.  

The motion moved by hon. Joyce Mpanga has 17 resolutions. These may sound very many but this is the nature of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animals Industry and Fisheries that we are dealing with.  It is a  huge Ministry on which 90 percent of our voters depend. The Agricultural Sector has, in the last 5 years, got between 50 and 55 billion per year from either government, NGO's and other private concerns. This motion is meant to ensure that this huge sum of money is used to provide for food security, economic well-being of our people and raw materials for our industries. That is what the Ministry of Agriculture is supposed to provide.  

I will return to the 17 resolutions later, but let me remind hon. Members that we looked at 2 projects; LSP and the Seed Project specifically to provide maize and beans to 850 sub-counties of Uganda.  Thirdly, we looked at the management style in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  If we start with the management style, Mr. Speaker, in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, I would like to remind Members that we sat through this two or three weeks of debate and observed the management style in action and I do not need to bore you more with this management style.  

The Select Committee Report talks of acrimonious and strained relationship in MAAIF - you saw that.  Mr. Opika Opoka, the former Permanent Secretary referred to this constant bickering by the Ministers, Mr. Opoka told the Committee that when he was transferred from MAAIF, there was a  fiesta by the two Ministers of State, hon. kezimbira Miyingo and hon. Kibirige Sebunya.  Mr. Speaker, a "fiesta" is latin which means a feast. The Permanent Secretary did not tell us how long the fiesta lasted.  

Mr. Speaker, with management style that existed or exists in MAAIF, it would be a miracle for a system to evolve to prevent financial loss by corrupting civil servants.  A Ministry with key players bickering amongst themselves cannot deliver. We are reaping the fruits of this constant bickering and a management style that badly needs reform.  Mr. Speaker, I am glad to say that reform has already started.  

Now, hon. Mpanga talked of the Livestock Service Project. This was a 24 US dollar project conceived in 1986, signed in 1990, made operational in 1991. Funds were released largely after 1994 and then evaluated in 1994, extended to 1996/97 then to 1998. The project had five components as you have heard and I will not bother you with that but I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that of those five components, there is very little to show on the ground. The water component was the one we concentrated on. For instance, you saw two videos of valley dams and tanks, you saw them here and I do not want to bother with details. The Ministry told us that they had filmed 17 valley tanks but only showed us two. Now, the question is, was this because the other 17 were so pathetic that they did not want to show them to the House?  If the two were classified as the best, then God bless Uganda because those two dams were, in my view and in the views of the Members for Rwemiyaga and for Jie county, pathetic!  So, of the two video shows, one by the Committee and one by the Ministry, which one do you believe?  

I am not a student of History but allow me to tell you a short story about Aristotle who was a pagan Greek philosopher who lived some 300 years before Christ.  He used to believe and preach that men had more teeth than women. Other men did not agree with this line of thought.  One day, his friend made a fundamental suggestion to Aristotle. He said "Mr. Aristotle, you have a wife with a full set of teeth, you have a full set of teeth yourself, why do I not count your teeth now, then I go and count Mrs. Aristotle's teeth and we settle this matter once and for all."  In other words, Mr. Speaker, this argument is easy to settle. 

You saw the two videos and we do not have to call Greek philosophers and so on to tell us.  We have Members here from those beneficiary areas; we have people from Rwemiyaga, we have people from Ntungamo, we  have people from Nakasongola, we have all these people from Kiboga and so on where these dams are located. They can tell us who is telling the truth.  So, the argument and counter arguments between the Committee and the Ministry of Agriculture will go on and go on but I think if we ask the beneficiary communities, if we ask the districts concerned, the stake holders, the farmers on the ground, they will tell us whether there is actually value for money and so on.  And also, I am glad to hear that there is going to be an independent reputable engineering firm to establish value for money.  

Our Committee had already asked the association of professional engineers of Uganda to audit.  They told us that from the record of Engineer Fatokun, in their view, Fatokun is not a competent engineer to do the work he did for the water facilities.  The Auditor General also told us that he had given the financial audit of the project. We looked at this financial audit and it  points out a number of serious errors in financial management, and the Auditor General adds that MAAIF had refused to respond to these quarries.  

In response to our select Committee report, the Ministry of Agriculture in a hurry sent six engineers from the Ministry of Water, from the Ministry of Works and Ministry of Agriculture to conduct what they called an engineering audit in two days and write a report.  These Engineers commenced work on Saturday the 27th of March and submitted their report on Monday 29th of March 1999  and their report is actually suspect in  a number of ways. First of all, the time given was too short and secondly, these are engineers but the did not carry out any measurements. They told us so. Thirdly, they were not neutral because they were interested parties.  Fourthly, they did not have time to alert the beneficiary communities such as the district leadership and the local leadership and finally, they studied only 7 of the 19 facilities.  They did not talk to any of the staff who supervised the construction work for these water facilities and these people who supervised actually can tell you of the shoddy work that was going on while the construction was taking place.  However, these engineers went ahead and made some observations. 

They said their report was based on visual estimates. Secondly, they said the report does not establish value for money. Thirdly, they say the two days given to the team was not adequate to examine project documents and to attain full understanding of the project before proceeding on field inspection.  So, they said they did not have adequate time even to examine project documents.  So, what were they going to evaluate if they did not have time to examine the project documents?  They said it themselves! Secondly, the said time was not adequate for measurements. Despite all this, the team went ahead and submitted an interim report.  We would like to ask this House to condemn that kind of effort and to disregard that interim report and to disregard their request that they should go for further investigation because I think a more independent investigation should be carried on.  So, Mr. Speaker, I will not bother you with more of this interim report but it makes very interesting reading. There is a copy of this interim report out somewhere and you can really have a good laugh if you want.  

For instance, they tell us in this interim report which is friendly - it is recommending the following: That there is urgent need to resume construction to avoid loss of Government resources already spent.  So, there is urgent need to resume construction and we can tell you that the money to the contractors has already been paid; they have been paid and yet you are supposed to pay a contractor when he has finished work!  So, as far as the work is concerned, the contractors have been paid meaning, the Ministry is satisfied.  They say further - these engineers - that further mobilisation of the community will be required to involve them in the operation and management of facilities to ensure sustainability.  Thirdly, they say, adequate consultation should be made amongst relevant Ministries and professional organisations during the design of similar projects to obtain value for money meaning, they are not sure there is value for money.  These are the friendly engineers.  

So, this report from these engineers implies potential loss of the already spent money, poor community mobilisation and lack of value for money on seven of the 19 sites visited and by the way, Mr. Speaker, these seven are not the worst, there are other worse sites they could have visited.  So, to end this section, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that as far as Livestock Services is concerned, the whole project was a disaster, the water component which we looked at in a lot more detail was even a bigger disaster.  The seed project, my Colleague has ably described how - (Interruption)

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I need clarification on the engineering audit that was carried out by engineers from Ministry of Works, Water and Agriculture.  The chairman of this Select Committee did write to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment asking for engineers to carry out an engineering audit.  We did not have any money and we did not know which vote to get the money from.  So, we took a bit of time.  

Secondly, Her Excellency the Vice President who was also the Minister of Agriculture at the time verbally told us to carry out an engineering audit within about 36 hours and that is the result of the interim report hon. Nkuuhe is talking about - 36 hours - (Interruption) 

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Clarification.

THE SPEAKER:  He is still clarifying.  Why do you not allow him to finish, then you can seek clarification from him?  Hon. Minister, you were giving clarification.  You finish.  If anybody wants you to clarify, then that opportunity will be given.

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO:  - and without the money.  Then thirdly, the Institute of Professional Engineers of Uganda was also contacted - I think by the Committee which institute said that their charge would be US $40 per work that they do. The Committee shied away and they did not respond as to whether they could meet that.  Now, the clarification I would like to have is, in view of all this confusion, I am so concerned, I would like to be guided - I would like to know the direction from henceforth on the fate of the dams.  Who is going to hand over these dams to the Ministry of Water when the Ministry of Agriculture is now in disarray?   Is the Committee going to believe us tomorrow when we come here to say that they were handed to us in that state?  Will we not also fall in the same boat like the officials, like the former Ministers of the Ministry of Agriculture?

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to rise on this point of order to remind my good friend, the hon. Minister that for very simple reasons, I do not believe it to be right for it to go into our Hansard that the Uganda Government Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is in disarray.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, and I think all hon. Members here know that the Ministry exists.  If a few Ministers are in disarray, that does not make the Ministry in disarray.  Mr. Speaker, with that background in mind, is he in order to describe the Ministry of this Government as being in disarray?  Is he in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  I think what the Minister meant was that the management within the Ministry seems to have been in disarray.  I think that is what he meant, not necessarily - the Ministry exists of course as a unit, but in order to keep it together, the managers have to be not in disarray.  That is what I think he is trying to - but hon. Minister, you wanted to be guided - from here, how are you going to handle the valley dams?  Is that what you are saying?

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO:  You see, Mr. Speaker, hon. Nkuuhe is appealing to the House to disregard even the interim report that has been issued and yet that interim report also points out very key issues that we need to take note of.  Now, in view of that, if we are going to ignore the interim report, what is the next course of action before the dam is finally handed over to me for proper management now?

THE SPEAKER:   Hon. Nkuuhe, are you about to conclude?

DR. NKUUHE:  I am concluding.  I would like to say that I thank the hon. Minister for that concern but I think you have your forum where you can really sort out these things. I think you can ask the hon. Prof. Nsibambi to advise you on the way forward.

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was going to say that we have had the two projects: the Livestock Service Project which was a disaster and the Seed project which we think is also a very big disaster because if it had gone according to plan, this is where we should be mobilising the population.  We would have a point because every sub-county was going to have 300 farmers growing maize and beans and then the Ministry was going to do the marketing and so on.  So, we would have a point around which we can mobilise but alas, it is not possible.  So, we think that project should be reinstated and this is one of the recommendations we should take  - (Interruption).

MR.  WANJUSI  WASIEBA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Nkuuhe.  I think the steps taken are the right steps.  Since there were investigations in the Ministry and the Minister, together with the Minister of State responsible for Animal Husbandry has been moved to another Ministry, the only alternative was to ask a group of engineers to go and give a preliminary assessment which has been received.  So, the next step to be taken, Mr. Speaker, is that the Committee be given more time to prepare the notes for handover to the new Minister so that he knows where to take from and eventually, when that Minister takes over, he will have to assemble his team to verify this report that has been received from the Committee which has been put in place.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Nkuuhe, I would like you to conclude.

DR. NKUUHE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to conclude by supporting my Colleague, hon. Joyce Mpanga and to appeal to the House to support these 17 resolutions.  They may sound very many but, actually, they are meant to improve the management in the Ministry of Agriculture.  We thank the House for having supported this crusade.  When we started, it was given all sorts of names but we thank God that we remained steadfast and we were not swayed by all this name-calling.  We were given enough names to last us a life time but we continued and we knew we were not after personalities, we were not after anything, we were just after performance and we are glad that the Government responded.  So, with those few words, ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, I implore this House to support this motion.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, this motion actually, is intended to bring to an end this long debate. We have been at it for three weeks.  Since receipt of the report, we have had responses from Ministers from MAAIF who were mentioned in this report, we have really given enough time or long enough time for the general debate.  Now, this motion really, is to bring this matter to conclusion.  I am aware that ordinarily, when a motion is moved and seconded, it should be open to a debate and I am not in any way suggesting that this should not be the case here, but I would like to draw your attention to the specific resolutions which are in the motion. If you read carefully the last pages of the Select Committee's report, these resolutions which appear in this motion are actually an extract from the report and polished up to suit the motion. They are not anything new although some of them may have been overtaken by events. I would like to draw your attention that they are actually resolutions which were extracted from the Select Committee report.  

I would also like to suggest that when it comes to considering these resolutions contained in the motion, it would be neater for us to proceed item by item and I am also saying that at that time, you are free to state your position, you are free to debate.  When we get there, it would be, I think taking us backwards for you to open up a general debate when we are considering each of those 17 items.  I thought I should make this clear so that we know there is no rush for general debate. You can make your point when we get to a particular point which we would like to pronounce ourselves on.

MR. PINTO:  May I,  Mr. Speaker, thank you and as a matter of procedure request that since this matter is in two parts, that the question be put for us to express ourselves on the adoption of the report.  If that is accepted and the question is put, then, Mr. Speaker, maybe the chairman or the Clerk as you have very well guided, one by one points of the resolution could be raised and then we express ourselves and I think the matter will be brought to a quicker conclusion, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Sir, may I suggest that if, for instance, the Front Bench were to find the resolutions which were read out by hon. Mpanga to be acceptable and not contentious, then the House could accept those recommendations, then they form part of the report so that the report we adopt is a report with its recommendations as modified by the motion of hon. Mpanga who is also the chairperson so that we just do it at once - so that we do not have to go through it two times.  That is my suggestion.

MR. MED KAGGWA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would slightly differ with hon. Wapakhabulo although I am in the same line. Since you had guided very well that we would straight away go to the resolutions so that we consider them one by one, if members of the Front Bench have anything - or indeed any Member - on anyone of them, one can put up his or her case and then we move and thereafter adopt the entire report.  

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether you read my guidance well.  My view is that we have had a really long debate regarding the report in general terms.  This motion is introducing resolutions to bring this matter to a conclusion and unless you really strongly feel otherwise, I think we should now go to the resolution one by one and if you feel that a particular resolution is not the way you would like it to be structured, you will say so.  Otherwise, if there is no objection, the House will pronounce itself on it and we proceed.  Is that okay?

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I am really seeking a very elementary guidance on procedure.  Is the chairman of the Select Committee telling this House to abandon the recommendations they made in the main report and substitute for them this circulation?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Dick Nyai, if you look at the preambular paragraphs, especially the last two on page 2, which states that: "The Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 6th day of April, 1999 - this is really my emphasis - Having considered the report of the Select Committee on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries and taking into account the debate in this House..."  Now, that report contains recommendations.  Those recommendations are found in the last two/three pages of the report and this is the report which the Mover of the motion is saying the House having considered and having considered through debate, the House would like now to pronounce itself on along the following lines.  

Earlier on, I had drawn the attention of the House that in fact what you see here as Resolutions 1 to 17 are an extract from what is contained as recommendations in the Report and if the Chairperson of the Committee does not think otherwise, and I have no reason to imagine that she will do so because she is the Mover, I really do not see any contradiction between what is here and the motion and what is contained in the Report. Now having said so, can we proceed to pronounce ourselves on the Resolutions item by item. Resolution number one; I put the question - (Interruption)

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, I am just wondering whether Resolution one or what is called Resolution one is already a Resolution?  I would seek your guidance here because it seems what we are resolving are issues which are likely to have a bearing on actions to be taken.  My view is that number one is really not a Resolution, it is a preambler part and it would as well be re-drafted and come immediately in the third paragraph above.  For example, it would be re-drafted to read like this  that: "noting the changes taken by His Excellency the President on the top political leadership of MAAIF and as stated to this House by the Rt.Hon. Prime Minister - then you say - Parliament resolves."  I do not think we are resolving on any issue about the President taking action and we are not resolving on the statement of the Prime Minister.  We are noting those actions, and they are, therefore, preambler matters rather than matters to be resolved on.  So I move that we transfer that one before we resolve.  That is my issue.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker,  I think hon. Omara Atubo is right.  Quite a number of what is supposed to be resolved here which, at the end, should be what we call the operative paragraphs are actually preambler in nature and should have been part of the preamble so that when we resolve, we resolve taking into consideration the declarations in the preamble. You do not resolve by making another declaration in the operative paragraph.  That is simply a technic in drafting.  I am proposing, therefore, Mr. Speaker, that anything here which would rather be preambler should be transferred to the preambler section. This would have required us to sit and do the drafting afresh but nevertheless, may I venture to suggest primarily that;
(a)  The present operative paragraph number one which is supposed to be a Resolution is a preamble and it should be transferred to the preambler paragraph with the following Amendment as hon. Omara Atubo said that: "noting the changes taken by His Excellency the President on the top political leadership of MAAIF as reported to the House by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister - that should go up in the preambler paragraph.  Then we may want to pronounce ourselves on that decision as a Resolution which I have in mind.  The second part also really is preambler.  Should we stop there first?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Okulo, let us go paragraph by paragraph. 

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Okay.  Then I would want to suggest an operative statement for that number one.

THE SPEAKER:  You agree with hon. Omara Atubo, except that you are including in the aspect of the Report or the statement made by the Prime Minister as your source of this information.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Yes, exactly.

THE SPEAKER:  Let us hear from hon. Wapakabulo.  He is an expert on legislative drafting.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Not necessarily this time.  Sir, what I am trying to put across is a Resolution of Parliament taking note of the action taken by the President so that we do not take this to just be a mere preambler statement but to say that Parliament resolves one; to take note of the changes taken because what I can see is some people arguing so that Parliament does not recognise the action taken by the President, but I think Parliament should take note of the fact that the President acted with speed and with respect to the requests of this House. So, we do not just make it a mere preamble, it must be part of the operative statement.

MRS. OGWAL: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure.  I would like you to guide us as to what exactly we are looking at now.  I was of the view that we are back to the Report of the Committee.  We therefore look at the recommendations as contained in the Report and while looking at those recommendations, we try and modify and cause Amendment as contained in this motion, Mr. Speaker.  I am saying this because there appears to be a fundamental difference between the recommendations of the Report and what is contained in this motion, Mr. Speaker.  So, I would like to be guided as to whether we are looking at the recommendations of the Report or we are looking at totally a different motion brought by the Committee.  And the Committee must explain why they are abandoning the original position, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I think I did say right from the beginning and I will repeat it, that if you look carefully at these Resolutions - I hope you are listening hon. Member.  If you look carefully at these Resolutions, the 17 old Resolutions, and you look at the 21 old Recommendations - according to my counting they are 21 although in the Report the numbering is up to 20. But if you look at that carefully, you will find that there are actually 21 old Recommendations.  Now, I said earlier on that if you compare the two, the recommendations and what is contained in the motion as Resolutions, the Resolutions in the motion are actually extracted and polished up, put in a more acceptable format.  Then when they appear in the Report, I think that is exactly what the Chairperson has presented here.  But it is of course up to her to accept that there is a fundamental difference, and that is why I am saying, I would be surprised.  

Now, we should, I think, proceed this way without wasting unnecessary time.  Look at a Resolution, change it the way you want and then we move to the next one.  Already we have identified - although there is a bit of a difference of opinion on that - that Resolution one should form part of the preambler paragraphs.  The other contention is that it is so important that the House should resolve to recognise the action taken by the Chief Executive, rather to take note.  The House should resolve to take note of the action or actions so far taken by the Executive.  This is now where we are and I think we should proceed on that one.  If you think that one paragraph has to go up, you say so when we get there.  And when you like that paragraph changed, even if you want it to sound or to read like what is in the Report, there is no problem with that.  You can change it provided you move the Amendment on the Floor.  I think that is how we should proceed.  Something burning hon. Okulo?

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Yes! I think it will possibly help us. Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to agree with hon. Wapakabulo on what he has said.  You see, as I told you, if we agree to move this to the preamble, then I was going to suggest what should be an operative paragraph.  So, in order to ease us out, I wanted this to move as a preamble and then as an operative paragraph we  say: "resolves as follows: (1) to commend the President for the actions he has taken so far with regard to the Report and debate of the Report of the Committee."  That is a proper operative paragraph.

THE SPEAKER:  There is no objection to that I can see.  So we proceed.  Hon. Members, operative paragraph (1) should now be split into two.  Part of it goes to the preamble paragraph and then the operative paragraph will firmly say that the House resolves to commend the President for the actions taken by himself. Can somebody put the two in a good format?  Because you see, it must go into - hon. Dr. Okulo Epak.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  The formulation of the new operative paragraphs which will be numbers (1), (2), (3), (4) - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Why do you not do the preamble paragraph first?

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Yes! I would like to formulate what will now be the seventh preambler paragraph. "Noting the changes taken by His Excellency the President on the top political leadership of MAAIF as reported to the House by the Rt.Hon. Prime Minister and actions taken regarding the interdiction of the civil servants pending investigations."

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry to disturb you on that one but Hon. Member, there is one word, "note the changes taken by the President or made"?
DR. OKULO EPAK: Noting the changes or actions.  Maybe it is better to say "actions".  "Noting the actions taken by His Excellency the President on the top political leadership of MAAIF as reported to the House by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister."  That constitutes a beautiful preambler paragraph.  

THE SPEAKER:  Now, that is an additional preambler.  Can we pronounce ourselves on that?

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Then the Resolution would be; "...resolves as follows: (1) to commend the President on the prompt actions he has taken on the Report of the Committee on the Ministry of Agriculture and the debate of the House on the same so far."

THE SPEAKER:  Now, can we pronounce ourselves on those two?  

MR. DICK NYAI:  No, just a minute, Mr. Speaker. If we pronounce ourselves that way, whereas I agree with a tenor of what hon. Okulo Epak is trying to move, will this House, Mr. Speaker, be in order to try and reflect that a Select Committee Report of this House which has not been adopted by this House yet has already been accepted and adopted by His Excellency the President, is that what we want to reflect in our Hansard?  I do not think so.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Dick Nyai, at the beginning, we said that when the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister asked for an opportunity for Government to look at the Report, it was not that it was a Report as adopted by the House or even the recommendations.  It was the Report of the Select Committee; that is the Report and recommendation of the Select Committee upon which the President acted, not a recommendation of the House.  We made that clear from the beginning.  Now, can we pronounce ourselves on those two preambler paragraphs which have just been read out?  Can you read it out?  Right, can we pronounce ourselves on the two formulations.  The first one is the preambler paragraph and then the second one is now the first operative paragraph.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  (2) That due to the intention of Government to undertake further investigation into the Livestock Services Project and the Poverty Eradication (Seeds) Project where hon. Kibirige Ssebunya was involved, Parliament demands that those responsible should not remain in the Ministry while investigations are going on.  

MR. MED KAGGWA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would want to re-phrase this (2) so that it reads: "Parliament resolves that Government undertakes further investigations into the Livestock Services Project and the Poverty Eradication (Seeds) Project."  I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER:  I have not got the formulation.  And you should say why you do not want to go by this.

MR. MED KAGGWA:  Mr. Speaker, I would want it to stop there because in the precedents we have had in this House, Select Committees have carried out investigations and the relevant persons have been in office.  It is my considered opinion that to ask a Minister to move away will not help any further investigations.  I think it will be more useful when he is there and questions are put to him and then he also helps access whatever they may not be able to access when he is away.  I beg to move.

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, we considered it was unfair.  This was a trial.  People who had taken part, three of them, two are posted away, one is left in the station.  Secondly, it is very difficult when the other top Ministry officials like permanent secretaries and Bamusonye and others have been interdicted.  There is a new permanent secretary there, the material is there and our Report will also be available.  I do not think it is necessary for the Minister to be there to give you the information. We thought it would be easier to deal with this without any of the political leaders who were there before.        

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Speaker, looking at the Resolution proposed, I think this Resolution is not necessary.  First of all, I want to draw the Members' attention to Resolution number (6) which states: "That Parliament urgently considers establishing a Standing Committee on Agriculture and Fisheries to probe the performance of the remaining 55 projects to closely supervise the sector and ensure implementation."  In other words, Resolution number (6) anticipates further investigation and therefore, they will look at the Ministry in its entirety.  So, I wish to propose that this Resolution (2) could be deleted in as far as it personalises this matter to Kibirige as a Minister because when we assigned the Committee, it was looking at the Ministry as a whole.
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kayonde, I think let us not waste too much time on that.  Numbers (2) and (6) are completely for different purposes.  You read carefully and you will find that number (2) is to deal with a different matter from number (6).  

MR. KAYONDE: Can I, therefore, move an Amendment on number (2) and it reads as follows: "Due to the intention of Government to undertake further investigation into the Livestock Service Project and Poverty Eradication (Seed) Project, officials involved should not remain in the Ministry while investigations are going on" -  because this makes it general that while investigations are taking place, all officials are not -(Interruptions)

MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Speaker, this Resolution No(2) specifically addresses the fact that one of the three major players in that Ministry has remained after the action taken by the President.  Sometimes when you are investigating, you can tell the person to go on leave, you can put him in the Prime Minister's Office or somewhere but what we are saying, he should not be in the Ministry of Agriculture while these two investigations, that is, the Engineering Audit and the Audit of the Seed money is going on. I think that is fair and we included others involved because there may be a few other civil servants involved who will have not been mentioned outright. I do not think it is unfair to pronounce hon. Kibirige Ssebunya because he was one of the three.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I am persuaded to consider the Amendment by hon. Kaggwa more seriously.  We have just said in our passed Resolution that Parliament commends the President on the prompt actions he has taken on the Report so far.  What does that mean? It means that we are happy that the President has listened to Parliament.  

The other day, the President went on a rally and said that out of the group that has been running that Ministry, he was happy with one Minister, Kibirige, who has been for a percentage of the time in the Ministry and another percentage elsewhere.  After a thorough consideration as the man who has been in charge of running this Government, he still feels that for him to be able to achieve his political programme and his manifesto, that same Ssebunya Kibirige will be the man he would like under the leadership of a new Minister, namely, Kisamba Mugerwa.  With that, he would like Ssebunya to remain there because he has observed certain qualities in him he wants to keep in that Ministry to assist the new Minister.  

Now, to me it appears that this is the time for compromise.  For us, the President has listened to us and has not only used the valley dams to change the entire 30 per cent of his administration, but he feels that in this 30 per cent change that he has introduced in the administration, this man should stay there.  Now, I think that on our part, we should reciprocate by thanking him. After all, we have commended him for prompt action.  By the way, this is the first time the President has taken prompt action on our recommendations, even probably faster than the people we have been censuring. 

So, I think we need also to now give an olive branch to him and say, if you think that is how you are going to approach your programme and succeed, go ahead and do it and I think we should allow him and stop where hon. Kaggwa has said because for me, if hon. Ssebunya Kibirige had not woken up to the call that we have made in this House, if he has not listened to the President telling him that he is spending a big percentage of his useful time in other things, the ones that the President is not very interested in, let us also give him a long rope and I think let us, as Parliament not be seen as if we are witch hunting.  Let us just say, go ahead. Let us give him a chance to prove himself.  After all, we are still here and Uganda is not about to run away!  Thank you.

MR. NYAI: Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, all I am going to say is that I agree with the Amendment moved by hon. Med Kaggwa.  Just to add to what hon. Karuhanga has said, by the third line in Paragraph 2, we are first negating our recommendation to His Excellency the President in the first Resolution and secondly, by implication, we are trying to censure His Excellency the President. I do not think that is the intention of this House.  To the extend that we do not want to personalise this matter and to the extend that we have noted with appreciation the action taken by His Excellency the President, let us stop on the generality as moved by hon. Med Kaggwa.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: For your information, hon. Med Kaggwa's formulation reads as follows - if it is wrongly captured, please, say so:
"Government undertakes to take further investigations into the Livestock Services Project and the Poverty Eradication (Seeds) Project".  

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the first place, we have not yet voted because the Speaker has not called us to vote on the issue, so you are quite right to allow me to speak.  

The Committee's recommendation on this Resolution is really asking us that we should not have interference whatsoever of any nature while the investigation is going on.  It does not, in any way, say that the President will not deploy hon. Kibirige when the investigation is finished.  That is why he said that while the investigations are going on, he should be kept out.  Now, as the hon. Member introducing the Resolution said, he could temporarily be put somewhere in another Ministry, maybe in the Prime Minister's or the President's Office while the investigation is going on.  The idea is that there should be no interference.  

I must also say that this question of imputation of witch hunting is definitely wrong.  Parliament is not witch hunting anybody.  It is obvious that mistakes have been made and the whole Country is concerned about what is happening in the Ministry.  We want to know what has happened there in detail and we do not want any interference.  We are not saying that the President may not, when the investigation is completed, redeploy the gentleman he wants to work in this position.  
We also should not confuse the preambler recommendation we have just passed.  We have said we recognise and we thank the President for the action he has taken so far.  What we are saying is that, so far he has done very well, but we are still anticipating some more action - that is why we said, "so far."  Now, one of the things that we want him to do for us  is for the President to keep this hon. Gentleman outside while the investigation is taking place.  There is nothing personal about it.  Hon. Ssebunya was involved, he was implicated in some way and we do not want interference.  aybe when the investigations are going on, it may also lead to more being discovered and we do not him to block it and, really, that is the gist of the recommendation of the Committee and I will not support the amendment.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The amendment is now supported. I will put the question.  The amendment is that Government undertakes to take further investigations into the Livestock Services Project and the Poverty Eradication (Seed) Project, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that Resolution which is the current number (4) be struck out.  Mr. Speaker, I say that it be deleted because of the importance of MAAIF to this Country.

THE SPEAKER: But why are you moving it?  There is a motion on it, we are debating it.  Do you want to amend or you want to delete it?

MR. ONGOM: I am moving an amendment that the original (3) be deleted for the simple reason that during the Committee's investigations, they found one particular individual could not responsibly handle the two jobs but in my experience, I have found His Excellency the President doing more than 100 jobs excellently and I do not believe that it is a duty of this House to determine how many jobs one person can distinguish himself in.  So, for us to be foreseers and fortune tellers of the individual merits of persons to say that anybody who is assigned to Agriculture should not do any other thing, I think it is beyond the scope of this House. So, I beg that (3) be deleted.  

DR. OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the amendment to delete the present operative paragraph No.3, except I want to substitute - and my substitute resolves to advise the President to consider splitting the present Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries into two Ministries; Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries.

It has been stated here very strongly that the Ministry is gigantic - hon. Nkuuhe said it.  In fact he used a bigger word than what I have used.  It has also been recognised, and this is more difficult, that a lot of funds are used in that Ministry. Thirdly, I did say here that it is inconceivable that four Ministers would descend on one Permanent Secretary and expect good performance. Fourthly, I am even now surprised that the water component is being removed from that Ministry and taken to the Ministry responsible for Water.  That Ministry so far has failed even to meet the water needs of human beings, how are we going to entrust them with additional responsibility of meeting the water needs of animals?  That is even moving worse!  

I would rather the Ministry be split so that one section deals purely with Agriculture and the other one deals purely with animal or livestock affairs including fish and the water component should be retained for better planning and coordination and implementation so that the Ministry of Water deals really with water for human beings and that Ministry deals with the question of water for animal resources.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, to help you debate this matter with clarity, there are two amendments.  The first amendment is just to delete  Resolution 3 outright - forget about it.  The second amendment is that having deleted 3, you substitute it with a Resolution splitting the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries into two; one dealing purely with Agriculture and the other with Livestock.  Now, when you are making your contribution, bear that in mind.

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, with your guidance, I am satisfied.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  When I was the Minister of Public Service, I participated in restructuring of the ministries and I want to refer you to Schedule 6 of our Constitution.  Under that Schedule, many of these ministries will largely be dealing with policy and also of course they will be concerned with standards.  A lot of the functions that we are talking about will be done by the districts.  That argument demolishes the need to split these ministries. I want to add another argument, namely that Agriculture and Animal Industry interface to assist the system to correlate meaningfully.  For example, the person who may be growing food may need cow dung.  So, the two are greatly interrelated and again when we are restructuring, things which are highly interrelated are not split because you lugubrious the process of minimizing costs.  

Finally, the reason why water is not under this ministry is that, it is a user ministry, it has a direct stake in that matter.  That was why water was taken in another ministry so that all user ministries can now objectively get the arbitration of a ministry which is not fundamentally a user ministry.  On those grounds, I would like to oppose splitting these ministries.  I thank you.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Sir, in opposing the motion by hon. Okulo Epak, I would like to just make one observation that government should run like business; that ministries should concentrate on what they know how to do best and their mission.  The mission of the ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries is not to drill and dam for water.  Their primary role is production.  Let the Ministry of water which knows best how to provide water, provide water not only to the towns, but also to farmers and others who are interested in getting water so that they too become efficient.  

Finally Sir, I wanted to propose some procedural point, if you accept it, that we have two motions on the Floor; the motion for hon. Member for Ayivu and the motion for the Member  for Oyam South.  I would, in handling this, start with one which departs furthest from the proposition.  Now, I would suggest that we first defeat this one of hon. Okulo Epak, then we come to the one which, if passed, would fundamentally alter the text.  Sir, if you agree, I suggest that we proceed.

THE SPEAKER:  I was intending to proceed that way.    

MISS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, in as far as I can remember, none of the motions have any seconder and, therefore, in accordance with our rules of procedure, in my view - I am wondering whether we have a motion on the Floor contrary to what the chairperson put before us.

THE SPEAKER: You are quite right. There was no formal secondment of the motions apart from people saying - now can we have seconders of the two motions.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to second the motion moved by my Brother from Ayivu. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I am standing to second the motion moved by Dr. Okulo Epak and since it is last one, can I speak to it, Mr. Speaker and you had promised me.

THE  SPEAKER: Yes speak to.

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I hate to be at variance with our fresh Prime Minister but I congratulate him for the appointment, and he knows that I am very happy about it, but let him allow me to differ with him for I would not like to cover the mistake that he committed when he was a minister for Public Service because, to say that these ministries interface - yes they do but so does the Ministry of Health, so does the Ministry of Water, so does the Ministry of Environment, so does the Ministry of Finance because the Ministry of Environment gives grass and takes care of the trees; Ministry of Water gives water, finance gives the money!  So, all these should be under one ministry according to what the Minister is saying.  But that is not the case.  Having identified that, therefore what he was talking was absolutely lugubrious and not necessary.  

I want to tell you the lamentation of the people who have been affected in this sector, bearing in mind that there are still 55 projects still to be investigated under one ministry for one Permanent Secretary, for one new Minister for Agriculture, poor him!  We are soon going to have him here for another castigation of failure to perform.  The cry of the people at the grassroots level has been that the - in fact the root cause of why the ministers have been having these problems in that ministry started immediately when they amalgamated the two ministries.  Within the Ministry itself, camps were immediately established  and if the ministers were upright enough to stand up to those who have been in that ministry, they would say so, including hon. Nasasira here.  Because he knows that people in agriculture refused to be led by the people in the veterinary and the people in the veterinary refused to be led by people in agriculture, and at the districts, the war still goes on and the Public Service Commission has literally failed to know what to do at the district.  Members here can bear witness to this.  This split is not of Ugandan making, this split was imposed on us by some people who were hired to go into the Public Service Reform and they were foreigners and they did not know that Uganda's economy was 99 per cent based on the backbone of nature -(Interruption)

DR. OKULO EPAK: I am aware of the fact that the demand for restructuring, even the determination of the number to which we must restructure ministries had been pre-determined by the World Bank.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, taking into account that this country has professionals and experts and taking into account that right-sizing is a necessity in order to ensure that you utilize your scarce resources effectively, is the hon. Member in order to undermine our country and falsify the fact that in fact the Ministry of Public Service spearheaded a process which was not pre-determined by any external factor?  Can he be in order?  Is he in order?  

THE SPEAKER: Considering that there was a long exercise undertaken by the Ministry of Public Service to study the process of restructuring the entire Public Service, I think it would be wrong and out of order to say that the World Bank dictated the right-sizing of the structure of the Public Service. If what the hon. Member means is that the World Bank said "look, I think you are too big, do something about it", he would be in order but if what he meant was that "you must have so many ministries, cut your coat according to the cloth", then that will be a serious charge and I think it will be of order.  I do not know which one he meant.   Hon. Karuhanga, we are running out of time.  Can you conclude your remarks? 

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes Sir, we just burry the hatchet. Now, the point is that, this resolution is going to help us on - I am talking about the Okulo Epak motion. If we pass it, we shall help our government because there is a spirit that is now in the House that finally there is cooperation and I am sure that the peasants who are giving 90 per cent of our economy support through  agriculture which is the mainstay of our economy would like to see a concentrated effort for modernisation of agriculture and concentration on that sector by the relevant Minister for Agriculture and then also for animal industry because if we could concentrate on coffee, cotton and then we have somebody else concentrating on - Hon. Members of this House have been moving round - (Interjections) -  Now, I depend on the Speaker to allow me because of the time.

THE SPEAKER:  No, it is your right. I can either accept or decline but that is going to eat into your time. 

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Karuhanga for giving way.  I have listened to you intently and I guess your motion could have financial implications in splitting and facilitating these two ministries and as far as I remember, except that I did not come with my copy of the Constitution, there is a provision within the constitution that bars us from making laws and regulations that would have financial implications on government and, therefore, I am seeking clarification from you whether you would be in order to do this while the constitution bars it.  So, where else you would get money to facilitate these two ministries?

MR. KARUHANGA:  First of all, I would like to inform my hon. Sister and hon. Member from Rukungiri that the split we are asking is just a paper and pen split.  The people are already working there, the ministers are already there, it is just a question of independence of decision making.  Secondly, the key word here is, we are asking the government to consider and, therefore, we are putting into account - we are saying, we ask the government to consider a split if it deems it fit.  But they should know what Parliament would like to see.  So, we are just  saying, government should consider and we are asking the Prime Minister to consider. It does not say that he will implement.  But if he finds that the salary for paying a Permanent Secretary will be so high as to cause imbalances in the economic development of our country and that is the key area where the failure to split is, so be it because that is how they want to run their government.  But for us in Parliament, we people representing the masses are telling you - and hon. Speaker, I thank this House for visiting every constituency in fund raising.  They have all seen Uganda now.  This is the only Parliament which has seen our country and that is why you see people who are not involved in cattle keeping are also screaming their hearts out because they want dams for our pastoralists.  

We are now saying, we are screaming our hearts out; we want a minister whom we can go to and not find him busy saying "no, I am busy I am going to check on cotton in Kasese; I am busy I am going to check on coffee in Mbale."  We want him to say, I am busy I am going to see the dams in Karamoja. That will be different and it is high time maybe this House created an organ that would maybe force - the pastoralist group here should form an organ here, a force group that can bring movement about.

MR. NYAI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am quite sure hon. Karuhanga believes in fairness of these legal matters.  Article 111 (1) under the sub-heading "The Cabinet" reads: "There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of the President, the Vice President and such number of Ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the State."  Mr. Speaker, my understanding of that constitutional declaration is that, it really takes it out of the ambit of this Parliament to tell His Excellency the President as to how he should cook.  I am begging my hon. Friend, hon. Elly Karuhanga and hon. Okulo Epak that if we are now going to encroach on the duties of the Presidency, then this House is tending towards the untenable.  

THE SPEAKER:  Now, let me clear your minds about two issues.  The first one; this is all related to hon. Dr. Okulo Epak's  motion which - correct me if it is wrong -  resolves to advise the President to consider splitting MAAIF into the Ministry of Agriculture and that of Animal Industry and Fisheries.  First of all, it is advice, it is a recommendation and if you are worried about article 93 of the constitution, I think you have not even reached there.  The President will consider and his lawyers will say look, there is a problem here to consider.  Secondly, the question of whether we are encroaching on the presidential executive powers of appointment, you are also saying he should consider splitting the Ministry of Agriculture.  So, I think let us not get into unnecessary discussion of this matter. I take it that hon. Karuhanga has finished, and we want to pronounce ourselves on this motion and then we go to hon. Dick Nyai's.

MR. KARUHANGA:  So, in conclusion - I just thank you for that clarification. I hope that it is not bad for Parliament to advise the President and the Prime Minister and the Government and I would like to remind the Government that we have a full minister in charge of Integrity.  Now, if we had a minister in charge of our animals, really, what would it mean in terms of exports?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Now, let us dispose of this one and then we move to the amendment which is furthest. That is the one of hon. Okulo Epak to delete resolution 3 and to substitute with the following:  "The House resolves to advise the President to consider splitting the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries into the Ministry of Agriculture and that of Animal Industry and Fisheries."  I repeat just in case you did not get me clearly.  First of all, you delete item Resolution 3. Are you aware of Resolution 3 first before you say "Aye" or "No"?  Alright. Now, having deleted that, you replace it with the following; that "The House resolves to advise the President to consider splitting the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries into the Ministry of Agriculture and that of Animal Industry and Fisheries."

(Question put and negatived)

	(The Speakers Ruling challenged)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, they are only 38 who have unsuccessfully challenged, only 38. I am advised that we need 40 to cause a division.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  When we stood up, only the Front Bench, hon. Ruzindana and hon. Mudhoola on this side together with the Ministers and only hon. Babihuga stayed seated and hon. Makumbi.  So we overwhelmingly defeated them. Now if that be the case, then there is no quorum - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Order! Hon. Karuhanga, can you resume your seat.  You should respect the regulations, you should respect the rules of procedure.  If you are challenging this, you know how to go about it, you do not rise a point of order - (Interruption).

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongom, the Speaker is for once Speaking.

MR. ONGOM: I oblige. I thought you had finished.

THE SPEAKER: No, I have not.  I am still speaking hon. Ongom, I am still addressing hon. Karuhanga.  I have got the count unless you are even going as far as suggesting that there is a problem in counting.  So, that is the position.

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, considering that you were actually making a very important decision, and considering that we do not form a quorum, were we in order to vote and is the House in order to proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongom you know our rules very well, the House has already pronounced itself on the matter, it cannot be re-opened in the manner that you are proposing.

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, my point of order was in two parts -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongom, will you resume your seat.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am seeking  clarification in connection with our rules and the way we reach decisions in this Parliament which are supposed to be very democratic and in accordance with all the rules of natural justice.  When a question is put, it depends sometimes on how the Speaker hears it and if there is no satisfaction in the House, Members stand up.  On this matter where Members of Cabinet have collective responsibility, we could not hear properly their strong views but on the whole of the back bench and on counting the numbers that would balance even including the Members. I want clarification on the question of whether it is true. Truth remains truth - whether it is true that this House democratically passed this decision correctly or whether rules are governing overwhelming democracy.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tumwine, you are opening a very interesting debate. The next thing, you will open a debate on the constitution.  Now, we go to pronounce ourselves on the hon. Dick Nyai's motion.

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, my point of order was in two parts and the Speaker ruled on only one.  I had asked also finally wether the House is in order to proceed without a quorum.

THE SPEAKER: You see, you started it in a very unorthodox  manner, very an orthodox. I do not know why.  You wanted to kill two birds with one stone but that is not how we should proceed in this House.  You direct your mind on a particular issue, it is disposed of then we go to the next one - (Interruption).

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, are we in order to continue when we are not having a quorum?

THE SPEAKER:  We have only 63 Members around, and therefore, we do not have a quorum.  I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes.

(The House adjourned for 15 minutes)

(On resumption_) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have not been able to realise a quorum. I therefore adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 pm.

(The House rose and adjourned to Wednesday, 7th July, 1999 at 2.00 p.m).
                                    
