Thursday, 1 April 2004

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is an indication in form of sad news. The Deputy Speaker regrets to inform the House that the Chairperson of Kamuli District, Mr Kaloli Baligeya Isabirye, died last night 31 March 2004 at Mulago Hospital following a motor accident on Jinja-Kamuli road on Tuesday, 30 March 2004. Also involved in the fatal accident was his wife, Annet who died on the spot. 

The burial of the wife will take place today while that of the late Baligeya will take place on Saturday at Nkondo, Budiope in Kamuli District.  This same sad news is contained in a statement by the Vice Chairperson of the Parliamentary Committee on Local Government, and the committee extends its condolences to the family of the late Baligeya and wife and also, to the Members of Parliament from the area, the people of Kamuli, for this tragic loss of a leader. I feel it is appropriate that we observe a minute’s silence in memory of the deceased.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: I must mention that in the Distinguished Visitors’ Gallery, I see some prominent citizens of this country. I see Mrs Ntiro and I see also hon. Joyce Mpanga, accompanied by other distinguished persons. You are most welcome to Parliament!  (Applause)

Honourable members, on the Order Paper as you see, we have a number of items to consider, but we have to adjust this Order Paper in accordance with our rules. Item number (4) should come first before item number (3) because it was a business we were transacting yesterday when we adjourned; then we shall move to item number (3) and then proceed in that order.

Also, I must say that in the Distinguished Visitors’ Gallery, we have the Speaker of Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom, Ernest Kiiza. You are most welcome! And he is accompanied by a member of the Rukurato, that is the Parliament of the Kingdom, Mr Henry Bamutura. You are also welcome.  

2.30
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am with humility demanding that you give me some advise as a Member of Parliament representing Lubaga Division South. The Luwero Triangle war claimants at one time spent a period of time in Wankulukuku Stadium and they entrusted me with a petition, which was seeking the indulgence of Parliament to get their claims paid. The petition has been pending for quite sometime.  It is true the Government Assurance report on the same matter generally recommended that they should be paid. However, Parliament later recommended that a select committee should be appointed to re-examine the matter. 

Mr Speaker, I find myself in a dilemma, how do I move? Should I not go ahead to petition Parliament on the same matter? The petition related to the poor innocent people, five of whom have already died unceremoniously, is ready and with your permission I could even present it. What is the way forward? I am in need of your advice.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member for Lubaga South, honourable members of Parliament, I have had an occasion to look at the intended petition through hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, and I have seen that its main prayer is that people from Luwero Triangle who were verified as proper claimants should be paid.  But then I noted that the Committee on Government Assurances presented a report here, where one of its recommendations that was never disturbed, was exactly saying the same thing.

It is true we set up a committee to look into other matters I think related to people who got money and so forth, but I know the record will show that we said other recommendations be implemented. So now the problem is, what would be the purpose of this petition when its single prayer is exactly what we have already adopted in the business that has been before us? I think the matter has been properly handled. Unfortunately, the petition came not aware of what had happened, but I think the problem has been addressed and the solution you are seeking has been provided for in a report, which the House has considered. I thank you for being concerned, but I think Parliament through its committee, has also noted the same problem and has provided the solution.

REV. DR SSEMPANGI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I put a question to the Minister of Lands and I have a note here from the Office of the Clerk dated, 26 March 2003, asking the minister to respond to my question by the 31 of March this year. To-date, I have not received any answer from this minister.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is not a matter on the Order Paper but you have raised it, I think the Clerk and the Parliament will look into this so that the minister is required to take appropriate action and give you an answer, which you sought.

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I want to invoke your discretion to have the Order Paper amended, so that I can be able to lay on the Table the Indicative Preliminary Revenue and Expenditure Framework for the years 2004/05 to 2006/07; and the three years Macro-Economic Plan and Programme for Economic and Social Development for the same years. The reason is that it was very difficult for us to prepare then in time but now they are ready and we are bound by the Budget Act to have them laid not later than today. So I would therefore, invoke your discretion to have the Order Paper amended so that I get chance to present them.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, because this matter was presented yesterday, I am happy that you managed to work in a few hours and completed the exercise.  Therefore, I will adjust and allow you to present it so that we comply with the law and then start the budget process. But before I do so, I am sorry, in the Visitor’s Gallery we have Dr Sarah Moten, a Division Chief of the African Bureau based in the United States. You are most welcome; and I understand she gave a keynote address this morning. Thank you very much. So, let us honourable members, adjust so that the minister presents the document then we proceed with the motion we had yesterday.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, honourable members of Parliament, the submission attached in compliance with Section 4(1) of the Budget Act 2001, has been prepared during the transition between the Poverty Eradication Action Plan as revised in the year 2000 and the revision of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan which is currently in progress. The programmes for the economic and social development are presented in the framework of the draft revised Poverty Eradication Action Plan. Therefore, in accordance with Section 4(1) of the Budget Act, I beg to lay before this august House the three years Macro-Economic Plan and Programme for Economic and Social Development. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. So, the document should be taken by the Budget Committee to consider and then make necessary recommendations.  You have another document?

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Yes, Mr Speaker. Again in accordance with section 4(2) of the Budget Act, I beg to lay before Parliament the Indicative Preliminary Revenue and Expenditure Framework for the financial years 2004/05 to 2006/07. The Indicative Preliminary Revenue and Expenditure Framework is presented in accordance with the current PEAP as the detailed costing in the revisited PEAP have not been finalised. Therefore, in accordance with Section 5(2) of the Budget Act, I beg to lay before this Parliament the preliminary estimates of self-accounting bodies with comments and all recommendations. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: the Budget Committee should study all documents, and then a report is made to Parliament.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON PENSION ARREARS

2.39
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, at the end of the sitting yesterday, you advised the mover of this motion and other persons interested in the same, to have small consultations to find a way of going over what was termed as a hurdle, because it was thought that the same motion offended the provisions of Article 93 of the Constitution. 

Sir, we went back and looked at the motion and did some little research and we found that it is not necessary to make any amendments to the motion because it does not offend the provisions of Article 93.  

Mr Speaker, we had the privilege of having a look at the Pensions Act - this is chapter 2, 86 of laws of Uganda - specifically at the provisions of section 7 of the same Act and we found that the pension we are talking about has already been charged on the Consolidated Fund and therefore, need no more appropriation from this Parliament. With your permission, Sir, I will read the relevant sections. Section 7(1) says: “ Subject to this section, all pensions, gratuities or other allowances shall be charged on and payable out of the Consolidated Fund without further appropriation than this Act.” 

Subsection (2) states: “All pensions, gratuities or other allowances granted to any Ugandan national under the Pensions Act of the community, shall be charged on and payable out of the Consolidated Fund without further appropriation than this Act.” 

The argument being advanced by some Members of the frontbench was that the pension we are talking about would be a further charge on the Consolidated Fund. According to my interpretation of this section of the Pensions Act, that does not apply and therefore, me and my other colleagues and the mover of this motion intend to proceed with the motion as was brought before this House, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, you very well remember yesterday when this issue came up and Article 93 was raised, I advised that when you are dealing with that issue you look at Article 154 and I think this was not considered because if you had done so – because the debate was that it had already been charged on the Consolidated Fund by Article 254. Article 254 merely created a right.  But the charge on a Consolidated Fund was done by the Act. And Article 154 says withdraw from the Consolidated Fund can only be done if the charge is specifically charged by the Constitution. Like the salary of the President is directly charged on the Consolidated Fund by the Constitution. 

The other way of charging the Consolidated Fund is if the law pact charges and this was never alluded to; it is good that after research this was found as the case. So, we agree now that the charge on pension is by an Act of Parliament; it is the Act of Parliament that charged. So, I think this will help us in future when we are looking at liabilities of Government to separate those which are charged directly by Consolidated Fund and those that require specifically a resolution of Parliament. This is a lesson, therefore I think in future we shall have a point of reference. 

2.45
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Mr Speaker, I think after your wise guidance, you will permit me to speak to the motion. And my points in light of this are very few because some of these points have been alluded to. First and foremost, my concern for raising this issue and moving this motion was based on the fact that in the budget year 2003/04, no money was allocated to the retirement of pension arrears, and in the supplementary budget no money was allocated to this item again.  Therefore, out of this concern, I moved this motion with the hope that Government will wake up to the fact that pension is a right.  Pension arrears in the amount Shs 292.1 billion is outstanding and therefore, must be given due consideration.

Mr Speaker, honourable members, in addition to this, I would like to highlight the plight of local government pensioners. Most of us who deal closely with local governments know that when there was decentralisation of pension, most of the local governments are not in position to pay pension, and when you consider new districts like that of Kyenjojo, even what was being paid on a monthly basis for the last three years has never been paid. This indeed will aggravate the situation further and create more pension arrears. It is an issue where the Minister in charge of Pensions and that in charge of Local Government need to harmonise positions so that we do not have further accumulation of pension arrears.

Number three; I would like to hear very clearly from Government how it plans to retire these pension arrears. There is need for the Ministry in charge of Pension to project the number of pensioners, to project the amount of money that needs to be paid and to also project what needs to be paid on a monthly basis for us not to have such staggering amounts of money in form of arrears. 

As I noted in the previous past, the workers of the East African Community took Government to court, an order of mandamus was issued and, Mr Speaker, honourable members, this means that Government had to pay in terms of court costs; it had to pay in terms of interest accrued because the pension for the ex-workers of the East African Community accrues interest. In essence, I am saving this government the cost of such expenses, which are uncalled for if we could plan adequately how to retire pension and how to continue paying pension to people because as we have said, this is a right.

Finally, Mr Speaker, honourable members, I would like to highlight one particular issue and although we have cited the law, we have created a precedent. It is in the interest of the Executive to work closely with the backbenchers. Article 93 exists in other jurisdiction, but this Article is not used to hamper the work of backbenchers. I am pleading with the Executive that from today henceforth, we should devise ways of addressing issues that concern our people, because just like the rest of the Ugandans, issues of pension arrears also touch on the Executive as much as they touch on us as backbenchers. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

2.49
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the mover of the motion, and I am standing up to support that motion. I am glad that through the efforts of some concerned Ugandans, the issue of pension as a charge that is payable out of the Consolidated Fund and other funds has been settled, and that makes it one of the statutory expenditures.  

Mr Speaker, out of practice, there has been a way of handling statutory expenditure as such expenditure that ordinarily takes the first call on the resource envelope. Besides that, the arrears of pension that we are talking about specifically are for people who are already out of service, people who are already aged, people who actually have suffered the vulgaries of this world, and some of them are in dire need of this money, either for treatment or for daily upkeep. 

To be told that arrears have only been cleared for up to people who were born in 1932, means that those who were born in 1933 up to those who retired about ten years ago, do not have their arrears or pension cleared and yet, this is the only hope for their social welfare. People who have put in all the useful parts of their lives to the service of this nation, it is very sad that such people are forgotten when they have put in distinguished service to this nation. It is not every work that qualifies for a pension –(Interruption)

MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is that when paying arrears, we started with the oldest persons, we started from 1900 –(Interruptions)- Yes. Can I be protected, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, very much protected.

MRS MUKIIBI: We started with the oldest pensioners and we had intended to move systematically.  Therefore, it is not correct to say that we only considered pensioners who were born up to 1932 and forgot others. What I expected, as a Minister of Pensions is that I would be getting some money every financial year and continue with the list moving systematically.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, honourable Minister for giving way. The life expectancy of Ugandans is 43 years, which fact means that most Ugandans would have died by the time you prepare to pay their pension. Can you give us clarification in light of the year, which you are mentioning; is it 1900, which is 104 years?

MR MWANDHA: With the information the honourable Minister is giving the House and the information being sought by my colleague, is the minister aware that at the end of the day nobody is going to get pension, because with the life expectancy of 42 years and starting from 1900, by the time she reaches the 2004, everybody would have died without having their pension? Is this the policy of the pension department to make sure that people do not get their pensions until they die?

THE SPEAKER: But, is the issue that pension is not being paid or arrears are not being paid and what are arrears?

MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague for raising those pertinent questions.  But I want to clarify from the onset that monthly pension is being paid; what we are talking about and what the motion is talking about is pension arrears, which accrued because of the amendment of the pension formula. But I want to repeat it again that monthly pension is being paid –(Interruptions)- give me time to clarify. 

So, the issue of the life expectancy does not really arise because we are paying the monthly pension and in any case, for those who have passed away whom we owe arrears, we are paying their next of kin. So, we had to take into consideration this age, because these are the people – I might give you information that we have pensioners who are 90 years old, and they are still on our pension payroll. So, we could not neglect even if it was one person. This was just a criterion of how we are going to handle the issue of pension arrears. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I thank my senior colleague for that information. It is very clear that by the time they clear their arrears, the successors of the successors of the pensioners will have also died. So, I think at this rate the Administrator General’s Office should be strengthened to be able to keep track of the successors of the successors of the pensioners, because the original beneficiaries will have died and the plea to government is that, please, clear the arrears so that the rightful beneficiaries benefit from their pensions. Yes, we know that Government has problems of raising funds, but when it comes to certain issues other than emolument, it becomes easier to find the money. 

What we are saying, Mr Speaker, is that the law must be respected. A statutory debt is a statutory debt and it must be made as such without disobeying the Constitution which clearly says that pension should be payable promptly and easily accessible. Is this a correct interpretation and adherence to the Constitution? If arrears have only been paid from 1900 to 1932, and how many pensioners are benefiting anyway? 

For example, what is the distribution of pensioners born between 1900 and 1932 as compared to those who are yet to be paid? It is all very well to say, “Yes, we are doing something” but can the Government please demonstrate its willingness to pay, starting with the coming financial year? I am glad that the minister had laid on the Table the framework for the coming budget and I would implore our colleagues on the Budget Committee and those on the Committee for Public Service and Local Government to ensure that whatever it takes, we should reallocate money from wherever to ensure that the pensioners of this country are provided for. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.58
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): I want to move, Mr Speaker, that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that I put the question.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO RECOGNISE THE EXCELLENT CONTRIBUTION OF EVANGELINE SARAH NTIRO TOWARDS THE ADVANCEMENT OF WOMEN’S EDUCATION IN UGANDA

3.00
MRS BEATRICE BYENKYA (Woman Representative, Hoima):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The motion reads:

WHEREAS Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro has held senior management portfolios in Uganda both in government and civil society organisations; 

AND WHEREAS prior to assuming the several posts she has held, Sarah Ntiro was the first woman graduate in both Uganda and East Africa;

NOTING with appreciation the long service and nationalism exhibited by Sarah Ntiro in various capacities;

AND NOTING that she exhibited tremendous support and maintained strong and committed membership to several non-governmental organisations both locally and internationally; 

NOTING FURTHER the enormous contributions she has made to the advancement of the women’s cause in Uganda;

APPRECIATING the magnanimous spirit in which she has served the public, the civil society and the education sector for more than five decades;

APPRECIATING her role in lobbying and preparing laws for Uganda’s independence as a nominated member of Uganda’s Legislative Council; 

AND APPRECIATING FURTHER the vigorous efforts Sarah Ntiro has made in the advancement of women’s education both locally and internationally;

NOTING that she has exhibited the highest calibre of nationalism and service evidenced by the several awards accorded to her by various organisations;

NOW THEREFORE, it is hereby resolved by Members of this Parliament that:

1. Mrs Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro has been an illustrious and celebrated citizen of this country.

2. The Parliament of Uganda registers its great admiration for Sarah Ntiro’s nationalism and leadership for the excellent services she has rendered to this nation, East Africa and Africa as a whole.

3. The Parliament of Uganda wishes Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha a long life with more fruitful endeavours.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Is the motion seconded?

MEMBERS: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded. Justification?

MRS BYENKYA: Mr Speaker, I wish to justify the motion I have just presented to the House and it will be of a general nature; I will not really concentrate on her curriculum vitae so that the other Members supporting it could have an opportunity to say more about her. But I will really speak because we, the people of Hoima, have got to know her more personally than the others.  

On 16 December 2003, Parliament honoured Dr Peter Mugyenyi, Director of Joint Clinical Research Centre, for his distinguished services in the fight against HIV/AIDS. Because of his dedication and commitment in the struggle, Dr Mugyenyi has become an international figure. Again today, we as Parliament are recognising another person in the names of Sarah Ntiro, who has also been internationally recognised. This trend in Parliament is very positive and should continue instead of waiting for people to die and having the words of praise and acknowledgement as obituaries.  

Evangeline Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro Akiiki hails from the Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom, specifically from Hoima District, in the western ward of Hoima town council. She is the daughter of the late Erastor Nyendwoha Akiiki and the late Jane Nyendwoha Adyeri, who were both teachers. Her parents were committed Christians and therefore, had a Christian family whose life was comfortable.  

Sarah’s mother, Jane, was an active member of the Mother’s Union in Duhaga Cathedral and occasionally meetings would be held in her home. At these meetings, Sarah would always act as the secretary, taking down the minutes while enjoying each and every second. The Mother’s Union meetings greatly impacted on her strong love for NGOs, which she has served for a very long time and in various capacities. Mr Erastor Nyendwoha, on the other hand, encouraged his daughter to do a lot of reading, something which Sarah Ntiro has grown up loving to do.  

Sarah Ntiro is known to be a woman of many firsts, and in the same vein, was the first woman in Hoima to drive a car, a Volkswagen. (Laughter). She usually drove it with a pet, a pussycat in the back seat. Two virtues that Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro has had way back from her childhood to-date are neatness –(Interruptions)- Mr Speaker, I am begging for order please.

THE SPEAKER: Order, please!

MRS BYENKYA: Two virtues that Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro has had way back from her childhood to-date are neatness, combined with smartness and punctuality.  In Duhaga Junior Secondary School in Hoima, today which is known as Duhaga Senior Secondary School, one of the schools that she taught in after graduating as a teacher, her car would be parking in the school compound one minute to 8.00 a.m. In fact, since many school going children in those days did not own watches, Sarah’s Volkswagen had become a time-teller, especially during the morning hours. In teaching, some teachers are known to conduct lessons that are left hanging, or use some extra time from the lesson that is to follow. This was not so with Sarah in Duhaga Junior School. As the bell would start ringing marking the end of the lesson, she would always be holding the door handle or about to hold it ready to walk out.  

The students of Duhaga Junior School admired Sarah Ntiro’s smartness, not to mention her brisk way of walking. The girls admired her and wished that they could be like her later in their lives. The school children also knew her as a very rich woman, who used only white handkerchiefs and threw them away almost immediately after use. The white handkerchiefs, as they later learnt in life, were tissues and therefore disposable. 

At King’s College Buddo, one of the schools where Sarah taught, the old girls and all commend her on her neatness and smartness. They relived to me their ordeals with her when she was their housemistress and disclosed how thorough she was during inspection, passing her fingers over the wardrobe tops, over the doors and other items to detect any dust. 

While interacting with Sarah, one thing about her is pronounced - the English language. In fact, in Duhaga Junior School, the students nicknamed her the “Queen” because according to them, since she had been to Britain, the Queen of England evidently talked like her. Her former students from the various schools that she taught in are, however, grateful to her in as far as the English language is concerned.  

This is a brief overview with some particular examples from Hoima of the persons we intend to honour today. Mrs Ntiro has held many senior management portfolios in Uganda, served under numerous NGOs, and has even ventured into politics.  In 1958 to 1961, she was a nominated Member of the Uganda Legislative Council (LEGICO). As a woman, she has always held her banner up high for all to see and that is why awards of recognition are still being bestowed upon her. 

In September 2003, she was made a lay canon of Bukedi Diocese, Church of Uganda. In May 2003, she graduated with an Honorary Doctorate of Human Letters, Ph.D. from Spellman College Atlanta Georgia, United States of America.  (Applause)

Mr Speaker, in my opinion, I think I have ably introduced Canon Dr Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro, and hope that this august House will support this motion without hesitation. I beg to move.

3.10
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, I have no problem with the spirit of the motion, but I am having a little problem with how the three resolutions are couched. If you look at the proposed resolution No.1, it says Parliament resolves that: “Mrs Ntiro has been an illustrious and celebrated citizen of this country.” I do not know how this Parliament can resolve that. This is a fact which has already happened and really -(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: I think it is a recognition by Parliament itself. 

MR WACHA: Then it cannot come under resolution! The same goes, Sir, for the proposed resolution No.3 that this Parliament wishes Mrs Ntiro a long life with more fruitful endeavours. I do not know how this Parliament can resolve that  -(Interjection) - I am not making you look ridiculous, whatever goes on the books of Parliament must be proper. I am just asking the Speaker to help us resolve it, otherwise, the spirit is perfect. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think with the first one, the question is that it must be illustrious and so forth but the national Parliament recognising her as such. You may improve on it but that is the purpose. Instead of being recognised in the village, in the Kingdom of Bunyoro Kitara, the national Parliament has taken that recognition. I think that is the purpose. The other one is, well that as a national Parliament we also – I do not know. How do you want to improve on it, Mr Ben Wacha?

MR WACHA: I agree with you on the first one, but then it becomes a problem recognising and resolving. I do not know whether you see my point, Sir. Maybe you say, “We hereby resolve that Mrs Sarah Ntiro be recognised as an illustrious and celebrated citizen of this country.”

THE SPEAKER: I think what we should do is that let us debate, then I will give you a break for people to go and fine tune. 

MR AGGREY AWORI: Basically, I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker. A resolution of Parliament for recognition is a wonderful thing but may remain on a piece of paper. I was just wondering if it was within the powers of this august House at a future date or today to have an accolade to go with the resolution. An accolade is a physical recognition, it is a plaque or a symbol or something that one can hang.

THE SPEAKER: That can be done, but even this recognition will be framed and somebody will be putting it somewhere, it will be here in the Gallery, and she will have it in her house.

MR AWORI: A medal or something -(Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER: Well, but let us deal with this one.

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification. Do they just recognise you without anything, without some monetary thing, because as I was discussing somebody was saying that we are charging the Consolidated Fund, the minister is going to stand up again and say Article 93. Do they just recognise you without anything?

THE SPEAKER: Yes it does and we have done it many times. What is money really? We can give money and then the next morning it will not be there but this will be there. It is a record!

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, is it possible to include in this resolution a proposal made by hon. Awori so that Parliament at some appropriate stage in future provides the material recognition, something that she can look at and even her great grandchildren can always look at and be inspired?

THE SPEAKER: I have said let us debate the merits of the resolution, we give five minutes before we pronounce ourselves on this one for the fine-tuning. That one will come back to us then see what we can do. But those details really can come later.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Perhaps it is understandable that the House is seeking guidance from the Chair because this is the first time this kind of resolution honouring a living person –(Interruptions) - honouring a lady and coming in this current Parliament. I accept the corrections and the improvements. I would like to support the resolution and I want to contribute on this motion on the following points: -

Mr Speaker, human society lives on extolling virtue; virtue of human beings and by their actions as judged by other human beings. Virtue that is timeless in many ways. In literature, you describe virtue perhaps as something that has an objective correlative, in other words, that it is so clear even a bad-hearted person should be able to see it.  He may negate it, but virtue will still be there.

In this motion, I feel that this is an interesting occasion when not only do we look at one citizen but also we reflect on society. Because this society of ours – Uganda - has had many episodes; in fact, more than episodes. You could call them epochs when virtue was not recognised; when mediocrity took charge “nasomawa”, when we have had presidents who could hardly read their names. (Interruption) 

MRS BABA DIRI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The motion has just been put across and the Seconder has not seconded the motion.  Under which procedure is my honourable colleague debating the motion?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let him make his contribution.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  So, virtue is a character or a characteristic of society, and I am glad that given what we have gone through, we, at a national level, have started in a big way to recognise virtue.  I would like to appreciate the family that brought up this lady we are honouring today because it is in the family that the shoots of life grow. 

 I would like particularly to say that probably the mother of Sarah may have contributed more than the father.  I am saying this not to raise a controversy, but I also know that all of us who are here, men or women, have more time with their mothers than with their fathers –(Applause)- not only in the womb, but also on their breasts as they are being fed. A person who had five years on my mother’s breasts, I have a lot to say –(Laughter).  The family, which sent her to school –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: The parents who encouraged her to read and excel, the parents who did not push her to get married because of bride wealth; so, as we recognise her, as we praise her, let us praise that family and the society in which she grew up because the parents could fail under the pressure of society.  The uncles, the aunts could have said, “This beautiful lady should be married,” and perhaps the parents would have given in because they would get share of the bride price.  Therefore, it is the society, which allowed her to scale the heights.  So, we recognise that and we must make sure that our society promotes virtue.

I would like to refer to the person you emulate.  I think Sarah may not know how many people see themselves in the mirror in her shape.  This gives us a big challenge because in my own career as a teacher, I was surprised when I found that one of my students had grown a beard and was smoking a pipe and when I asked, “What is all this?”  He said, he sort of wanted to look like Kabwegyere – (Laughter)- and I said to him, “Growing your beard is alright because if the chin is fertile enough, let the beards grow, but for the habit of smoking, please do not emulate me.” I have since dropped smoking.  Therefore, those who admire us emulate also bad things.  

I would like, therefore, to congratulate Sarah Ntiro on being such a model that she must have influenced so many women and encouraged the girl-child to be like her.  This is not to mention her words of wisdom to many children, to many women and to many men.  Therefore, as many reference groups as we can generate in society, as many virtues we shall grow.  I now see in this country that we have many people whom we can admire.  So, I use this occasion to thank hon. Byenkya and the Seconder. I wish to urge our society that we must work as hard as it takes to make sure that good is put in such a place that its visibility should not be unseen.  
 
Lastly, I would like to improve on the content, because I think, as hon. Ben Wacha was saying, “Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro has” - I would like to say, “is” because it is not yesterday. She is still here. She is an illustrious and celebrated citizen of this country.  So, instead of “has been.” I am saying “is”. I am saying, “Mrs Sarah Ntiro is an industrious and celebrated citizen of this country.”  

Many members were seeking guidance from the Speaker, whether there could be an attachment to this resolution.  I feel there should be an attachment, but at the same time it is an opportune moment for us here to decide on it.  I would rather, as we set the precedents, as we start the tradition, suggest that equally Government sits down and works out a system by which a person of this calibre, of this historical stature, should be rewarded, should be accorded appropriate recognition; be it in the form that hon. Awori was talking about, be it in material terms, such a thing as giving an illustrious contributor to Uganda’s history, something that she can live in.  For example, give her a house, a recognisable property where she can sit and say, “I, Sarah Ntiro made a contribution to Uganda.” Where people can come later on to say, “We are visiting a house or a residence – (Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER:  Article 93. Proceed.

PROF.  KABWEGYERE: So that the house becomes a monument or a sanctuary of virtue.  Therefore, we should search our own minds as we contribute to this motion so that we enrich what we can give, not necessarily money which can be consumed in one week, but something that can be there so that a thousand years later, people will come and say there was a Sarah Ntiro, and we can stand where that virtue is symbolised and go back having connected with that virtue and therefore become virtuous.  

I support this resolution, and I thank the mover for having given us this opportunity to say good things about a good person, about a virtuous person, about a good citizen that deserves to be recognised by this House and a country as a whole.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.29
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti District):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to congratulate Sarah Ntiro for being the woman of the “so many first”.  Mr Speaker, in paying my respects to this great lady of this nation, I recognise the fact that she is a woman who had to confront many odds.  I have heard that she was an administrator and it reminds me of the many odds women face in administration.  I have also heard that she has been a Clergy woman, and women in the clerical clergy Christian religious circles face the same challenges. But above all, I recognise that she was a girl child at one point in this country, confronted with so many cultural impediments to her success. 

Mr Speaker, tonight, even as we recognise her distinguished service to this country, my only desire is that we remind ourselves of the many challenges, the many obstacles that the girl children of this nation continue to face in their quest for excellence.  We should be reminded that even with programmes like UPE, the girl children of this country still are faced with the highest dropout rates.  They are married very early; they are still the children who are defiled; they are confronted with a heavy workload.  It is very difficult to succeed as a girl child in this country, and it is my humble prayer that in honouring Sarah Ntiro, we as Ugandans remind ourselves to make a very serious commitment to address the needs of the girl children in this country, to help them to excel, to bring down the heavy workload, to create more time for them to be at school, to implement the good laws and the good policies that are in this country.  

In most of the countryside, Mr Speaker, you find children are still getting married off at the age of 14 or 16.  At the end of the day, we ask ourselves, how do we get the many Sarah Ntiros if this type of practice continues.  We still find that they live school before they are in P.5.  How do we address the cultural barriers that cause these children to get out of school?  They are stigmatised.  Sometimes the school environment is so hostile to them. 

Mr Speaker, if we hope to raise many of the Sarah Ntiros, there should be an opportunity for each one of us, and indeed as a nation, to make a fresh commitment to help the girl children of this country.  

It also reminds me, Mr Speaker, that many of the disadvantaged children in this country probably do not have the parents that are able to take care of them, and I keep on wishing that for the vulnerable children in this country, for the disadvantaged girls, there will be a policy. In this House, we have ever said that a policy should be brought in by Government to take care of the needs of the orphans and the vulnerable children in this country.  

It is my hope that as we recognise this distinguished achievement, we reflect in that direction and urge the executive to give us a policy for orphans who are disadvantaged in this country that they may equally excel.    I want to congratulate all the people of Hoima and congratulate Sarah Ntiro as a person upon this very distinguished achievement.  I support the motion.

3.33
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja District):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to add my voice to those who have congratulated Evangeline Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro for her achievements.  There are a number of untold stories about this lady.  I am not sure whether Members of Parliament know that in 1961, Ben Kiwanuka offered her a job as a Minister of Education and she turned it down in order to focus on fighting for the under-privileged.  In this country where people are manoeuvring – (Applause)- for ministerial jobs and they fight to discredit others, here we have an example of a person who stood by her principles. (Applause) 

I first got into contact with her in 1969 when I became a lecturer at Makerere University. She had become an Assistant Registrar at Makerere University.  I used to hear stories in the corridors of Makerere that she was a cantankerous woman –(Laughter) but I did not know what they meant.  I did not learn this until much later.  I now understand that the reason why even some men (Professors, Lecturers and Administrators) feared her was because she was a woman of principle. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I had the chance to meet Sarah Ntiro in Nairobi. We were in exile.  In 1981, many students from Makerere University ran into exile, some of them with bullets in their legs; they were running from the UPC government atrocities.  When they came to Nairobi, our first duty was to try and help these students.  

We got a letter from a former Professor at Makerere, Professor Anthony Lowe, who was then Vice Chancellor of the Australian University in Canberra, and he was the chairman of the Australian Council of Churches.  He appealed to all of us who had been in Makerere to assist these students to get off the streets by trying to place them in Universities so that they could complete their studies.  

A committee of four was formed under Professor David Lubadiri from Malawi, and Sarah Ntiro became the Secretary to that committee.  I was one of the members with Professor Talitwala.  Our first duty was to try and find out who of those had genuine academic documents, and who had been bonafide students from Makerere University.  The exercise took a long time and we finally identified 30 students.  Our job was then to try and find places for those students in African Universities. 

What is interesting is that, when we met some of the politicians who were making a lot of noise in Nairobi about bringing changes in this country, they did not listen to us.  So, the four of us and I would say, particularly, Sarah Ntiro, was the one who moved everyday to the United High Commission for Refugees to enable these students get scholarships to go to various Universities in Africa. One of them, I am glad to say, whom we sent to the University of Liberia is a member of the Security Organization in this nation, and that is the brother of former Member of Parliament called Shem Bageine.  

On one occasion when were all frustrated, I asked her, “How shall we be rewarded for this great work we are doing for Uganda?”  She reminded me of the story of the Bible when Jesus cured ten lepers and only one went back to thank Jesus, and she said to me, “Frank Nabwiso, we are here to do a duty for our country.  Let us do what we can do, may be God will look upon us and thank us.”  I am glad that God has fulfilled his promise and we are thanking Sarah today for these contributions- (Applause) I am not sure whether God will help me later but -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: But you see you are here.  (Laughter)

DR NABWISO: Yes, I am glad that God has given me the opportunity to be in Parliament and to contribute to this motion.  

There is something else that people have not said about Sarah Ntiro, and that is her contribution to the Movement, I mean the NRM, because now days we have people who have joined the Movement and given themselves accolades and told us that they are more Movementists than those who started Movement.  But she was very instrumental during those days when we were in the external committee of the Movement. 

I happened to be the Secretary of the external committee at that time.  The people who formed the Secretariat, whom I was working with were, hon. Kiyonga, a former Member of Parliament called Kweronda, Sarah Ntiro was Secretary for Women Affairs and Hope Kivengyere was in charge of youth activities.  She worked with great dedication to ensure that the struggle for which the Movement stood came to be successful.  

I remember on one occasion when even some of the Bishops in Kenya and in Uganda were telling the whole world that Ugandans, who had ran to exile, had gone there for economic benefits and not because there was a serious security problem.  Sarah would be the person we would choose to speak on our behalf against these Bishops.  Since she was born from a Clergyman’s home, and I was born in a similar home, and there were others, she always spoke using the Bible and she would not depart from the Biblical teaching on extending love to all regardless of their tribes, ethnic groupings, religion, etcetera.

I want to end my contribution by saying that one of the things that kept us moving was music.  She is a great alto singer; I used to sing tenor and there were others who sung with us in that choir in Nairobi called Nyonza Singers.  It contributed a lot to the Movement struggle because the Kenyans realized that there was something from Uganda. 

I want to say this to all women leaders in this country, I would urge you to stand by your principles -(Applause)- I would urge you to avoid political sycophancy. I would urge that we build this country on principled politics and on principled reason, on principled cooperation so that we build this country together and that when we finally write the politics of Uganda during this turbulent period, we shall have the name of Evangeline Sarah Nyendwoha standing high or higher than ourselves.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.46
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER/GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I also stand here to support the resolution subject to the concerns raised about the details of the resolution.  Sir, over the weekend, I was in the Kingdom of Bunyoro Kitara, and while I was there, I had an opportunity to have audience with the King. I had never sat before a King or a Queen for that matter.  I also learnt a lot of things while I was there, about the Kingdom of Bunyoro besides the standard history we know about that Kingdom.  Therefore, it is not surprising that that Kingdom was able to produce a person like Mrs Ntiro. What is missing in her names is her maiden name. We would have loved to know her maiden name. Nyendwoha sounds like a man’s name; we wanted her maiden name.  

The other day, Sir, we were in this House, eulogizing the late Wapakabulo who could not hear what we had to say about him.  Therefore, this is a great thing that we are talking about someone who happens to be in the Gallery.  Some of you may not know her, perhaps - I do not know whether it is in order for her to stand up and be recognized?  

THE SPEAKER: Can hon. Sarah Ntiro, if present, stand up to be recognized?  (Applause)

(Mrs Ntiro stood up for recognition)

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: So that is the lady, Mr Speaker, we are recognizing.  I want to thank God who has given Mrs Ntiro the opportunity to live reasonably long, and it is not out of order for us to ask the Almighty God through a resolution of the House. I am glad that now it is God who is being asked to implement the resolution, not the Government, that she lives even yet many more years because that has given her an opportunity to hear the leadership of this country pay tribute to her that she so richly deserves.  

I know very often ladies do not want people to know that they are old or how old they are, but in 1949 when Mrs Ntiro became a teacher, that is when I first went to school and here I am a very senior Member of this House with the opportunity to pay tribute to her.  So, that is why I say I thank God for allowing her to be around that long to be able to hear these tributes. 

Mrs Ntiro went to Oxford University.  The closest I was to Oxford was about 10 miles away and the next closest is I read books written by Oxford University Press, but Sarah Ntiro went to Oxford University, was resident there and studied there and that is no mean achievement of a woman. I do not know how she used to come to Kampala, because when you are driving to Bunyoro Kitara now, the road is not yet complete, but for her to have moved all the way from Bunyoro Kitara to Oxford University is a very great thing.  

I think, there is no question in anybody’s mind how resolute this lady was, how determined she was to succeed in life, how determined she was to reach the top of the ladder, so we must pay tribute to her. I would like many of us here who are still young enough to emulate her that try and go to Oxford – yes you may pick one or two things from there.  

I had the opportunity to work at Makerere while Mrs Ntiro worked there in the 1970s and when Dr Nabwiso became a lecturer in 1969; I think things were still reasonable at Makerere. But in the 1970s, Mr Speaker, things were really bad in this country and actually some of us who had returned to Uganda always looked up to people like Mrs Ntiro to show us the way and they did.  When things became very difficult, they comforted us and I remember the calmness with which she approached some of the very serious problems we had in that institution.

I would like to say this, Sir. We have been passing resolutions about pensions, but I have never heard anybody bothered about those men and women who served practically for nothing.  If Mrs Ntiro told you her terminal benefits from Makerere, you would be shocked. Therefore, when we are talking about sacrifices that have been made, we should also recognize those people who served this country practically for free.

Now, the best tribute we can pay to Mrs Ntiro, in my own view, is for us to attempt to emulate her and we need not be women, even men should attempt to emulate her: One; to aspire to achieve; two, to serve selflessly; and three, to maintain our dignity even under the most difficult circumstances. (Applause)

Therefore, Sir, I want to congratulate the hon. Member for Hoima for bringing this motion. I would like also to congratulate Mrs Sarah Ntiro for having made it so easy for us to debate a motion like this, which I am sure we are going to pass unanimously.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Mrs Florence Nayiga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to say a few words from the depth of my heart about Madam Sarah Ntiro.  I stand here, Mr Speaker, to support the motion on the Floor.  I personally got to know Mrs Sarah Ntiro from the late Eliphaz Mazima, who was then the Chairperson of the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda, which is an umbrella organization that brings all categories of people with disabilities together so that we can have a united voice.  

Mr Speaker, the late Eliphaz Mazima used to talk a lot about Mrs Sarah Ntiro, and as one of the young activitists then in the Disability Movement, I always wished I could see her and I had an opportunity to meet her.  

Mrs Sarah Ntiro would always give an opportunity to the late Eliphaz Mazima to consult her on issues that were at hand in the Disability Movement.  The late Eliphaz Mazima would not fail to consult. Mrs Ntiro would always ensure that the late Eliphaz Mazima could access the offices, especially the political offices that mattered then, that is the period between 1987 and 1994.  

We were struggling as people with disabilities to have our issues heard, to have our issues attended to by the new Government, which had come in to make a fundamental change in this country.  Our starting point was to deal with a person of the calibre of Mrs Sarah Ntiro and we were never disappointed.  She enabled us to get to the Office of the Vice President, Office of the Prime Minister and all other offices where we wished we wanted to be, not forgetting to help us develop our organization because by then she also had responsibility in the Prime Minister’s Office and she was doing a lot in the area of the Non-Governmental Organizations. 

Mr Speaker, I trust Mrs Sarah Ntiro must be proud to see the fruits of the Disability Movement in this country, being able to see among others two women with disabilities in Parliament.  We are proud of you, Mrs Sarah Ntiro, because your contribution made it for us.  But this came out of a disability-sensitive Constitution, which is admired by our fellow persons with disabilities globally.  

A disability-sensitive Constitution did not just come like manna from heaven, someone had to work hard to have these articles in the Constitution, and the late Eliphaz Mazima who represented us, the person we elected to go to the Constituent Assembly, worked closely with Madam Sarah Ntiro to ensure that we have these articles that have promoted us to be where we are today and to have people with disabilities in the local Government councils at all levels. we are proud of Madam Sarah Ntiro.  

As Minister responsible for older persons in this country, I must inform you that we were in touch with this distinguished lady and she has made a contribution in the draft of the National Older Persons Policy, which you shall soon access. At present we have a draft in its final stages.  We continue to look forward to working closely with her and our prayer is the same like hon. Kagonyera, who said that the Lord Jesus continues to provide all the support and strengthen her so that she can live longer and make a contribution in this country.  

I would like, therefore, to conclude by thanking hon. Beatrice Byenkya and all the seconders of this motion for coming up with this particular motion. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this motion. 

4.01
MS SINABULYA NAMABIDDE (Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to support the motion and congratulate Sarah Ntiro for her enormous achievements.  I also want to applaud Sarah Ntiro for having held the torch for girls’ education high in an era when girls were thought to be only fit for marriage. I want to thank her for transcending the beliefs of the day to become the first Woman Graduate in East and Central Africa.  

I want to recognize Sarah Ntiro’s contribution to the Women’s Movement as early as the 1950s, when she fought against discriminative remuneration in the Public Service.  When Sarah Ntiro was posted as a graduate teacher in Gayaza High School, Sarah rejected being paid less than her male colleagues teaching at Buddo -(Applause)- it is through her struggle that later on Government decided to pay both men and women equally. We want to appreciate the contributions of Sarah in that endeavour.  

I also want to appreciate Sarah Ntiro as one of the first women legislators in the Legislative Council.  Sarah Ntiro did make a great contribution towards improving domestic relations when she introduced the Private Members Bill in the LEGCO, which thought to recognise Indian marriages and make them legal in Uganda.  

This motion, Mr Speaker, seeks to recognise and appreciate the contribution of Sarah Ntiro in the advancement of women’s education in Uganda.  I want to support this by quoting her own words in a book entitled, “The Rising Tide: Ugandan Women Struggle for a Public Voice 1940 to 2002”.  Sarah Ntiro had this to say: “All my life I have struggled for girls education.  I remember when we were fighting to establish Tororo Girls School, I threatened to walk throught Northern Uganda to see for myself if actually there were no girls who needed that school”. These were the words of Sarah Ntiro long before she knew that this motion would be here today.  We want to thank Sarah Ntiro for her enormous contribution to ensure that girls across this country can access basic education- (Applause)  

As I wind up, Mr Speaker, I want to remind Government; Government committed itself to the achievement of the millennium goals by 2015. One of such goals is to ensure access to basic education for all children, boys and girls, by 2015.  Much as we acknowledge the great work done by Government to ensure that children go to school, there are many gaps, which need to be filled before these goals can be achieved.  So, I want to urge Government that if we are to emulate what Sarah Ntiro started and pay genuine tribute to her, we should abide by what we committed ourselves to do.  I want to end by congratulating Sarah Ntiro for her enormous achievement.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.06
MS GRACE TUBWITA (Woman Representative, Nakasongola):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.   I would like to take this opportunity to join my colleagues to congratulate Sarah Ntiro for her many achievements.  Mr Speaker, if you look at the achievements of Sarah Ntiro, you notice that Sarah had many senior management portfolios in Uganda, and she held these posts before the affirmative action could take place.

Mr Speaker, if you remember very well the fate of women in this country, it was not easy for a woman to come up as Sarah Ntiro did because she had no mentor at that particular time.  So, I would like to thank Sarah Ntiro for her commitment to serve in such positions.  

Let me take this opportunity to inform the House about some of the senior management portfolios which Sarah Ntiro held in this country.  In 1991 to 1995, she served as Special Assistant for Social Services and Director of the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit in the Office of the Vice President.  From 1986 to 1991, she was Director of the Aid coordination Secretariat in the Office of the Prime Minister.    In 1982 to 1986, she was Executive Director, African Refugees Consultancy Service in Nairobi, Kenya.  

Mr Speaker, I agree with Dr Nabwiso and Prof. Kagonyere, for having said that Sarah Ntiro worked in Makerere University.  This is true, from 1971 to 1978 Sarah Ntiro served in Makerere University as Assistant Secretary to the University Council and Senior Assistant Registrar in the faculties of Arts and Social Services.  During her service in the faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, Mr Speaker, I happened to be a student in that faculty. It is a pleasure to move a motion in this House to praise Sarah Ntiro’s contribution to Makerere University.

Mr Speaker, Sarah Ntiro again worked as a co-founder member of NGOs such as DENIDA, the Development Network of Indigenous Voluntary Association, Tripartite Training Programme (TTP) and the Ugandan Association of University Women.  So, you see that her advocacy for the women started as early as those years. 

In 2003-2004, Mr Speaker, Sarah Ntiro is serving as a Chairperson for Window Trust Uganda.  This organisation enables refugees to access education in Uganda.  Sarah Ntiro in 2001 to 2003 was the President Uganda Society. She organised a public lecture to expand the library, to promote knowledge and participate in the production of the Uganda Journal.

Mr Speaker, when you look at the achievements, which Sarah Ntiro has made, I feel it is good to recognize her for her good work when she is still alive.  I do not think it is in order to recognize someone when he/she is dead and then talk about all the good things, which he/she did. 

Mr Speaker, when we were honouring the late Wapa, very many people talked good things about Wapakhabulo, but by then he could not hear anything and I do not think he was in position to know that he was that much loved.  But it is good for one to hear the good things the people are talking about you when you are still alive so that you can know that people appreciate the services, which you rendered to this country.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, we have to do some gender balancing.  Let me give a chance to hon. Kasirivu, and then we go to Chairperson UWOPA.  

4.11
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi county, Kibaale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I wish to associate with my sister, hon. Nyakaisiki, who moved this motion to recognize hon. Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro Akiiki.  She is honourable, because as a member of LEGCO- I am sure, she is one of the first people who entered this Chamber and sat on these green benches we are sitting on.

This great lady from the Kingdom of Bunyoro Kitara –(Laughter)- I want to associate with her achievements as enumerated in her CV.  Mr Speaker, I want you to make a mental image of a girl from a community, which was under separation; which had a negative attitude from the Government of the day - the Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom - and having gone through all the chains of bondage, which the colonial masters had put on that kingdom as also seen by hon. Prof. Kagonyera, that up to today we still have the effects of that separation and negative attitude; that is why he travelled on murram up to the Kingdom. But a young lady broke through the bondage, and as Professor said, went up to Oxford University. Just know that actually she was born to do great things, otherwise, it was an impossible task.

Mr Speaker, that area - Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom - had only sympathies from the missionaries and it is only the missionaries who would dare go and set up even the few schools that existed at that time. And I am sure it was the missionaries who helped her through the bondage that had been pushed on to the kingdom. And there is in particular a lady, Ms Esley, who was a missionary in Duhaga Girls – a teacher - maybe because of her parents being teachers, that association with missionaries helped her and that lady pushed her to Kings College, Buddo, and from there things started rolling in her favour. She went to Makerere University, to Oxford University and the rest is enumerated in her curriculum vitae.  

Mr Speaker, that means many of these areas, which are disadvantaged by virtue of our history, have a lot of potential, but we have not made favourable conditions available for people of her kind to come up. Many of us, especially from those areas, which are still disadvantaged, have always requested Government to include in their programmes the affirmative action, especially with university education. I am sure Members know that in this Parliament, we have advocated that the scholarships government is extending to students in universities, should be equitably distributed so that children from Kibale, from Hoima, from Masindi, from wherever, once they have qualified for university admission, they should also have a share on the scholarships. 

Mr Speaker, if this Parliament supports it - and I know it supported it at one time, and it is now the Executive, which has yet to give it a blessing. But, should it be given a blessing, then I will say today’s motion of paying tribute to the achievements of Sarah Ntiro Akiiki will have been realised, and I would be sure that her efforts of advocating for the girl child, advocating for the needy, for the disadvantaged, will have been answered. Because today the majority of children going to universities are those around Kampala of the well-to-do and the few of us who have managed to slip through the funds and chains of history. 

So, Mr Speaker, it is indicated that now we have started a culture of recognising people when they are still alive. Dr Mugyenyi Peter was one of the first people we recognised, and I am very happy to have been the person who was the architect of that motion and my sister is the second one. And I hope it is not just a culture for the people from the kingdom of Bunyoro Kitara, but it is now a culture of Parliament. I thank you.

4.17
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion with a lot of pride and with a lot of praise for Mrs Sarah Ntiro. I would like to thank the mover and I would like to congratulate the people of Hoima for giving birth to such a distinguished woman. 

I would like to congratulate Sarah Ntiro, not only for the achievements as we read in the papers and in her curriculum vitae, not only for what she has visibly done in terms of jobs and positions held, I would like to congratulate her also and mainly for the person she has been; the upright person, the principled person, the person who does not give compromises even in difficult situations. If Sarah had been a thief, I do not think I would be here congratulating her. Today, we are in this Uganda where sometimes stealing is even applauded. I think it is high time we looked within ourselves and said, “Will I deserve this kind of a motion” especially now that all of us are actually in very distinguished positions. We are among the first 300 citizens in this country in terms of leadership. Do we deserve this kind of motion in our conduct?  

I would like to focus on Sarah Ntiro as the girl child with respect to education. I first interacted with Sarah Ntiro in the late 1980s when we were founding ACFODE, that is, Action for Development - an NGO. The first thing I could easily notice about Sarah was her mentoring attitude. She was much more senior, but she had patience with the young ones and she was always there to show the way, to be the light. 

I would also like to appreciate that today as we honour Sarah, we have another distinguished citizen, but this time not a citizen of Uganda. In the Gallery there is a citizen of the Unites States of America representing interests of the United States Government in terms of education for the girl child, and that is Dr Moten, who has been with us. I would like to appreciate the linkages that these two distinguished people have made between us the legislators and the civil society through FAWE. FAWE is the education NGO for the girl child. 

I would also like to take this opportunity to appreciate FAWE.  Sarah and the visiting distinguished visitor from the U.S.A have travelled to the war-torn areas during this visit. I would like to really focus on the education of the girl child, especially in our present situation where a good part of the country is at, I would not say at war, but it is termed as, disturbed areas. I am not trying to pre-empty the Alaso report, but I think as we talk about the education of the girl child today, let us also focus on what the situation is in those areas, where children who should be in school are presently in the camps, not knowing whether they will get their next meal this evening or whether they will sleep, or whether even they will stay alive up to tomorrow.  

Uganda needs all the brains that it can develop.  We cannot talk of being competitors in a globalised world if we are going to live part of our human resource unattended to in terms of education, and especially for the girl child who is doubly disadvantaged. We cannot afford to leave the girl child in whatever situation unattended to in education.
  
Studies have shown that for a girl child to be able to absorb and to be a good mother, somebody who can absorb health education and any other education, that girl should go beyond primary, that girl should have attained  “O” level. Otherwise, a girl who has not attained up to “O” level is as good as a girl who has not been to school. Therefore, I think we all owe it to ourselves to make sure that the human resource in this country is well educated to be able to talk about other aspects of life like health, like entrepreneurship, like anything we talk about. We cannot talk to an illiterate population.
  
I was glad to learn from the garden - we had a session in the garden today. I was glad to learn from hon. Tim Lwanga, that Government is considering providing some kind of education for the war-torn areas, especially for the children.  But what I have observed is, when you only provide learning centres to these children, it is as good as having done too little. I was recently in Kaberamaido and I visited a school where there are over 7,000 children with no facilities and that is a learning centre; it is like just a shell, the substance is not there. So, I would like to appeal to Government that in this effort, let us do a lot more. I would suggest that we have special scholarships for the children from the war-torn areas. We have some scholarships; why can we not have scholarships for the children in the war-torn areas so that they can go beyond primary?

I would like to mention something about the affirmative action, which is already in place. We have the affirmative action for girls entering university, that is, 1.5 points. But I think it is now time for us to review that affirmative action and really find out if that is the right point at which to intervene. In my own judgement, I think the intervention is needed at an even earlier stage especially, at the secondary and “A” level stages so that the girl child is given the facilities necessary and an enabling environment for her to compete with others. So, I think it is high time we re-examined the affirmative action.  

Lastly, as UWOPA Chairperson, Sarah Ntiro, UWOPA congratulates you, UWOPA is proud of you! (Applause). We know you were a legislator. This country is going through a transition up to 2006 and we know as women parliamentarians that we have a very significant part to play in that transition.  Sarah, we have something to learn from you, we have a mentor in you and we are grateful to God that you are still with us to see us through that period. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.27
MS BETTY UDONGO PACUTHO  (Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion. I want to say that I have been privileged to know Sarah for these last five years. I wish I had known her earlier, because when I look at the contribution she has made in this nation, she is worthy more than just moving a motion.  But I want to thank God that we are able to recognise her contribution while she is still alive.

I got to know Sarah Ntiro when as a lecturer struggling with promoting girls education at Makerere, I was identified as a model of excellence and recognised during the Sarah Ntiro Award. Mr Speaker, I want to tell you that that recognition boosted my esteem and from that time on, I wanted to excel as Sarah Ntiro and I think that is the reason why I am where I am today.  

I want to thank FAWE that is, Forum for African Women Educationalists, that identified Sarah as a role model. And I want to thank FAWE that through the annual Sarah Lecture Award, we have been able to receive funds to support girl education in this country. 

Mr Speaker, you may recall last year, I came to you for permission to go to the U.S. for a Summer Institute in Nashville, Tennessee. It was after the Sarah Ntiro Award that Sarah Ntiro fellowship was awarded to four headmistresses from the North from Muni, from Ngora, Tororo and Sacred Heart and I was privileged to be invited alongside with them as a resource person at that institute. And there I met Sarah after she had got her Doctorate from Spellman College. And while we were there, Sarah was a guide to us. One thing we noticed about her was, she was very organised and she was a timekeeper. In fact, she was always on the dot and so for me I had a good excuse because I carried my little baby; so I could afford to be late on that excuse, but that was no good excuse.  

While at that –(Interjection)- I need protection, Mr Speaker, from hon. Awori. While we were there, Sarah made a presentation to the teacher academy, and this time around I was also privileged to be associated with Sarah Ntiro. In fact on Tuesday, I accompanied her and others to Gulu, including Dr Moten who was the speaker this morning, for a mentoring session in the North, to mentor the girls so that they could aspire to even succeed amidst the circumstances they were in. 

Mr Speaker, one colleague said Sarah said she could walk round in the North to collect girls to go to Tororo Girls. In fact, she did not tell you that that time when Sarah threatened to go and collect the girls because they said there would be no girls from the North or East to go to Tororo Girls, she was very heavy and she would not walk. In fact, she delivered that evening. But you can see the courage she had, she threatened to walk and go and handpick these girls to go to Tororo Girls. I am so grateful to Sarah Ntiro because most of my relatives, my sisters that have been successful, have gone through Tororo Girls.

As I said earlier, through Sarah Ntiro and her connections and links, we have been able to receive more funds to support girls. I am so thankful to FAWE because this year, Nebbi girls got 11 scholarships. So, at least those needy and bright girls have a bit of a future and this is because of Sarah Ntiro. 

Mr Speaker, it is not enough for us to just recognise Sarah, we need to do something more substantial. But I want to appreciate that at least she can be here to hear all these good things we are saying while she is a live. And as other Members have also put forward their concern, I think it is not too late for us to do something substantial, concrete to recognise Sarah Ntiro. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, I think we should be very brief now so that we share the little time we have.

4.35
DR DAVID MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like firstly to thank Parliament for the idea of honouring people who deserve honouring when they are still alive. This is a very good idea.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, when we talk about achievers, I am supporting Prof. Kabwegyere who said that we must also consider those people who were responsible for the foundation on which these people built to achieve whatever they have achieved. So, I think this is very important and these in the first place naturally must be the parents. I really think that her parents - I think by then she was Sarah Nyendwoha - must have been very farsighted to have taken Sarah, a girl, to school and I suppose by recognising her, we are also recognising the contribution her parents made to this nation.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, her peers too must be congratulated, must be thanked, must be considered. They could have made life very difficult for her, either male or female, but I also think they made the environment conducive so that now Mrs Sarah Ntiro, could achieve, go to school, work well and perform well. I think they also need a pat on the back and say, “Thank you very much for having enabled her.” I am sure there are many people who protested or who did not want a girl to go to school, but these were silenced. Thanks to God who made Mrs Ntiro achieve.

Then, Mr Speaker, looking at the list of women achievers of a certain generation there, definitely Mrs Ntiro is taken among the top five. These were the ladies who were on the scene just before and soon after independence. These were women of substance. I am talking starting with Mrs Ntiro herself; I am talking about people like hon. Mrs Joyce Mpanga, I am talking about Mrs Florence Lubega and so many others. But among the top five, definitely, Mrs Ntiro was there, that was no mean achievement.

So, Mr Speaker, I do not think it is by accident that these ladies, Mrs Ntiro and the other two ladies, were the vanguards and strong activists for the girl-child education. They were among the very first graduates and first women legislators in this country. So, I do not think it was by accident that she has achieved so much. So, that is something that we have to be aware of.

Mr Speaker, most mothers of that period, my mother included, were of the opinion that their daughters should be like Mrs Ntiro and this was because of her smartness, education and self-confidence. Definitely, my mother used to say, “Well, I wish my daughter could achieve that” and I think that was no mean thing; my mother was not very mean either.

So, Mr Speaker, I support the motion by hon. Byenkya that we recognise Mrs Ntiro, and definitely I congratulate Mrs Ntiro on her achievement and on this kind of recognition. God bless her and give her many more years to come so that she can achieve - I do not know whether there is anything else she has not achieved yet - but let us hope there is something still that she can achieve. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.40
MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity that has made me stand to support this motion, and I would like to congratulate the movers of this motion. I hereby envy those who had time to interact with Mrs Ntiro. I for one did not and I think I missed a lot. That is why I was trying very hard at least to document my own observations through this contribution. I thank you for it.

First, I would like to recognise that Mrs Ntiro is a distinguished lady, determined, and was a very effective legislator when she was in the Legislative Council. When I read a book about women and politics in Uganda, and I saw how the women of the time of Mrs Ntiro struggled with the heads of state to promote women into politics, I then appreciate that the Movement Government has done a lot, which has multiplied the number of women in the law. 

Not only that, I would like to appreciate by observing further that the Movement Government has recognised the contribution that the women can make by awarding an affirmative action of 1.5 at Makerere. I do support it and I pray that it continues as the new Chairperson of UWOPA put it.  Me, as an old Chairperson of UWOPA, I will support her and second her when she brings the motion.

Mr Speaker, I would like to recognise that the girl child in Uganda is still faced with negative attitudes about sending children to school, especially in my district Kasese where education is a late venture. Many parents would prefer sending the boy children to school rather than the girl child. That is why I appreciate the role that the parents of Mrs Sarah Ntiro played to decide against the odds and educate a girl and a girl who has excelled. I praise them and thank them for that contribution.

Mr Speaker, I would like to observe that the distinguished achievements of Mrs Sarah Ntiro leave a lot of challenges with us the would-be Ntiros of today, especially we as the legislators, the Executive as policy makers and implementers of programmes. When I look at our education policy and look for a policy or programmes that would be promoting the so many Sarah Ntiros I am still worried; there are very many gaps. Her CV tells us and her own testimony that she went through negative discouragements, both structurally and verbally.  

When you look at facilities in our schools, especially the mixed schools, Mr Speaker, you find that we still need a deliberate action to look into the conditions that would promote the education of girls in mixed schools, especially the sanitary requirements, separate toilets and other facilities that girls need as girls. Especially when they are at secondary, that is where they get discouraged, that is where we lose the would-be Sarah Ntiros, because of the environment in the schools. It is not yet conducive and we need a deliberate policy to address the sanitary situation at secondary schools.

Secondly, we need to address their accommodation.  The government now is discouraging more boarding schools generally. But I would like to use this Floor to appeal to Government to use the policy in place, the national strategy for promoting girl child education to look at the accommodation of girls at school more closely than we are doing now, because it is appalling. 

Even when you look at our policy on Universal Primary Education, you find that more girls are dropping out of school. We of today need a policy to address that challenge so that more Sarah Ntiros do not drop out of school and they never get an opportunity to explore their talents. That policy to-date is nowhere and we get more and more girls dropping out of school, many of them mainly due to pregnancy. If you look at it closely, the boys who are responsible for the pregnancy remain in school.  Is that fair, is that going to give us more women achievers in this country? I am concentrating my contribution on the challenges we are getting as a result of appreciating that a woman somewhere has achieved.

My last point, Mr Speaker, is to call upon FAWE (Forum for Women Educationalists) in this country that has promoted Sarah Ntiro, promoted her so much so that she has got an honorary Doctorate from a university in USA, I want them to continue documenting many more women achievers and also publish their achievements. Hon. Matembe here has already taken a lead and given us a challenge by publishing her own achievements. (Applause)

There are many more women before her who have achieved in the arena of politics, there are others who have achieved in the arena of academics and others are volunteers, others in civil society. It is only through publishing and documenting many more women’s achievements that the attitudes of our colleagues towards the female gender and our own attitudes as women towards our own capacity to achieve will be changed.  

FAWE has selected many women in this country and called them role models in education. I am glad to document that I am one of the role models of education. (Applause) I was selected specifically in 1998 for my district Kasese and I was called to the International Conference Centre and recognised with many other women, many of whom are also here. But I am bringing this point because I took a challenge thereafter. I have been recognised from my district but how many more are following me who can also be like me and be like Sarah Ntiro? 

Mr Speaker, I took a resolution in 1999 to start a second girls secondary schools in Kasese District so that I can also honour my people for having educated me. That school has now got 80 girl students and it is found in a county of 250,000 people where there was no other school for girls at that level. The only schools in that area were 15 mixed secondary schools. 

I took a study around and realised that the girls mature in their body at the time they are in secondary schools and so they get derailed. I thought that we should look at the girl child of Uganda more carefully and have more girls schools in this country geographically distributed. Why have we continued to have only Gayaza, only Nabisunsa, only Nabbingo and they are all in the centre here? We need a policy to distribute quality girls schools evenly all over the country. It is upon we, the policy makers, the Executive and we the legislators to move in that direction.  

Mr Speaker, I felt so many good things had been spoken about Sarah Ntiro; my approach was to address the challenges. I thank you for giving me this opportunity and once again I congratulate her upon this achievement. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would appeal that you shorten your speeches on this subject to enable me cover as many contributors as possible.

4.50
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County, Kyenjojo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My points are just two.  The first is that, I feel privileged and honoured to second hon. Beatrice Byenkya’s motion.  The fact that Dr Sarah Ntiro taught at Gayaza knows that our motto is, “Never Give Up.” I think this is one of the mottos in her life, which could have sustained her.  I would like to make note of the fact that in bringing up this motion, we wanted Parliament to note, recognise and appreciate Dr Sarah Ntiro’s achievements. That is the essence of the motion.    

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the fact that she took Sciences and specialised in Mathematics, serves as an important role model, which shows that when given equal opportunities, women and girls, in Uganda can excel.  Dr Sarah Ntiro is the person we are talking about today, but her face, as she said this morning, is a face of many Ugandans, whether they are from Nakapiripirit, Kisoro or Kyenjojo; indeed she is the face of these women from rural areas.  Women who are marginalised but can still make it to Oxford University, to the Legislature and doing all the things that she has done in her lifetime.  

I would like to make note of a few issues, which touch on unfinished business.  The first is that there is the Millennium Development Goal to which Uganda is committed to eliminate gender disparity by 2005.  As you note, this is 2004, we have only one year.  I am glad to note that we were informed that currently the Law Development Centre has more females than males.  So, at least the legal profession will have surpassed this particular provision.

Finally, on the issue of culture, I would like to talk about the issue of family values.  The issue of culture is one of those aspects in our lives as Ugandans, which continue to hinder girls’ education.  For example, the issue of bride price, the issue of pregnancy and where we have no policy for re-entry. These are some of the issues, which make the girls not to perform as well as the boys.  When you also look at the division of labour, the girls are hampered with a lot of work whereas boys have a lot more time to study.  I would like to appeal to this House that when we debate the Domestic Relations Bill, you support it so that we can address equality at this level.  I thank you.

4.54
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara District): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  In supporting this motion, I wish to thank ourselves for this new culture that we have now learnt, of recognising people’s contributions when they are still alive.  In this country, there are quite a number of people who have been recognised by both regional and international bodies, and even other Governments, but back at home people just look at them and they do not know who they are.  So, it is so good now that we are beginning to have this good culture of talking about people and recognising them when they are alive.  It motivates them, even those who are already aged and tired, they can be rejuvenated and they become young again to move forward.  

I would like to actually inform this House that Dr Ntiro has been recognised – you know we are just finally doing it.  First of all, when FAWE actually identified her - I wish to thank FAWE for identifying Ntiro and putting her forward so that she could be seen.  Otherwise, she has done so much and because she was doing it under an environment, which was so difficult, she had not featured up so highly like we of big mouths – (Laughter).  So, I certainly thank FAWE for recognising her, which led to her recognition in the United States of America when she got the Doctorate.  Many times we just come and eulogise people when they are gone.  I hope one day some of us also will be -(Laughter)  

Now, I would like to thank hon. Byenkya for moving the motion.  You know usually it is men who are recognised. Even in the history of the struggles; they talk of founders of Uganda as if they were alone!  So, it is very good now that women are also beginning to feature.  Therefore, I wish to use this opportunity to congratulate Sarah Ntiro for yet another of her “first of firsts”, because she is the first woman once again to get this recognition. (Applause)

We are recognising Ntiro as an achiever.  Why?  There are many women who have achieved, but there are people who achieve and their achievements become personal achievements, but there are those who achieve and use their achievements to make others achieve, and that is Dr Sarah Ntiro because she could have got her education, got her job, sat in the office and behaved like a man.  You know, like many women do and they start saying, “I see no problem, we are all the same” and so they do not do much.  So, we are recognising Ntiro because her achievement became the achievement of the girl-child in this country and eventually of the development of the people in this nation.  I would like to call upon many of my sisters and brothers to try and make their achievements, achievements of others.  

I first met Dr Ntiro in the Prime Minister’s Office in 1986, when we were introducing ACFODE.  You know when NRM Government came, ACFODE had been established and it had fire. Therefore, some women went and reported us to Government that we were spies because we had a Chairperson who was a Black-American.  So, we had to go to Prime Minister’s Office to defend our cause, and of course Ntiro had already identified herself with us, having come back from the external wing.  So, that is when I met her.  

The first time I saw Dr Ntiro, I saw her as a determined woman of great resolve.  You see Ntiro looks simple, small and humble with a sweet voice, but behind all that there is a strong, tough, determined woman of resolve.  I saw her pushing people around in that office.  I said, “Who is this woman?”  They were telling her that, “You get off!”  I said, “Eh, I think this one is of my own”, and from that time we have never parted. I tend to think that the barriers through which Ntiro had to work and break as a lonely woman, who was being viewed as having broken the norms, made her character the way she is.  
I am so grateful that she has really acted as a role model for us.  You know what is very interesting, Ntiro at her age, she is even more interested and committed to the struggle for gender equality.  I go to many meetings and conferences here, be it women Members of Parliament, you see only two or three women, but Ntiro is there.  She has continued to be more interested and committed than young women. She really deserves this recognition.  

Let it be on record today. Government enjoys relationship with civil society; it did not just come like that.  That future is an introduction of Ntiro; she is the one who used to work as a bridge between Government and all the civil society.  Since 1986, I do not think there is an NGO where Ntiro did not have a leg and influence. I would like to thank her for that.  

As I conclude, I want to say that it is indeed benefiting for this country to recognise Sarah Ntiro as a great distinguished daughter of Uganda that has made tremendous impact on the education of women in this country.  But this tribute to be more meaningful, this Government really needs to pay special attention to the girl child’s education, especially so these days with the levels of poverty increasing.  

I am telling you more girls are missing out on education and unless we put deliberate policies that promote girl friendly educational institutions, the rest will be just rhetoric.  We need deliberate policies that establish specific women friendly institutions that can promote the education of the girls.  In fact to award Ntiro more, is to see more and more girls educated and achieve like her, because her achievement alone cannot be enough unless all women achieve.  

We need to address the issues of defilement of girls by teachers and others very, very specifically, and to really put stringent measures to protect the girls.  We also need to address the issues of early marriages very seriously so that the girls’ education can be promoted.  I would like, therefore, to end by thanking this honourable House for the first time recognising a woman that has been a role model in East and Central Africa. 

As a member of the Pan African Parliament, I wish to put it on record that Ntiro you have made the African women proud. May you live longer with your God, because it is your God who has sustained you up to now, and I believe will continue to sustain you and make you live a more meaningful life. 

But, as I sit down, I want to say, Mr Speaker, we stand here and recognise people but do we ever consider their life as per now.  How do they live, bearing in mind that the conditions, for instance, under which Ntiro worked were not good enough to make her even save what to live on?  You recognise them and they go on record but are they living a comfortable life?  Are they living a life worthy of the status that we take pride in?  We need to look into these matters; you never know maybe Ntiro’s pension is among those arrears, which are not being paid.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you, and call upon this House and Government while thanking ourselves for this new culture; we should follow it with something more substantial and make these people not to embarrass us as we move torward praising their names.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Now, honourable Members, those who are going to speak are five, and you will share 16 minutes.  

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (PENSIONS)(Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I wish also to add my voice to those who have supported the motion. I would like to declare my interest that I come from Bunyoro Kitala Kingdom –(Applause)- where Ntiro comes from.  

First of all, I would like to congratulate Ntiro for this achievement and whatever you have done for this country, especially, for the advancement of the women in this country.  From what others have said and what I know personally, I think Ntiro you deserve this recognition and you should not be shy about it.  

I would like to thank my sister, hon. Byenkya, for spearheading this motion and to you honourable members who supported this motion with very kind words about Ntiro. I thank those who have worked with Ntiro to enable her achieve this, because Ntiro alone could not have got this achievement on her own.  

I thank FAWE for recognizing Ntiro early enough and made her a touch bearer for the advancement of education of the girl children.  I hope that this will add more value to the education of the girl child because Ntiro is a role model.  But today, we are promoting her and giving her highlight so that others could also learn about her.  We were privileged to know her, but this motion is helping us to use her as a role model for Uganda and for the region.  I thank you Ntiro for being a shining star that early for East and Central Africa.  You have made us proud as women of Uganda, especially the people of Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom. We thank you.  

I want to bring my congratulations from the people of Kibaale district for your achievement, and we are already benefiting from your work. I would like to encourage you to do more so that we get more Sarah Ntiros from the region. 

At this juncture, I would like to thank the parents of Ntiro, because as others have said, at that time it was the parents who had to put their foot down to educate a girl in that region.  I thank them for their being visionary and very strong parents. As you all know, women those days were meant for marriage and producing children.  

This also brings me to the point of educating the children of this country, as it is advanced by the NRM Government through the UPE programme.  If you look back, you will see that Ntiro’s parents were educated.  So it is very important to have mothers and fathers in this nation who are educated so that they can also appreciate the education of children, especially the education of the girls, which is very critical.  So, I would like to appeal to the people of this country to support the Government UPE programme.  Do not criticize it; let us all support this programme so that it achieves the objective it was meant to achieve. We in Government shall do our best to improve the programme, but the programme is really good because it is enabling all of us to go to school, especially the girls.  

Since I have not got much time, Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that this motion should motivate us as Women Leaders to go an extra mile to advance the education of the children in this country.  We are at the decision-making table and we should be careful and make decisions, which will continue to advance the education of girls in this country.  If we do that, this honour we are giving to Ntiro will be meaningful.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.10
MS SEKITOLEKO KABONESA (Youth Representative, Central): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.  Mine will be very brief since hon. Benigna Mukiibi has said almost everything that I wanted to say.  

First, I would like to thank Madam Sarah Ntiro, indeed she has inspired most of the young girls of this country.  I am also happy to associate with her because as a girl-child from Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom, I am really happy to be here and to be associated with her.  

The men of those days, Mr Speaker, must have been disciplined and respected the young girls.  All has been said, I have listened very carefully and I am happy to be one of the last speakers.  

Mr Speaker, the girls have so many problems while growing up and face so many challenges, some self-made and some not self-made.  But I would like to point out, Mr Speaker, that cases of defilement today are increasing and are at a higher rate.  These are not problems brought by the girls, but are brought by the men who are not disciplined.  I can imagine the men of the days of Sarah Ntiro while she was a girl were disciplined.  I would, therefore, like to urge the men of this country, who are not disciplined, and go on to defile the young girls to stop it and take an example of the men of those days.  

Likewise, I would also like to thank the parents of Madam Sarah Ntiro, they must have not discriminated her as a girl-child.  Today, we are here recognising her and she is a product of a girl-child and not a boy-child.  Therefore, we should continue praising the girl-child. 

At this point, I would like to thank you very much for giving us courage and we hope that we can all make it because in 2003 you still went back to school to get your Doctorate.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

5.12
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker and honourable members, I too would wish to add my voice on that of the members who have stood up to recognise the achievements of our colleague, Sarah Ntiro.  

Mr Speaker, many speakers have been talking about Ntiro and her work of Bunyoro and Kampala or Central region.  But, Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the Members’ attention and awareness of Ntiro’s work throughout the country.  I happened to grow up in the Eastern region, where my father was a chief under Kakungulu’s regime, and my mother happened to be a leader of the women’s group.  But Ntiro used to move from Kampala to what used to be called Bukedi, Bugisu and Teso regions, that is, from the River Nile up to Kyoga - those were my father’s domains - and Ntiro used to move with my mother, taught her diplomatic roles and behaviour and leadership skills. 

As we talk now, the women in Teso, Bukedi or Pallisa, Mbale and Tororo, whenever we have any function, say in, Forum For Women in Democracy (FOWADE), once you say that Sarah Ntiro will be there, they will not even ask for their travel allowance; they will come just to see Sarah who took light and leadership skills, and even education to the rural woman.  So, Sarah Ntiro happens to be a household name in those regions, that is, from River Nile to Lake Kyoga, which is a rare skill, even among the leaders of today.    

So, when we come here to recognise and pay respects to all that has been done by Sarah Ntiro, I feel so happy because all the time that my mother lived - 87 years - she was referring to Sarah Ntiro as “a clever girl” and whenever I talked to her, she would say, “I wish you would be like that girl, Sarah Ntiro,” yet for me the time I came to see Sarah Ntiro, she always wanted me to call her “Maama” yet my “Maama” was referring to her as the girl.  

Dr Sarah Ntiro contributed a lot to the developments and achievements that we are enumerating now and feeling proud of as women.  I recall in 1968, when I was still a student, Sarah Ntiro came to Gayaza to give us a lesson on career guidance, and when I went back and told my mother about it, she said, “Now the door has been opened to you, since you have known Sarah Ntiro, God will make it in such a way that you keep on meeting Sarah Ntiro and you will benefit from her numerous skills and wisdom.” It has been so because as we talk, I talk so proudly of what Sarah Ntiro has done, especially for the people of Mukono, because since 1986 when I was the Chairperson of Buikwe County, Sarah Ntiro used to come there to sensitise our women through NRM.  

She introduced micro-financing through lobbying Government to find a way as to how these Women Groups could get access to Government facilities, and she even lobbied Government to see that the rural women, through their NGOs, could find a way of meeting and interacting with Government Officials and donors.  That is how these micro-finances we are proud of came into the village women, especially, Mukono women, because we excel in that according to records in the Prime Minister’s Office.

Mr Speaker, Sarah Ntiro did not stop there.  In 1991, I recall Sarah Ntiro was working in the Vice President’s Office, by then His Excellency, Kisekka, and Sarah Ntiro had a lot of influence in the Vice President’s Office whereby people - I am talking of the rural people especially in Mukono- had access to meeting these great people, which is so difficult as of now, even if we went through some of the ministers we have, with all due respect to our ministers around, it would be very difficult to meet some of these top leaders like the President or Vice President, but through Sarah Ntiro there was some organization of a lobby group of NGOs.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I feel so happy and proud to have associated with Sarah Ntiro. I contributed to a book where Sarah Ntiro also is a writer, that is the book by FOWODE called the Rising Tide.  So, whenever people will be reading about Sarah Ntiro, at least they will come to Chapter 12, where Lydia Balemezi also contributed –(Laughter)– and they will know that I was walking side by side with Ntiro.  

It was also on the same day, same time, same place, when I was also awarded an award of model of excellency for leading the Girl Guides and the women leaders- (Interruption)- yes, of Mukono and Uganda –(Applause)- So, when they said, these people are going to be given awards with Sarah Ntiro, we looked so great.  So, Sarah Ntiro, we are so proud of you and we would wish to continue associating with you. We pray to God that you continue living so that our names also keep on coming up.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we end the debate with Rev. Sempangi.

5.19
REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very happy that I can contribute to this motion.  I support the motion.  Mr Speaker, it is always said that behind every important man or beside every important man there is an important woman.  But it is also true that beside every important woman there is an important man. I just want to say that because, Mr Ntiro the late, was my professor and my teacher at Makerere University. 

I am also happy to see Mrs Sarah Ntiro in the company of Mrs Joyce Mpanga, who was also my teacher at Makerere College School. So, these are two great women who have actually made my life to be what it is. I wanted to say that Mrs Ntiro lived with the elites like, Mr Maloba, Njawo, those were professionals at Makerere who were referred to as renaissance of art at the University.  The contribution of these ladies, Mrs Mpanga, Dr Ntiro, Dr Nambooze- these are the founders and what they have done should really be emulated.  

Whenever Mrs Sarah Ntiro came to the school of Fine Art, she walked like a teacher and talked like a teacher. Today it will be a surprise, when somebody is walking or talking, you never know whether he is actually a teacher or not, but those were professionals in their mannerism. The way they walked, the way they talked, the way they dealt with people, this was a culture, which is almost gone, and much must be done to revive this kind of culture.  

I wanted to say also that Sarah Ntiro was the daughter of a clergyman.  I came to discover that Sarah Ntiro was a God fearing woman, and without the fear of God in our hearts let us forget that you can produce people like Sarah Ntiro. We need to inculcate religious education, which is not only for passing exams, but to build and to mould character.  Otherwise our cultures, we are in fear, are going away unless there is proper education.  

When I was in Hoima, I found an artist there, he was putting up a small museum where people could go and see art of contemporaries. I wish that a monument will be elected either in Hoima or in Kampala as an example so that people can go and teach our young people that so and so lived like this even if he is living today, which is a good contribution.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to encourage Parliament to do what it is doing now. Yesterday in the corridor, somebody was making a proposal that somebody must pretend that he has died; let them put the coffin here when that person is sitting up there and listen to what people are contributing.  I am very happy that today we do not have a coffin –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Did you find somebody to volunteer? (Laughter)

REV. SSEMPANGI:  Mr Speaker, it may not be easy to volunteer on that basis, but I am happy that Sarah Ntiro today is sitting up there and hearing these contributions. I think Parliament should continue to do so and we maintain the character, which has been done by this people because it is not easy to maintain a name. I thank you Sarah Ntiro for having built a name and maintained it.  May God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Mover, do you have anything to say or we take a vote?

5.22
MRS BEATRICE BYENKYA (Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank, Mr Speaker. There is something very small. I beckon the members to look at the motion. I beg there are some amendments after consulting with hon. Ben Wacha, which I think we should improve upon and instead say: 

“Now, therefore, it is hereby resolved by Members of this Parliament that:

(i) Mrs Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro’s achievements so far be noted, recognized and appreciated.” We should delete No.3 because it is something beyond us, but we could pray to the Mighty God to grant her even a longer life.  

I wish to thank the Members for the overwhelming support they have given to the motion, and invite them to Bunyoro Kingdom on Saturday. There is a “Big Do” in the Kingdom. We are recognizing Dr Sarah Ntiro and Dr Sarah Moten and you are going to see the generosity of the Kingdom. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much hon. Beatrice Byenkya. Honourable members, you have heard the motion, you have debated it and you have seen the merits of it. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I have consulted with the Chairman, PAC, and we have agreed that we deal with the report next week.  So, I appeal to you to come with the copies of your reports. Study the details so that when you come here you will be in position to effectively deal with the report.  We have arranged transport for those of you who will be going for the burial. With this we come to the end of today’s business. I wish you a nice weekend.  The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 April 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)











