Tuesday, 6th April 1993.

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The House was called to order).

LAYING OF PAPERS ON THE TABLE

THE MINISTER FOR PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Kintu Musoke): Mr. Chairman, Sub-section 2 of section 6 of the Uganda Aids Commission Statute requires the Commission that from time to time, the Commission shall submit progressive report on its activities to the President and any other person on body which the Commissioners may deem necessary and formulate a policy programme to be presented to the National Resistance Council within one year of the commencement of this Statute.  In pursuance of this Section Mr. Chairman, I would like to lay on the Table, Uganda Aids Control in Uganda the multi-sexual approach as required by law dead on time.

BILLS

COMMITTEE STAGE
THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

Clause 4. (1)

DR. LUYOMBYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to move an Amendment to Clause 4(1) and delete the word Republic from that Clause.  I have circulated the reasons for this but unfortunately, they were badly typed. So permit me to go over my reasons very quickly.  The basis for the need of completely a new Constitution was that the earlier Constitutions were written without wide consultation to the population and secondly, there was duress during the debate.  The 1962 Constitution was discussed in a foreign land with colonialists waiving the word independence as bait to the delegates.  So, they were pre-occupied with acquiring independence above anything else.  In 1967, the military under their commander-in-chief cordoned off Parliament.  Under such circumstances, the Members of Parliament by design or against their wish constituted themselves into a Constituent Assembly and declared Uganda a Republic. Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, we must be -(Interruption)

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that in 1967, there was no army, which surrounded this House and cordoned the Members.  That happened in 1966. In 1966, we came here, we were treated to a statement by the then Prime Minister and then we found the Constitution that is read in the pigeonhole.  The 1967 constitution was published in the gazette and it was debated here and the House used to convert itself into a Constituent Assembly when it was debating the Constitution and then re-converts itself into a Parliament when it was debating other Bills until the Constitution was passed and re-enacted.  I just wanted to set the record right, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information. The 1967 Constitution was debated from May up to the 8th of September 1967.  It could not have been drained but anybody in Uganda having the frog’s brain would say that it was not debated.  Therefore, let us put history right, not simply to dream that it was not so.  It was a fact and law of the land.  

DR. LUYOMBYA:  Mr. Chairman, maybe, as I have said, some Members were free during this debate but there are others who were not free when debating that Constitution.  We should be consistent, principled and sincere.  Let not the NRC pre-empt and prejudice what will be discussed by the Constituent Assembly.  Through this Bill, the NRC is legally giving conditions and terms of reference to the Constituent Assembly. And under these terms, the Constituent Assembly will debate and promulgate the new and desirable popular people’s constitution.  If the term required is left in the bill: in other words, as terms of reference, the NRC will have decided substantially on Chapter two of the draft Constitution prepared by the Constitutional Commission.  Unless the Constituent Assembly is free -(Interruption)

MR. TUMWESIGYE: Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Dr. Luyombya holding the Floor that the name of this country as we stand today, is the Republic of Uganda.  This is contained in Clause 2 of the 1967 constitution that was not suspended by Legal Notice No.1.  Therefore, if this name has to be changed, it must be changed by the Constituent Assembly and not by NRC.  (Applause) Therefore, I think we would be saving ourselves time if hon. Luyombya realised that and left the job to be done by the body that will be created to do it.  (Applause)

DR. LUYOMBYA: Mr. Chairman, I wish the Member waited until I had finished my reasons.  If the term ‘Republic’ remains the NRC will have tied the hands of the Constituent Assembly and yet unless we agree that the Constituent Assembly is free to change the terms of reference of they are not, then their hands will be tied.  The type of governance, in other words, the nature and mode of change of government or even the extent of power should be left to the Constituent Assembly.  Let me allay some fears.  Removing the word ‘Republic’ from the bill does not mean in the first place that the NRM period has ended or it does not mean that whatever the NRM has effected  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Luyombya please, move your Amendment and stop there.  That is your Amendment, please?

DR. LUYOMBYA:  My Amendment is that we remove the word “Republic’ from Clause 4(1).

MR. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the Amendment because this government looked at the 1967 Constitution and decided to move with it cautiously.  Where it found that some areas was so offensive, it amended it or suspended the provisions and we did not find that particular area as offensive.  What the Member is proposing as of now is to start a debate of whether Uganda should be a Republic or not a Republic. I entirely agree with hon. Jotham Tumwesigye when he says this is a debate that should be preserved for the Constituent Assembly.  I oppose.

(Question put and negatived).

Clause 4(2(a).

MR. BUTAGIRA: Mr. Chairman, on Clause 4(2), the hon. Minister has moved an Amendment.  I also have an Amendment that is directly opposite, and I think for procedure it is better to dispose of my Amendment and then go to the Minister’s.  If you allow the Minister to proceed, then I should also move the Amendment.  Why I am saying this, if I move the Amendment, it may be contrary to the position already taken by this House according to our Standing Orders.  It is just a question of re-arranging because when my amendment comes first, if it is defeated, the Minister can go.  If it is not, the Minister can make amendment even to it.  Otherwise, if you allow the hon. Minister to move, then I should also without prejudice move my amendment independently.  That is what I want to say. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  This is a government bill.  So the Minister has got the right to move his amendments first.

MR. NJUBA: I am most obliged. Mr. chairman, I move that that Clause be amended by deleting paragraph and inserting the following paragraph: (a) Such number of directly elected delegates as is equivalent to the number of electoral areas designated by the Commissioner and elected in accordance with the rules set out in the first Schedule to this Statute.  One delegate being elected for each electoral area.  As you see from the original provision, we have to provide for 180 being based on the mathematical calculation.  However, we propose - government proposes to lower the number from 80,000 to 70,000 per electoral area.  Secondly, even if we had gone by the original arrangement, still the number would have exceeded 180 and then since we are not going to divide the constituencies ourselves but will be done by the Commissioner, it is a task to be left to the Commissioner to be apprehended and do all justice and hence the provision, Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move.  

(Question proposed).

MR. KANYOMOZI: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  Unless we get clarification from the Minister’s Amendment, I am rather perplexed by the fact that we are leaving the thing open-ended. We do not know how many in the end the numbers of people that are going to be in the Assembly.  I do not know why the Minister could not give us an exact number.  Mr. Chairman, I do not think it will be fair for us to pass an open-ended Clause in this Bill.

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr. Chairman, since Clause 4(1) has not been put in this Committee, Amendment was defeated but the Clause was not put.  Therefore, it is still a Clause that has not been considered by this House.  That is the order, Sir.

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to support the hon. Minister’s Amendment.  By implication of this Amendment, it is very easy for us to establish the number of electoral areas from our recently concluded Population Census.  so this is not a big problem.  The number of delegates, if we accept the proposal of 70,000 per electoral area, will be approximately 220.  So there is no problem with the Minister’s proposal. And, I want to take advantage of the same proposal to request the Minister to consider using these electoral areas and defining them and demarcating them for future use as constituencies.  Because considering our financial resources, if we can accept these as constituencies, it will save us a lot in terms of preparations for constituencies in subsequent elections. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NDEGE: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I accept and conquer with the Minister.  We should not urge ourselves with numbers, because if do now, any subsequent Amendment will be defeated by this very limitation.  So we should agree with the Minister, leave this one open and when we come to the relevant section, then whatever we accept I am sure the Electoral Commissioner will go by the will of the House. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand also to support the Minister’s Amendment on basically two grounds. I have looked at other Amendments which come close towards the Minister’s and I find that the Minister’s is the most prudent.  Because if we do not accept the figure of 140 and we reduce it to another small figure, let us say 50, as proposed by some Members, this has very serious consequences.  It has direct financial implications which, in my view -(Interruption).

MR. LUBEGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Is the hon. Member in order to debate the figure of inhabitants who are going to be represented by the delegate when the Amendment concerning that figure is contained in Schedule 111.  I think the point is that we are receiving the Minister’s proposal that the figure of 180 should not be mentioned in Clause 4.  We are not debating now whether or not electoral area is going to contain by way of population quota - 70,000/. So, is it in order that the hon. Member on the Floor should go clip on that?

THE CHAIRMAN: That was point of information.

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So, if we allow ourselves to go deeper or much below than the proposed figure of the Minister, we have direct financial problems and this could bring delegates to as many as 600, while now we are talking about a manageable figure of about 200.  The second point that is even more dangerous is that we will be allowing the Commissioner to start gerrymandering in constituencies.  The smaller you make them, the more difficult it will be for the Commissioner who will be informed to sort out where the constituency starts and where it ends.  It will mean that there will be a lot of requirements for geography and map drawers and this will delay the work and the timetable of 1994.  Because supposing that you have got to take the constituency which has got 130,000 and then you want to break it into 50,000, that means you have got to find another constituency where to take some people.  That is another reason why I would like Members to avoid getting involved in these details.  Let us keep the counties as they are, except where the population is so high that the work leaving the counties will not be more than imaginable 20, which is, therefore, a reasonable thing for anybody to plan the work of the business and proceed.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 4(2) (a) be amended as proposed by the Mover.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 4 (2) (b).

MR. BUTAGIRA: The Minister moved his Amendment first and then I will also move my Amendment.  But now it seems we are engaged in trickery.  I have to move my Amendment to (a).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, move it.

MR. BUTAGIRA: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to move the Amendment to Clause 4 (2) (a).  The Amendment I propose to move reads as follows: “4 (2) (a) The Constituent Assembly shall, subject to the following provisions of this Statute, consist of the following delegates: (a) Members of the National Resistance Council; (b) plus not more than 300 delegates.  

MR. ABU MAYANJA: Is it in order under Rule 59 (1) of the Rules of Procedure of this House - this Rule states that, “Any Committee to which a Bill is committed shall not discuss the principles of the Bill, but only its details.” The House became committed and passed on Second Reading and Constituent Assembly Bill in principles and purposes as moved by the Minister responsible for the Bill.  I have seen the Amendments intended to be moved by the hon. Member.  These Amendments create a different Constituent Assembly from that which was envisaged by the Minister that is embodied in the Bill, which is entirely different. Now would it be in order to allow the hon. Member to move an Amendment that will be creating a Constituent Assembly that is different entirely from the one which the NRC has already accepted by passing the Second Reading of the Bill?

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of clarification before you rule.  Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.  This Rule referred to by the hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister/Attorney General concerning principles of the Bill, what we passed on the Second Reading was the principle that there should be a Constituent Assembly.  That one is very clear; we all passed it.  But the detail is who constitutes the constituent Assembly.  Who are those people? And that is what we are engaged in.  There is no contradiction.

THE CHAIRMAN: Rule 61 (3) says: “No Amendment shall be moved which is inconsistent with any clause already agree upon or any decision already come to by the Committee, and the Chairman may, at any time during...” According to this Rule 61(3), I think hon. Butagira is out of order.  So on that note, we are on Clause 4 (2) (b).

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of Procedure, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, when we initiated the debate, you gave us the impression that those Amendments that are attaching after the Minister has moved his Amendment will be considered.

THE CHAIRMAN: I have already ruled on that.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, there are Amendments which were given to you months ago.  I have an Amendment on 4(2) (a). 

THE CHAIRMAN: You will have to move your Amendments.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Yes, can I move it now?

THE CHAIRMAN: We are on 4(2) (b).  Okay, you can move it.

MR. KANYOMOZI: I am moving this Amendment because I had suggested at the time the Minister moved his Amendment that we are going to have an open-ended House and going to be subject to Electoral Commission manipulating the way the boundaries and the number of people we are going to have in the House.  I, therefore, move that; “The Assembly shall, subject to the provision of this Statute, consist the following delegates; not more than 238 delegates elected from the electoral college, one from each electoral area in accordance with the Rules set in Schedule 111 of this Statute.”

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to appeal to you under Section 85 of the Rules of Procedures that you suspend the Rules of Procedures in order to allow some of the Members who are eon the Back Benches who have a bad taste in their mouth to proceed and make their Amendments as they wish so that these Amendments can be defeated openly, clearly without any shame -(Applause)- instead of using procedural rules which will not satisfy them.  I would move that you move under Rule 85 and allow Members to freely get defeated or win for the benefit of the smooth conduct of business of this House.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you mean we leave the Rules of Procedures and then follow the Members.

MR. KARUHANGA: That is right.  I appeal to you, Sir, to use Rule 85 to allow hon. Members whom you have already ruled out of order to move their Motions as they so wish.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: In that case, let hon. Butagira move his Amendment as he wanted.

MR. TUMWESIGYE: Mr. Chairman, we have already passed the Minister’s Clause.  But if it is the opinion of the majority of this House that we should go back to it, my view is that the Minister should move his amendment again.  Those who are opposed to it should oppose it.  Because, we cannot pass an Amendment which is contradictory to an Amendment we have already passed.  We cannot do that.  So, those who support hon. Butagira’s Amendment, what they can do is to oppose the Minister’s Amendment. But we cannot pass two clauses that are contradictory to each other, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: According to our Rules of Procedures, hon. Member is right. But to satisfy the Members and the public, we can go back to his Amendment so that we defeat it here.

MRS. MATEMBE: Mr. Chairman, can it also not be put to the House to agree that we suspend the Rules.  Do you not think that it will be in order to proceed that way so that we agree that we suspend the Rules all of us and then we proceed.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, just for the benefit of hon. Members who may not to have come with their Rules, Rule 85 is a complete discretion of the Chairman and the Chairman has already exercised his discretion.  When I made my request under Rule 85, there was a big acclamation that the Chairman took to mean consent of the majority of the Members.  Accordingly, the Chairman ruled and accepted which he felt was the majority of position of the Members.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Butagira should move his Amendment.

MR. BUTAGIRA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to move this Amendment to Clause 4 (2). It reads for the sake of clarity: “The Assembly shall, subject to the provisions of this Statute, consist of the following delegates: (a) Members of National Resistance Council: plus not more than 300 delegates elected in accordance with the Third Schedule, as amended.   

Let me say this on this Amendment when the hon. Minister was replying to the debate he did refer to this Amendment moved by me, that it was not honourable.  Those were strong words, I do not want to use equally strong words, but I want to point out that all along, the Minister has been expounding the principle that those people who should take part in Constituent Assembly should be directly elected.  It is the same Minister, somewhere in his proposed Amendments, he now wants, he himself, to come in not through election. (Applause) He has moved an Amendment that the Minister for Constitutional Affairs should be part of the Constituent Assembly.  As I said, let me conclude on that, that I am not surprised because the hon. Minister stood and he was defeated.  He fears the people.  On this Amendment, there were strong views expressed during the debate.  One, on -(Interjection)

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member from Rwampara, former Speaker of this House to say, that the Minister fears the people, because he stood and lost; when by the act of standing alone, there was no fear? When the second time -(Laughter)- when also he knows that by standing and losing is an honourable, democratic process and by standing, you do not stand to become a Minister for Constitutional Affairs?

THE CHAIRMAN: Not in order, please.

MR. BUTAGIRA: Mr. Chairman, before I was interrupted, there were two views strongly advanced in this House and also outside this House and these are: Some people supported NRC alone discussing and passing the Constitution.  The other view which is equally strong was that there should be a new body directly elected.  Those were two views.  We spent almost two months debating and it was clear that these views were predominant.  Now, this is a Constitution making exercise where, if possible, there should be accommodation of all views.  It is in light of that, that this Amendment that seeks to marry the two, which strikes a compromise, is a democratic Amendment.  You recall my proposed Amendment had said, let there be NRC plus those directly elected but the latest new element in view of some fears expressed that if NRC combined with the other ones, those directly elected, the view that the NRC would dominate, that it is taken as a rubber stamp - as NRM rubber stamp; to overcome that fear and view, we have come out with a proposal that those who are directly elected out-number the present NRC Members.  That takes care of that element of fear.  

So, the combined, numbers, some people have said, it is too big but there are Parliaments - I do not want to bore you with figures, whose membership is 600, 1,000 and so forth. It is not the issue of numbers, it is the principle involved that a Constitution that is going to be passed should be acceptable to many people as possible.  That is why this Amendment, which I am proposing, which strikes a compromise, which accommodates all views, is even consistent with NRM policy that they have all along exposed.  It is also consistent with common sense.  It is also consistent with accommodating as many views of people as possible.  It is sensible and I therefore, move that the Constituent Assembly should compose of the NRC plus those directly Members whose numbers will outnumber us and both combined should discuss and promulgate the Constitution.  I so move.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Butagira’s Amendment is now open for everybody to debate.

MR. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: I beg to oppose this Amendment for the reasons that, this House, sometime in the past, asked the population to extend its life and this House did not consult the population, the population gave it benefit of doubt.  Now, for this House to ask itself to debate the Constitution, contrary to public opinion outside this House is a coup against the population. (Applause) And once those in power stage a coup against those who put them in power, you are creating recipe for trouble.  Stand warned, Gentlemen and I would not be party to this. (Laughter) It has happened before in our history, it is bound to happen again.  If this House, if Members of this House insist that they should be party to the new House - the Constituent Assembly, I am wondering why they do not remember that this move was initiated by the Army Council; which in the first was supposed to be party to the debate of the Constitution. 

If this honourable House says it wants to stick around to discuss the Constitution, maybe, it is time the Army council also says, we should come back, after all - the whole Army Council and as far as we are concerned, it is not a feeling of the Army Council that they should come back, but if this House demands that they stick to debating the Constitution, then we, in the Army Council have a literate right to demand to be brought back.  Uganda is a poor country.  We are so poor that we are living on credit.  I know democracy is expensive, but is it not prudent that we should try at least to cut our coat according to our cloth? Certainly, having a House bigger than 300 is a bit - I do not think it augers well with whoever is trying to support us out of our poverty, both abroad and at home.  

It has been advanced that the Minister for Constitutional Affairs has been begging this House to have himself brought into the Constituent Assembly, not through elections. I wonder whether the previous speaker ever takes into consideration the issue of reshuffle.  I thought the current Minister was trying to introduce into the Constituent Assembly the Institution of the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs not Njuba himself. Because Njuba could be removed tomorrow! (Applause) 

So, me I see not contradiction and it is relevant to what hon. Butagira is advocating for.  We have recently gone through a process of reconciliation.  We have been trying to reconcile the peoples of Uganda and reconciliation is a very, very, tender exercise.  In the process of reconciliation, there must be no room for suspicion.  Hon. Butagira’s Amendment, if it is passed in accordance with tabulation of the Constituency is brought here; I see something that is going to create a bit of trouble in future.  I am sorry to say; I see a situation where the Northern and North Eastern part of our country is going to be overshadowed by delegates from the South.  You may say it is democracy, but I may say, in future people will say, we were stampeded. I would beg this House for the sake of reconciliation, to avoid a situation like that one arising in future.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BARIGYE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose this Amendment.  (Applause) It is my considered view that if we pass this Amendment, we are going to be opposed by the population of Uganda; because it will be very clear to the population of Uganda that we are more interested in ensuring our permanency here than in obeying the will of the people.  Anybody who has been following the debate going on in the newspapers, in seminars, everywhere in this country, by now should know that there is clear call by the people of Uganda to elect their delegates to the Constituent Assembly.  If we here, ignore this voice, everybody in the country will say, we feared standing for elections, we are self-seekers, we are interested in perpetuating our lives here and, we will have lost sight of the important goal of this exercise to enact a Constitution for the people of Uganda.  It is more important than anything else to ensure that this Constitution will be seen by all the people of Uganda, by the whole world, that this was the Constitution drawn up and enacted by the true representatives of the people of Uganda. We should not do anything in this House, which will detract from that universal acceptability of this Constitution.  We do not want this Constitution to go down in history again that this was a Constitution by NRM government or by a section of the people; we want a constitution of the whole people of Uganda. Moreover, this Government has already spent a lot of resources on this Constitution-making exercise.  Why should we throw all that money into the dustbin by appearing to hijack the Constitution? I appeal to my very good Friend, hon. Butagira, the CM for Rwampara and others who support this Motion to withdraw their Amendment and others who support this Motion to withdraw their Amendment or to change their hearts.  (Applause) it is not too late for them to change.  In any case, some of the worries they had about the mandate this House has can be taken care of in my own Amendment, which will come later. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. EKEMU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, this Amendment that is moved by hon Butagira is really a matter of very great concern and I think we must take a heart-searching exercise and resolve it very, very carefully.  Before I say much, I would like to point out that elements of personalities should not be brought in, because this would only try detract us from the main course.  Whether the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs stood and lost, is irrelevant for the purposes of the Amendment now moved.  

Now, in my humble view, the Bill has asked us hon. Members to surrender ourselves to the population of Uganda and to say otherwise, or to do anything else, will be absolutely undemocratic.  I have the greatest respect for hon. Butagira and I have consulted very religiously that I find it absolutely impossible to support his Amendment. (Applause and Laughter) First of all, if you look at the very way the Bill is providing, to raise the Members of the Constituent Assembly, the Bill proposed that these Members be elected by secret ballot under the principles of universal suffrage. I was not elected in that manner and I am here.  Now, for you or for hon. Butagira to bring other Members who are elected in that fashion and try to graft them on me, is completely incompatible.  I cannot find myself in a position to discuss with them at per.  If we accept that, there will be complexes that are not explainable at the moment between the Members, and in my submission, those are not going to be the Members who are going to be competent to debate the fundamental law of our land, and we have been talking about democracy and since we are going into Constitution-making, we must be seen to cherish the basic and fundamental principles of democracy and in that respect, I would not like to see ourselves arrogate ourselves the powers to discuss the Constitution o Uganda.  If we have to do so, then, we must surrender ourselves to our population.  Let them say, in any case, the Bill allows us to go and stand and come back to the Constituent Assembly.  But at the same time, I would like to extend that I should and I made this in my earlier submission about this Bill.  I said, I should be allowed to serve for the little time that I came to serve here and go away after the end of my work but if we accept hon. Butagira’s Amendment, then I, I am going also to be tied here, unless of course, I resign, but why do you put me to the task of having to resign, which I may not necessarily like? 

So, these are some of the observations and especially, and finally, who gains, who really gains if we marry this House to the number of Members who are elected? Who gains? Look at an ordinary Ugandan.  An Ordinary Ugandan, my uncle and my aunt will gain because they will get opportunity to exercise their voting right to get the person they want.  So, if you force them by letting us continue, then you have deprived them of that right; and how will you justify that? I do not like the future posterity to count me and most of the hon. Members to be party to this kind of thing.  We would like Uganda to pave its way freely and we must emphasise that.  In fact, in this case this time I am going to invite you, that we should really take this matter very seriously because some of us, it is a life and each matter and if it comes to voting and we vote I think this time we should vote very clearly so that posterity should tell where each hon. Member stood over this matter. (Laughter) 

MR. KABUUBI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, on my part, I support the Amendment by hon. Butagira.  I do support that this current NRC should be part and parcel of the Constituent Assembly.  For what reasons:

(i) This NRC we have got the experience -(Laughter)- because why I am saying that the current NRC has got the experience to debate this Constitution intelligently, is because some of us have been in this House for say, three or four years. But you find some Members have never even contributed anything.  And for that matter -(Interjection)

DR. MAGEZI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that experience is no monopoly of any sitting Member in this House. Secondly, that even sitting here and observing people speak is in fact, greatly more overrun experience than physically standing up and debating.  So, the fact that Members may not have contributing, should not be seen as a discredit to those hon. Members.

MR. KABUUBI: Thank you for the information.  What I was trying to say, when you bring -(Interruption)- Mr. Chairman, I think, with your protection, I want to deliver my points and I am being interrupted.

MRS. MIRIA MATEMBE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to stand in this House and say, some hon. Members came here and warm the chairs only, without substantiating, and yet is he is order?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is entitled to his views, proceed, please.

MR. KABUUBI: Mr. Chairman, as you are very much aware, the Mover of this Motion or this Bill has emphasised the importance of Constitution-making.  And by so doing, when you let a fresh person to come and sit in this Constituent Assembly is supposed to stay for three months or four.  Within that time, by the time this man begins to grasp what is actually important, the four months will have expired.  So, really this output -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my Colleague holding the Floor of the House, that the qualification of coming to this House is not the experience alone.  But it is the lack of this country, and that because as we believe in democracy, majority is out. We the 230 or 300 cannot be cleverer than the majority outside.  For all the institutions of learning, the Professors we have in universities are cleverer, we cannot -(Laughter)

MR. KABUUBI: Mr. Chairman, I have talked about that point, and it is a serious point.  Me, I am fearing that this Constitution exercise, maybe, put in trouble by bringing in people who are inexperienced, and by so doing -(Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Kabuubi to continue saying that NRC Members have experience in discussing a Constitution when we have never discussed the so-called Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is entitled to his views.  

MR. KABUUBI: Another point, Mr. Chairman, I would like to put up my case; it is the public to judge.  Someone has said that we are going to have two - it is very expensive to run this Constituent Assembly of say about 500 people because of the finances.  But as you are aware the NRC will be still on, that is the House.  And a Constituent Assembly is also another House, so really is that not the same thing? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, please.

MR. KABUUBI:  So, me I was try to say that we have always accommodated each other.  When in 89, you were about 38 Members, so you expanded the House. This was for the posterity of this nation and to bring also tranquility. Now, at this material time you are saying NRC off and then we create and bring in another body.  So, in actual sense now, NRC is not useful.  I want Members to understand that, me I was of the view that it is not logical for the Constituent Assembly, if it is to be there these people should come - should continue rather than bringing them here for four months and then they go.  Then the Parliament should stop.  So, Mr. Chairman, that is my case I have put up.

MR. SUM NJUBA:  I would like clearly to oppose this Amendment.  It is not Mr. Chairman; the Bill is very clear.  The objective of this Bill is to give the highest legitimacy and acceptability in this Constitution.  When we came into power, NRM, we promised a fundamental change, and this is what we are delivering.  We have been fighting the various level, now are really to deliver a fundamental change.  What method are we going to use? The method for achieving full legitimacy and acceptability is to involve at every stage of our Constitutional making, the population.  If you look into the gallery all these people are watching you here because they want to see what you are doing. (Laughter) Mr. Chairman, this proposal is based on one point, self-reservation.  Even if the experience hon. Kabuubi is talking about can be a very dangerous line.  Because it will divide the people, the new ones and the old ones.  Most of the points have been made but, I cannot forget to thank all those who have opposed this Amendment and also say that I am grateful for hon. Butagira for have -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR; Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House, the hon. Minister of Constitutional Affairs holding the Floor of this august House that if legislating of the House is number one.  And that is when people come into the public gallery, it is not for blackmail because they elected us - they came here to see us.  So, therefore, we should be in harmony for one nation and one Constitution.  And this respects us, we -(Interruption) 

MR. SUM NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I think most of the points have been made, were at the people’s way. I oppose the Amendment, Sir.

(Question put and negatived).

Clause 4(2(a).

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, I am moving an Amendment to Clause (2(a) that the Assembly shall be subject to the provision of this Statute consists the following delegates; Not more than 238 delegates elected from electoral areas, one from each electoral area in accordance with the rules set in Schedule 3 of this Statute.  The reason why I am moving this Amendment is that, I consider first, that the House as we have heard from the Mover of the Motion should consist entirely elected members based on the population of each area.  And I am suggesting that when we come to schedule 3, an electoral area should have a population if it is in rural areas within the range of 50,000 to 70,000 people.  in case of urban areas, within the range of 70,000 and 90,000.  This will only affect actually for urban areas, the only area that will be affected will be Kampala.  I am suggesting this because the delegates do represent people.  We have now an anomaly even in this House besides the other anomalies that have been pointed to us.  The anomaly is that we have areas with excessive population.  And even the formula suggested by the Minister of taking 140 and dividing it by 2, does not solve that problem.  There are areas with large populations that need representation.  There are areas with small populations that have excessive representation.  If the Constituent Assembly, is to represent people’s views, let it be seen in deed and in action.  Unless those areas have the population that warrant representation.  I have also limited the numbers -(Interruption)

MR. MAYENGO: Mr. Chairman, when you are demarcating representative areas, you take the terrain and the area to be covered by that representative or delegate, definitely, it is easy for hon. Babu to cover his area even on foot. Unlike hon. Tumubwine or Pulkol who is going to trespass a larger area.  That is why I am giving because of in urban areas can cover them efficiently with easy.  There are special areas and I thought my hon. Colleague Mr. Mayengo was going to start that.  But in schedule 3 I do in my Amendment provide that each district which includes also Kalangala with 16,000 will have a representation.  How is that going to happen? I am giving a proposal when we come to schedule 3, and even in section (b), that since we are going to have one woman delegate, even the smallest of our districts will have a woman delegate and Kalangala’s interest will be taken care of.  I am also limiting the numbers so that we know the figures we are dealing with instead of an open-ended situation that we are giving to the electoral Commissioner to deal with.  When these numbers are taken into account and using the population figures which we have, we definitely have a reasonable and manageable House.  It is reasonable because the numbers are not excessive, in fact, it will be even smaller and the work will be done quickly and easier than if we had a very large House maybe with little co-ordination. 

So, I am suggesting that the hon. Members do accept this Amendment and we have an elected House Assembly, with delegates tied to the population that I have given you, and also allowing for the modification to take care of those areas which have heavy concentration of population, that is the urban areas.  Mr. Chairman, thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kanyomozi’s Amendment is now open for discussion.

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, the Amendment brought by my Colleague Kanyomozi also is meaningless. (Laughter) Just for the sake of extra Number. One, if he has read page 47 of the interim report and understood correctly what it is all about, and the need for the democracy way to involve most of the people here.  Indeed then you talk about democracy, we talk here. (Laughter) You see, unless this august House as leaders of the people, in every heart to share, fraternize and bring most of our people that we represent. Do not worry about that I came to this House on historical basis, nominated or elected but the interim period brought us into one common denominator, regardless whether you belonged to ‘kidala’ and, therefore, it is not the vital importance of the House but we did they very best for our country.  

So, therefore, let us bring most of the people from their county and also municipalities.  Why? In the municipalities we have wonderful people - men and women who are intellectually excellent because they understand the politics we talk.  Therefore, I disagree entirely and I oppose my Colleague’s Amendment.  I want more people to participate in democracy.  If we say they participate in democracy, many people must come in not a few - we elect them.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I wish to oppose this Amendment on the ground that it will be better for us in 4(a) - although most of us had moved Amendments trying to get the numbers but because of the limited logistics and facilities, it would not be able single-handedly to get the exact number. We leave it as the Minister has amended - that the Electoral Commission is given the chance to determine electoral areas sitting as a Commission so that we do not have to give exact members that will be elected.  Nevertheless, I think if the Amendment shall not be supported we should only specify the maximum number of people in an area and I will support Mr. Chairman, an idea of something like 70,000 as the maximum but not necessarily the number of members to be elected.

MR. SUM NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, we have set three principles.  One, we propose that there should be in electoral area - 70,000 population.  We have also said that a county should be the electoral area.  Now, this was reconsidered to avoid gerrymandering with experience we have seen in the past.  Thirdly, we have provided that as far as possible a sub-county that is a gombolola should not be divided.  Now, on the basis of this, we have given the Commissioner clear guidance and he will be basing them on that one; rather than us sitting in Kampala and drawing up from the Office a number of them. (Applause) So, I oppose this Amendment.

(Question put and negatived).

Clause 4 2 (b).

MR. S. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move this Amendment that we delete paragraph (b) and insert the following new paragraph, ‘The number of delegates specified in the first schedule to this Statute elected in relation to each body specified in schedule and in a manner specified in the schedule or prescribed under this Statute.’ Now, this concerns a special elected Member.  The reason for this is that during the debate Members persuaded government to increase the number of women representatives in the Constituent Assembly, in the regional eight to 30 to each district to be represented by one lady and therefore, the original number of providing the Bill would be far in excess.  I read out that the reason why we want to change this number is that it is no longer 42 delegates from the specified body because already the ladies’ number has gone up so that we have one lady per district instead of having eight as it was original in the schedule.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Point of clarification. Mr. Chairman, I would like the Minister to clarify yet because when we come to schedule three, the numbers are likely to continue changing. I would rather we leave this figure open until we have finished Schedule 3.
 
MR. S. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not understand what my friend is suggesting because under that Amendment, I am not understand what my friend is suggesting any number.

MR. KALULE SSENGO:  I wish also to move an Amendment on the same section.  I have already circulated my Amendment.  In fact what is sub-section (b) was erroneously written down as sub-section (6) but it goes in line with the first Schedule and I want to propose that we get two delegates from each of the following major religions.

THE CHAIRMAN:  We are still on Clause 4: 2 (b).

MR. KALULE SSENGO:  It is the same Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have to get rid of this one first.

MR. KALULE SSENGO: But it is part of the same  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no.

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for an hon. Member to move another Amendment -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: He is already out of order, please.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 4; 2 (c).

MR. S. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I propose to move this Amendment by deleting paragraph (c) and insert the following new paragraph; ‘c) 13 other delegates comprising of the Attorney General, the Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs and the former chairman of the Uganda Constitutional Commission or in the absence of that chairman, a former Member of that Commission appointed by the President in accordance with the advice of the cabinet’ 

The proposal is as a result of the concern voiced by the Members when the ruling number of 15 nominees was proposed.  Government found it necessary to specifically point out those officials of government who should take part in the Constituent Assembly as ex-officials.  The three; that is the Attorney General because is the Principal Legal Advisor of Government.  The Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs has been handling the exercise and I must point out contrary to what my friend said - it is not in his personal capacity but in his official capacity.  It is not Njuba; in other words whoever will be holding that portfolio will be there and the former chairman of the Constitutional Commission because he has been so involved in this matter and we should be able to assist.  We thought these officials will assist government, will assist the Assembly to reach fair conclusions.  The 10 are in a spirit of balancing.  We feel there might be some area that might be lacking representation and there may be some people special knowledge that will enrich the debate but are too busy to go for politicking and so forth; but more particularly as a balance in the act.  We have always been broad-based and so we left the President some 10 on advice of the cabinet - some 10 people to come in and continue with balancing.  May I remind Members, Sir, it would be on advice of cabinet that is still broad-based.  I beg to move.

MR. J. NDEGE:  I would like to oppose the Amendment -(Applause) -seriously because - I think it is designed to slaughter some people here and there. Let us give the President 15 people.  Whoever, he wants to put on this. Whether he wants to include the Minister of Justice and Attorney General or anybody else, let him do so but let us not tie him with any sort of Amendments here and there.  Two, I would not like cabinet again to be brought in into this thing because they have already made many errors regarding this very Bill. They ignored the NRC. They have wasted a lot of time.  Had we been consulted we would not have wasted a lot of time and we do not want to waste the President’s time any more by saying that he should consult cabinet.  Let him go ahead and choose 15 good people. (Laughter) 

I am, therefore, saying that with so many errors which have surrounded this Bill, and it is out of courtesy for the population that we have really said - let us go back to the population - I would like to say that let us not have the President’s hands tied by the cabinet because of so many - I cannot enumerate - plus the fact that they knew that the Constitutional money was stolen.  They did not do anything; (Laughter) I am sorry I think I oppose the Amendment and we leave it as it is.  The President has had enough problems -(Laughter)- and he came and explained to us.  That would have been all.  Thank you. (Laughter)

DR. LATIGO OLAL: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for this opportunity you have given me.  I have liked the way the debate has gone and particularly when we surrendered to the people and that is most democratic.  Let the Minister of Justice also surrender to people. We do not want - you see, we are saying go for election then we are saying a Minister.  Let it be the choice.  The other body of 15 people, we can debate on that one but we are not going to say Attorney General or who - who is a Minister, the Cabinet. We are saying that let everybody go home and if you return well and good.  If you do not it is alright. So, I do oppose this Amendment and I do advise the hon. Minister not to be contradictory all the time otherwise he will spoil the soup. (Laughter)

MR. R. ASIKU: I stand to make my conviction very clear. I oppose the nomination of three people as put in, in the Bill.  It should be contained as numbers of people nominated by the President; which means I stand with agreement that the President should be given a chance to nominate 10 people and that nomination obviously would accommodate the beckoned ministers he thinks are necessary.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, I find this Amendment by the Minister a bit illogical.  Why I am I saying that my position has been clear since this debate started.  We want the people of Uganda to decide on the delegates who should come to this House and debate the Constitution, so that we do not have colours or people brought in through backdoors.  I thought that was the thrust of the logic in defeating Butagira’s Amendment. (Applause) Equally, because this House was indirectly elected.  Despite the fact that when this House was elected there was jubilation that this was the most democratic, Constitutional and peaceful, fair and free elections, we have now come to a position of saying this House despite all those glories that we parted on it, that it is not perfect and that the perfection can only be brought to this House if Members are elected directly.  Given that background, the logic, and the sequence of ideas that have evolved through time and through this debate, we have even discarded the experience that a Member honourably laboured on.  Given that, I find the Amendment very difficult to accept.  I can see a reason of having of these three Ministers and others attached in Section C (1) as ex-official without the technical know-who because they will not have been elected.  I am saying and I am appealing to the House - let us be consistent and have an elected delegates Assembly; and therefore, that disposes of 3(c) 1. The Members can come, in their rights as ex-officio Members to give technical advice to the Assembly to enable the debate to continue smoothly and finish.  That one I think would be an hon. Position.  

As for 10 delegates by the President, the reasons given by the Minister is that, the President will be balancing; but then at an earlier you have said we do not the people of Uganda and the outside people to feel that this House has got people who have come in to influence things, or come in by short-cut. Let us be consistent with our positions.  Already, the President himself has nominees in this House and these nominees including the hon. Sibo are intelligent and performing work very well; but we have said that even the hon. Sibos of this world are gullible and they are not capable to be the House -(Interjection)- Yes, because they are already here - if we had thought that they were reasonable men we should have maintained them.  We should not have asked them to go back.  Let us be logical Mr. Chairman.

MRS. M. MATEMBE: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, the principle upon which we passed 2(a) is entirely different from the line of argument hon. Kanyomozi is leading.  Is it in order for him to mislead this House by following on that wrong line? (Interjection) Yes, he is not.  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, you see you have made the hon. Mrs. Matembe her state known, a new vocation of acting; and she thinks every place is a theatre. (Laughter)  Mr. Chairman, I am saying  -(Interruption)

MRS.V. SEKITOLEKO: Point of order. Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order first of all to start discussing personalities and secondly, to call an hon. Member from Mbarara an actress?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is quite in order.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, thank you for the protection and good ruling. I wish we had the opportunity of continuing with you.  I am saying that keeping to logic and the arguments you have so far heard, let us insist and let us show the world that we are going to have an Assembly fully elected delegates who will come here and deliberate on the Constitution.  We will accept the ex-officio in the House to advise us.  But let us be consistent and keep the position we have taken and this has been the thrust of the main debate and that is what should be the guiding line.  These delegates, after all, anybody with interests will express them through the elections and he is free, if he has a special interest, to have a delegate coming from his area to whom he can send his feelings or sentiments.  Moreso, the Constituent Assembly is going to be composed of delegates.  They are not representatives.  They will carry everybody’s message.  I am saying, given that the Amendment proposed by the Minister should not be accepted.  I oppose it.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I just want to be specific on two areas; the area of the Attorney General and the Minister responsible for constitution and the Presidential nominees. Whatever the arguments are, let us look at what we want to produce.  Honestly a number of laws have been passing here, you have been providing for expert membership based purely in expertise. We have passed laws here where someone because of his office, not because he has ever been elected or not, but by virtue of an office, that person’s expertise is necessary either on the Board of Directors or on an Assembly like this one.  So, I think it is not fair to say that if someone had been following the process of making the Constitution all along, this person should not continue with this process even if this person decides not to stand but holds that office. 

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I than the Minister for giving the Floor away.  I want to inform the hon. Minister now standing on the Floor that, whether or not, the Attorney General, the Minister of Justice or the Minister for Constitutional Affairs or the Chairman of the Constitutional Commission and Members of this House will be available; their offices will be at the disposal of the Constituent Assembly.  I assume they would service the Constituent Assembly at any time they are called upon to do so.  Thank you, Sir.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: I have a lot of respect for hon. Kanyeihamba, but I do not think he thought I did not know that.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for overcoming the afternoon debate -(Laughter)- for being flexible and I am sure my Colleagues will agree with me that it was a big relief that you have overcome that problem.  (Applause)

Coming to this Amendment, and the information I want to give is that both the Attorney General and the Minister for Constitutional Affairs are not Members of the NEC.  Attempts were made, they should be co-opted by virtue of their position, but it was in vain.  Perhaps it was done when I was away. But as of now, they are not.  So, I do not know why they could not be co-opted, not only on this Constituent Assembly issue but also on any other issue that needs legal advice from our learned Friends.  So, this Amendment I think is not necessary.  Thank you.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, hon. Moses Ali has just made his own contribution under the guise of giving me information.  Mr. Chairman, hon. Moses Ali says there was an attempt to make the Attorney General, a Member of NEC and it was difficult.  No wonder, you have been complaining about the processing of the laws by NEC and so on.  We are now saying that nobody should have a right to refuse whoever is the Attorney General or somebody responsible for Constitutional Affairs to be a Member, not even the President.  So after realising the need of these people being there and also rendering services to our community, we are requiring by law that they become to be there.  We are not leaving it to the discretion of the President or even a person holding that office.

MR. MANZI: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, the information I want to give arises out of a conflict of Amendments in that in Section 4 (c) (i) we are saying the Attorney General and the Minister for Constitutional Affairs be made delegates.  But further down, the same Minister moved an Amendment in Schedule 111, Clause 11, on page 4 of the Amendment and says that whenever any decision of the Assembly…and at the end the matter shall be notified to the Minister in writing.  If he is a Member of the same House and you are going to notify him over an issue, you will have a crisis.  Because we have been debating with you as a Member and then he wants to appeal to him as a Minister.  So, I think we should clarify those contradictions in those two sections otherwise when we get down, we shall have a problem.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: When we come to page 4, we shall debate it.  (Interjections) Hon. Members have their views and I should also have my views.  Mr. Chairman, we are saying it is our advantage as those who will remain Members of the NRC may be interested to know the progress the Constituent Assembly is making although Members are not there.  The Minister responsible for the Constituent Assembly can make statements to Members on the progress of what is going on there.  So, I beg that we do not deny expertise representation on the ground of expertise which principle we have upheld in all other fora.

MR. LATIGO OLAL: Mr. Chairman, this is a very burning point.  I was wondering whether it could not be cleared to me as to who is going to stage the constitution debate. Is it not the Chairman, his Secretary and his Vice, who will eventually, having finished the whole Bill, will then bring it to the Minister to bring it to the Parliament.  What is the work of the Attorney General there? What is the work of the Constitution Minister there, if they are not going to be only co-opted?  What are they going to do?

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, hon. Members may take things very lightly.  The people need legal guidance. I am not a lawyer, but we all go to legal people to give us legal guidance.  We cannot say that our people who will be elected, 300 of them, do not need legal guidance. Legal guidance is not the same like legal domination.  So, I want Members to sit in a desire for people to have service in the name of the people who are paid by Government ahead on the ground of being experts in the law.

About Presidential nomination, as I am here, I am a Presidential nominee and I am very surprised with the way people have been trying to degrade someone because one is nominated.  I want to say humbly that I do not think the President’s nomination being catered for here is for people who will stand for elections, then after losing, the President nominates them. (Interjections) Let us have a clear understanding.  There are people in this country who may have certain contributions but who are non-political, who do not dream and will not dream of contesting elections.  Most of the Members are contesting these elections because basically they are active political animals. There are certain sectors of the population and it can end after those elections when such people do not stand, either because of their social status, because of their occupations, they find that they will not go to participate in the wrangles of an election.

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to summarise, please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Let me try to summarise.  Therefore, this should not be confused with what hon. Kanyomozi calls brining people through the back door.  I am just glad about NRM Government because of the change of value that has now come through us.  The people like hon. Kanyomozi who honestly understand the value of a provision can, through twisting a language -(Interjections)- Because hon. Kanyomozi was saying he had a reason for an Amendment that had been brought by hon. Butagira.  Now he says that for the same reasons he is now fighting this provision.  

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of order. Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Minister in order to impute improper motives in my thrust of the debate?  Because I have consistently when we started insisted that the Assembly should be an elected Assembly.  Is he in order to impute that I am using the same arguments as the hon. Butagira’s having when I have never used those arguments?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is out of order.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: I want to conclude because this debate can go on for a long time.  I want to conclude by saying that I would like the Colleagues to look as a role of the two ex-officios, whether they are elected or not, the Assembly is entitled to their legal expertise.  The kind of nomination is not the current nomination of Kafumbe Mukasa, of Sibo and so on, up to political animals.  When you look through this light, you will see the need to have some accommodation.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 4 (2) (c) (i) be amended as proposed by the hon. Minister.

(Question put and negatived).

Clause 4 (2) (c) (ii).

MR. KARUHANGA: The procedure I want to find a clarification from you, Mr. Chairman, is that hon. Kanyomozi had made a proposal that in 4(c) (1) instead of having the Attorney General/Minister of Justice and Chairman be made ex-officio members but not participating members. I do not know whether we can go also on that one.

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is another Amendment that has not been moved.  We now move to Clause 4 (2) (c) (ii).  I now put the question that Clause 4 (2) (c) (ii) be amended as proposed by the hon. Minister.

(Question put and agreed to).

DR. MAGEZI: Point of order. Is it in order for hon. Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine to enter the Chambers when he is not properly dressed?

THE CHAIRMAN: That a style of Kaunda suit.  So, it is okay.

(Clause 4 (3) agreed to).

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Sam Njuba) Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose an additional sub-clause (4), immediately after (3) as follows: “(4) The Minister may make rules to regulate the elections of the delegates referred to in paragraph (b) of sub-section (2)”. Mr. Chairman, the reason is that we had provided for delegates without providing for the manner of their election.  Mr. Chairman, in 4(2) (b) we have provided for additional membership from 42 to..... The 42 provided, that is namely the women, but we have not provided, we are not giving government an opportunity to arrange for or to provide for the elections. 

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, since the Minister has actually set out the procedure for elections of other delegates, and we are going to approve the rules, I would also request that this House should lay down the procedure for other delegates who are nominated and not him alone to make the laws. Let the laws be made by this House, but not him for those special cases.

MR. TURYASHEMERERWA: Mr. Chairman, before we actually voted our Clause (c) (1), where the Minister was supposed to be a delegate, in Clause 4, which he is proposing, he is now making regulations for delegates.  So, you can see that, actually, the Clause is adequate, and the Amendments; because if there are going to be regulations for the delegates, I think they should be in the schedule.

MR. RUTARO: I stand to support the Minister’s proposal, just because at certain stages, you may find something crops up, and if we do not provide for a Minister being able to handle a problem as it crops up, later on it, may be very, very difficult, you cannot call the NRC to come here and they include another rule so that a problem is solved.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs, to reconcile his current Amendment with section 30, which provides for Rules and Regulations, and which has already given him powers to do what he is asking for; because, it seems to me that he is writing laws of other laws which are in effect giving him the same thing, and therefore, this Amendment in my view is redundant absolutely, and it is superfluous.  Probably he was not advised.

MR. NJUBA: I think I conceded to that.

DR. TIBERONDWA: It is 4 (2) (4) and 4 (2) (5).

THE CHAIRMAN: We have stopped on 4 (3).

DR.TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, this is an additional, it is 4 (4) and 4 (5).

THE CHAIRMAN: Additional.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Yes, Mr. Chairman, the reason why I am moving this Amendment is to give legitimacy - I want to read it - and acceptability to the Constitution. I am proposing that under a new Clause 4(4), that the NRC shall stand dissolved after the formation of the Constituent Assembly, and that under new 4(5), that Constituent Assembly so formed shall become the interim Parliament which shall form the transitional of Government to steer Uganda through the transitional period up to the general election.  The reason why -(interjection) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Dr. Tiberondwa, are you really serious with your Amendment?

DR. TIBERONDWA: Yes, I am serious, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Tiberondwa who is a very well experienced Parliamentarian to move an amendment of the Constitution or an Amendment of Legal Notice No.1, which seeks to completely bring a total government and complete change, whoever has been going on, in a small Bill which we are discussing now, sorry, in another Bill which is not the Constitution, because this is totally a different Amendment which goes to the Constitution, not to this Bill, and anybody in this county would know that hon. Tiberondwa’s Amendment is irrelevant and out of order.

THE CHAIRMAN: Really, hon. Tiberondwa you are out of order.

(Clause 4, as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 5).

THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that under Clause 5, to delete paragraph (d) and renumber (c) as (d) and in 2, in paragraph (c) as amended, we delete that is paragraph (c) as elected at the end of the paragraph.  The reason, Sir, is that many Members have questioned the wisdom of the requirement for residence and after careful consideration, Government decided that this should not be the requirement for a candidate to stand in an area.  We leave the judgement to the people in whose are he is standing whether he will serve their purpose, in other words, the requirement for ordinary residence is being removed.

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, though the Minister has gone ahead of me, I have tabled here an Amendment to Clause 5(c), to the effect that the reliability to pay tax and what not, should be deleted out of the Bill and that those who come to the Constituent Assembly come sailing smoothly as we did without any taxation and payments. So, I hope the House will help me in this -(Interjection) Yes, because, my argument is that since all we coming all over the county, we are most of people living in rural areas, they are not well placed like ourselves, with money, so therefore, everybody should be allowed open opportunity to get their people without no taxation to come to the constituent Assembly.

MR. MORO: Mr. Chairman, thank you for giving me this opportunity, I stand here to support hon. Obwangor’s Amendment.  I would like to thank you for giving me this chance although since we started debating this Bill, I have not really been feeling well, I have been feeling very, very sick, because I registered myself to be one of those to contribute, unfortunately because there are so many people your eye did not catch me.  I know it is very difficult. I have been a Chairman, for a long time, and I know it is not easy for you to please everybody. But as I stated, I support hon. Obwangor’s observations, in that it is the people who must elect their representatives and I believe they should elect their representatives who are worth of representing the people.  In our rural areas, most of those people who represent the people are not all that wealth; if we say we ask them to pay, that amount of money, I know most of our people will not be able to pay.  So, I feel that if a person is to represent the people, than he should be given the right to elect their right people without restricting people by paying very heavily, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. MANZI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have an Amendments on section 5 (b), my Amendment is that, person shall be qualified to be elected or appoint a delegate if that person is 21 years.  I want to move that if that person is allowed to vote at 18 and we are also encouraging the Youths to participate in our political life, I think we should also have the same base of age, for those who can stand and those who can vote.  I beg that we amend to 18. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NJUBA: The proposal is accepted, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. TURYASHEMERERWA: Mr. Chairman, I want to amend Section (b) and add after (b) (c), which reads as follows: it is on minimum formal education of Ordinary Level standard or its equivalent,” since we are going to elect people of the equivalence or Members of Parliament, since we have said that the official language is supposed to be English. I think this will perhaps these are the people who can eloquently present themselves in the official language where the Minister has actually put in an Amendment.

MR. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I was persuaded to remove the question of interpretation and use the official language, but I am not persuaded that proficiency in English is necessarily related to a qualification attained by an individual, there are many of us who want to University but cannot deliver and many of us who did not see inside of Secondary Schools who speak perfect English.

(Question put and negatived).

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, Clause 5 (c) of the Bill be deleted. The argument is that, under a need to require, there is no need required at all, because we are to get the people with an open way to contribute in making of a new National Constitution and in a spirit of broad based or Government and that because, what touches all must be approved by all.  We should allow a people opportunities in rural area, I am seeking particularly in those areas which were war ravaged by rebellion, particularly in the North and North East, and other areas, so that everybody should be given opportunity, all areas I should say, opportunity to elect their Members, but also because of the economy, we are product from our University or other colleagues, that because of the finances, there are two meagre to be able to participate in the elections in that they have got to pay tax, which they will be because of the NRM environment will not be in position to afford.  Let us leave Kampala and ourselves, because we are making a Constitution by making all the people to participate, however, humble they are, we should give them opportunity in the same way as the NRA in 1989, get the opportunity in February of last year, to come to this House without paying anything.  So, let us afford this opportunity in making of a new Constitution that joins by all people console. Therefore, I submit that this opportunity would be brought by broad based. So, as to ensure all the people in Uganda respective of the financial position to come into this august House for making the new Constitution.

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, while I appreciate the sympathy hon. Obwangor has got for the rural people, I want also to realise that the basic tax and almost only tax the people in rural areas pay is graduated tax, now, is hon. Obwangor trying to tell us that we should clear people who default even paying graduated tax to be allowed standing in the Constituent Assembly? Secondly, I think now we are in a spirit of sensitizing the population of Uganda to appreciate payment of tax, and I think it will be nice that whoever want to stand should appreciate the value of taxes, on that point, I oppose hon. Obwangor’s Amendment.

MISS KADAGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I really did not see the facts my colleague is making about this particular provision, this provision is very clear, if you have paid your taxes, you can tell the Government, I have paid my tax, if you have not been assessed, you say I have not been assessed, or if you have been assessed and you have not paid, you will say I have made arrangement to pay every months or the next month.  So, we cannot sit here and legislate tax defaulting and tax avoidance in this House, Mr. Chairman.

(Question on the Amendment put and negatived).

(Clause 5 as amended agreed to).

Clause 6.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  Clause 6; I wish to move that Clause 6(g) be deleted.  The reasons for this are that, being a person possessed of any profession or qualification disqualified on this, for the ground from practising that profession.  I have a small problem here on defining professional disqualification.  I will give two examples.  If a father in the Catholic Church got married he will be defrocked for marrying.  Would that disqualify him from being a good person to be participating in the Constituent Assembly? Because unless we define the qualification or professions very clearly, we may lose sight of the whole issue of who is being dispossessed and how it is related to the Constituent Assembly.  I wish to say that we delete that Section and I am sure the Electorate will be wise enough to ensure that they elect the right people regardless of their professional disqualification. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURE YOUTH  (Dr. S. Kazibwe-Wandira): Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose hon. Manzi’s Amendment.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to say that in this country when we are trying to have people upright in their professions, it would be very unwise, to actually say that you get disqualified professionally and you end up being qualified politically.  This is what has been happening that people who are misfits in their professions think that they will end up being politicians and they make politics a place for people who cannot do anything else.  Every profession has a Code of Conduct and has a Code of ethics. So, that if anybody is actually disqualified indeed they are not fit to be representatives of the people.  I beg to oppose the Amendment.

MR. EKEMU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Disqualifying a person professionally is an extremely delicate task which an ordinary person without qualifications would not be able to perform and I have seen people professionals being disqualified on very - on what an ordinary person to call very flimsy ground and yet the ground is highly technical, so such person is disqualified.  And, professionals are the elite.  They are the educated people in our society and they are the people who should help us as much as possible but sometime they run into these technicalities within their professionals and sometimes they are not necessarily believed disqualified using their best measure but there is the measure.  Now it would be a tragedy to our community if such people are bundled up and disqualified totally, even from the point of view of politics, as the hon. Minister for Women says. They have had a fault but which might be so flimsy that they could still be very sound representatives of the people.  So, Mr. Chairman, I support the Amendment.

MR. TUMWESIGYE:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I really sympathize with the views, which have been expressed particularly by the hon. Minister for Women in Development Culture and Youth, but I think, it would be very dangerous to allow this Clause to stand in the Bill.  Because we do not know the rules for example which some of these professionals use.  We do not know the impartiality which is accorded which are brought before these tribunals or disciplinarily bodies.  It is very, very easy for some of these bodies -(Interjection) Le me finish.  We do not know these rules, and I am not even sure then we talk of a professional what exactly we mean.  When we talk of a professional body, would a reverend, for example, would a reverend not fall in the category of being a professional?  He preaches – so, I think it would be as much as I can appreciate some of the points raised, I think it would be dangerous and it would result in some innocent people being barred from standing in these high positions.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ATTORNEY GENERAL  (Mr. A. Mayanja): Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment and I will start with the point made by my hon. and learned Friend over there.  It is not true to say, we do not know the rules under which professionals and disqualified because professionals are created by this House.  All the professionals which disqualify people have got acts made by Parliament which set them up, regulate them are provide for disciplinary bodies and circumstances in which they can be disqualified.  I am talking of professionals like the medical profession, illegal profession, accountants, architects, quantity surveyors, you name them.  Therefore, we know the rules it is not capricious, thing which are not yet professionals like journalists they will not come in because now when you are talking about a profession are the matter of law we can only mean a profession which is legally defined as I have already said.  

So, those which are still between and not profession they will not be caught but those where parliament has defined that somebody who acts in this way is acting unprofessionally and such a person is adjudged by his peers, by members or his profession and they found him guilty of professional misconduct, of such gravity as to warrant being disqualified from exercise the profession such people should be unfit to come and define the basic law and which we shall leave.
 
PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you Mr. Chairman. I just want to give one piece of information in supporting Mr. Manzi’s Amendment and also supporting the view expressed by hon. Tumwesigye.  In Law, the legal profession, it is a professional office to advertise yourself as a lawyer to the public at large.  In other professions, it is regarded as honourable to advertise yourself and to sell your services.  It would in my opinion be very unfair for a lawyer who has discipline because he advertise himself to be disqualified to come here as an hon. Member of this House and therefore, some of the rules, Sir, are very obscure to the various professions and should not be used as justification for disqualifying a member to come here.  I thank you, Sir.

(Clause 6 as amended agreed to).

Clause 6 (2).

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr. Chairman, I wish to move that Section 6(2) be amended to read as follows for avoidance of doubt.  It is hereby declared that a person who holds a public office shall be disqualified from being elected by reason only of holding a public office and this where the Amendment starts from.  But such officer shall ask for leave without pay and shall return all the equipments and vehicles and other access as rendered to his work at least 30 days before nomination day.

Why am I moving this Amendment? We are coming to an election and we are going to have a number of public servants and civil using public vehicles, public funds to go and campaign and we are trying to control the budget and actually ensure that our expenditures are within limits.  Because if we do not and we allow them to use government vehicles and other government facilities we shall get the situation where they are over spending and over-suiting their own budgets.  The Amendment is intended to control those officer and public officers to go out and campaign but use their facilities like everybody else.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Thank you, Sir.  I wish to point out one or two facts.  One is that, the Government has a policy for cost-sharing vehicles, so that most of the government officers, including Ministers have cost-shared vehicles.  If they have cost shared vehicles, they are entitled to use those vehicles but they should not be entitled to use department vehicles for their own personal campaigns.  

Secondly, the Civil Servants who are high ranking also have been allowed to cost share vehicles.  They too should use those vehicles at their own expense but to pick a government department vehicle and carry you to go and campaign against hon. Manzi or against so and so is very unfair in considering that he has not got the same facilities.  I therefore, support hon. Manzi’s Amendment without provocation.

THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I oppose the proposed Amendment because the Provisions as it stands was deliberately put into attract as many of our people as possible to participate in these elections.  It is the short time election.  It will take only one year or much less and therefore, I do not think by denying them any facilities including their own owned vehicles, it will mean that they cannot participate in these elections and for that reason I oppose the Amendment.

9Clause 6(6) (2) as amended agreed to).

Clause 6

MR. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to propose an additional amendment which we call 6(4) that every employer to whom Sub-section (3) relates shall upon receiving an application by an employee grant to the employee leave of absence with or without pay to seek nomination as a candidate and to be a candidate for election as a delegate and for such period as maybe required by the employee.  

This is to protect the employee from being thrown out of employment because he wants to seek elections.  It is really the protection of the would-be candidate from being sacked from his employment and bearing in mind that this is again a short time exercise.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr. Pulkol): Mr. Chairman, I support the Amendment by the Minister because one of the reason that has affected this country, one of the problems why the quality of politics has been low as in the past been a requirement for people opting for elections to resign in advance and people have children in schools, people have houses and so forth.  In such a risk business the best playing do not go in there because - and more so when we are putting this Constituent Assembly for four, six months.  So, in order to attract as brain people as possible, I think these safety valve should be provided as the Minister has put, so that people can be free to come and be able to go back. Thank you.

DR. HIGIRO (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Mr. Chairman, it is alright to allow these people to come in to contest but if they are interested. They should go without pay.  This idea of with or without, they should be without, with should be withdrawn -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Higiro and the House that we should be very careful because as far as I know, all of you are on the pay-roll and all you will be interest to contest what you are legislating to others must also apply to you.  I just want this to be very clear.

(Clause 6(4) agreed to).

(Clause 6 as amended agreed to).

Clause 7

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Njuba): I propose that Clause 1 on page 7, we delete paragraph (b) and insert the following new paragraph: “for the purposes of registering or voting for a delegate in an electoral area, the person; one, originates from the electoral area or resides in electoral area or works in gainful employment in the electoral area.” Now, this is intended to clarify that a person is free to register where he works or where he lives or where he originates but he must not register in more than one place and that is the meaning of the next Amendment by adding three that no person shall register as a voter more than one electoral area. 

CAPT. BABU (Central Division, Kampala): Mr. Chairman, I would have supported the Minister except for No.3 that is (b) (3) where he says: “Works in gainful employment in the electoral area.” I have a very big problem here.  The problem is that during the day Kampala has 2 million people and the who reside here 125,000, therefore, with this discrepancy, I would like to request the Minister to reconsider and remove (3) and I will support him.  Because the people should register in their areas where they reside.  If you start looking for people where they work, everybody who supports you people works in Kampala. I will end up with 2 million people instead of 125,000 and seriously, I do not mind the other Clauses that the Minister has moved, I support him entirely except Clause No.3.  Thank you very much.

(Clause 7 agreed to).

(Clause 7 as amended agreed to).

Clause 8

MR. WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale): Thank you Mr. Chairman. I propose that Clause 8 be amended so that we start renumbering.  Our people were after views about the Constitution and they gave in their views to the Constitution Commission. The Constitution Commission has drawn up a draft Constitution to RC IV so that everybody would be given an opportunity to discuss the Draft Constitution so that it is not termed as being NRM.  You find that some people may not feel comfortable about this proposition for the simple reason that traffic came in one side that is getting views from the people.  The people must also be given an opportunity to discuss this at RC IV level and from RC IV level to RC V, and then from RCV, it will go to the Constituent Assembly alongside with the Draft Constitutional that was prepared by the Constitution Commission.  

In that way every person in Uganda who has got views to contribute to the Constitution will be given an opportunity and the reason that if the Bamasaba want to circumcise and really they want it that way then the people should be given an opportunity. If people in Ankole my Friend hon. Barigye to be the Omugabe of Uganda then they should -(Laughter)- I have got - what I have in mind is that, it was one way traffic when people gave in their views but they want given opportunity to debate the Draft Constitution and therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would like the whole exercise to start at RC IV, and in that way everybody will be given an opportunity. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I have listened very careful to the proposals of hon. Wanendeya but I have told him also - we have discussed it with him that I will definitely oppose it because it will be putting us back to square one.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 8 be amended as proposed by hon. Wanendeya.

(Question put and negatived).

MR. OBWANGOR: I want to move that Clause 8 (2), that the words “not exceeding” be deleted there from.  The argument is, the passing of the Constitution as such, of course I know the Cabinet would last four months that is about 120 days, but the very fact that this Articles are 314 articles, an that it is either the question of adopting or elimination or modification or amplifying.  So it is in this matter that administratively, if the hon. the Mover can listen, that it will be in my view if administratively well organised, that the Constituents Assembly meets say at about return for the debate again on the Constituent Assembly - the 314 Articles that we know.  

Now, debate this, then up to a quarter past two in the afternoon up to 6.30 in the evening; absolutely sure that if this House - because for 30 years Uganda has intellectuals and if you hoped that there will be men and women of ability.  They would be - in my view, the hon. the Attorney General is not here but those who attended with us in London Conference in June 1962.  It was just a matter for 21 days that is history -(Laughter)- because, I am serious with this, because we must value time rather than saying four months or more. The Constitution Commission and the nation has always termed that these are things that we desire that is containing now 314 in a book the Minister has given to you -(Interjection)- No, no, I know what I am talking about -(Interjection)- we must get money, we are not colonialists here.  We must have time to discuss our work as quickly as possible, to save money, so that we can have a continuous legitimate government operating in the country under the new Constitution and a new dispensation of a better administration.

THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I do not support the Amendment of - I do not support that Amendment.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 8 (2) be amended as proposed by hon. Obwangor.

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 8(2)).

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  I move that on Clause 8 Sub-Clause (2) and (3) be deleted.  My reasons are that Sir. I believe that it would be incorrect to put time limit on the Constituent Assembly as to how it does its work.  Sir, when these people came to this House, we thought we would finish it very quickly, but see how long it has taken.  It is my opinion that, of course, we want to be very economic but should be catered for administratively; there is not reason why the relevant Minister or Ministers did not, should not collaborate with the Chairman of Constituent Assembly on questions of timing and so forth so that in the end this matter can be dealt with expeditiously by internal matter.  But if we say, that this Constituent Assembly, should complete its work only within four months and then we give the Minister power to extend it.  I do not know how often he may wish to extend it.  It may, as you know our detractors may say, you are trying to put pressure on the Assembly to complete its reveal and so on and so forth.  So, it is in my opinion that this matter should be taken care of administratively, we do not put a time limit and we simply let the Constituent Assembly to debate the Bill.

MR. S. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, this is very unacceptable.  In the first instance it is with very difficult for the planners of this august House, we have to have some idea of how to settle the things.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 8 (2) and (3) be deleted as proposed by hon. Kanyeihamba.

(Question put and negatived).

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, in view of the fact that Members would like to follow closely these Amendments, and that they feel a little bit tired.  May I move that the Committee adjourns, so that, Members can revamp their energy for tomorrow and they move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to).

MOTION FOR COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered and made some Amendments but not completed.  I beg to report. 

ADJOURNMENT


THE CHAIRMAN: We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. Thank you.

(The council rose at 2.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7th April, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)










