Thursday, 7 April 2011

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. There is some adjustment, which I want to make on the Order Paper so that we may receive an item before item No.3 and then we shall move to item No.4. I have said items No.3 and No.4, but before 3, I understand from the Minister of Finance that there was an error last time when he laid a supplementary document; another part was left. There is an addendum that they want to lay so that the committee which is currently sitting to consider that supplementary, also takes care of that. So, will the Minister of Finance do the needful?

2.47
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and colleagues. I would like to lay on the Table, an addendum to the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for the financial year 2010/2011 budget. This is under Ministry of Defence for classified equipment. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: So, let the committee considering the supplementary Schedule No.2 take up the matter, consider it and make necessary investigations.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the hon. Minister of Finance specifically. We do not want to speculate on this addendum you are putting forward. Is this what is now popularly talked about as the jets of Shs 1.7 trillion? Could you be very clear to us?

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The details of the addendum will be discussed in the committee. I do not have to disclose them here. Thank you. (Applause)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to presume that matters of the supplementary budget are really very urgent and very important business of this nation. I want to know from the minister whether her addendum includes food to the famine stricken people of Teso because they are dying of food shortage; they have no food and I am hoping that Government will bring in a supplementary to help keep them going. Does your addendum include something to feed the hungry people of this nation?

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, as I said before, this is under Ministry of Defence and it is classified. When a request is made for food for the starving people of this country, a supplementary will be brought here. I thank you.

REPONSES BY MINISTERS ON ALLEGATIONS MADE BY HON. BEATRICE ANYWAR, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE KITGUM (FDC), ON THE ILLEGAL TAKEOVER OF FOREST RESERVES AND IN PARTICULAR, THE CASE OF NAMANVE CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE

2.51
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing here to make a response to the statement made by my colleague, the Shadow Minister, hon. Beatrice Anywar on the status of Namanve Central Forest Reserve. I have made a number of copies and I am laying some papers on the Table that I have not been able to circulate to everybody because of costly expenditures. I will lay some of the papers on the Table, but I will circulate the others.

You are all aware that a statement dated 29 March 2011 was made by hon. Beatrice Anywar on the Floor of Parliament, a copy of which is attached to the paper that I will lay on Table, and in the process of making this statement, copies of communication documents between my office, the Director of Environment in my ministry, and the hon. Minister of State for Housing, hon. Werikhe, were tendered in and which I have also attached on the documents I will lay on Table for information and guidance. These documents will give you the development process of this saga.

My intelligence network reveals that the statement read by hon. Beatrice Anywar was authored by one Patrick Byakagaba, a lecturer at Makerere University, and a member of a group calling itself, Forestry Learning Group. The prime motive –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. I made a statement to this House as a Shadow Minister for Water and Environment, in order to perform my oversight role. In the response, the minister is supposed to reply to the issues raised in my statement for the good of this country. Is the honourable minister in order to stand here and say that, I, Beatrice Atim Anywar, a representative of the people of Kitgum District, a Shadow Minister of Water and Environment, representing the voiceless in this country, having raised an issue with authenticity and with documents laid on this Table, I am not the one who has authored it and whatever I presented was somebody’s work? Is she in order and could she substantiate?

THE SPEAKER: I think she said that the technical advisor is the one who made it; according to her intelligence, the technical advice was given by somebody at Makerere. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, each one of us comes to this House when we think we have the capacity – including the A-Level equivalent - to articulate issues in this House. In my view, it is demeaning to belittle the attempts of an honourable member to articulate issues in this House. Unless the minister presents to this House a paper which is copy-righted by this gentleman as proof that hon. Beatrice Anywar copied somebody’s work, then we shall not accept her explanation. 

But if the honourable Minister’s intelligence network did not equip her to that level, I would pray that she withdraws that paragraph – remove that sentence and we proceed because that statement has very serious implications for this country and we wouldn’t like to be diverted by plagiarism, which cannot be proven. We would like to pay attention to the real issue.

THE SPEAKER: Now, in order not to waste our time, hon. Minister Mutagamba, would you skip paragraph two of your statement so that we can continue – you skip two and then we go to three.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you for your guidance, Sir. The purpose of my statement to this august House is to update you, honourable members – 

THE SPEAKER: Well, are you withdrawing paragraph two from the statement – the only problem is that she has already made a statement. Anyway, you just withdraw paragraph two.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Let me substantiate Sir. Before I came to the Floor of this House, I had to find out how this document was arrived at. The person who wrote it has even boasted of having done the work. I sent people around to find out the origin of this paper, and even from the way the honourable member was reading here, you could see that  it was not  her document; everybody saw that.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, would you like to withdraw paragraph two of your statement?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Having said that, Sir, for purposes of making my shadow happy, I withdraw that part. 

Mr Speaker, the purpose of making this statement to this House today is to update honourable members on the development taking place at Namanve Central Forest Reserve and to clear the inaccuracies reflected in hon. Beatrice Anywar’s statement. 

Background to the legal status of Namanve

Members may recall that The New Vision of 22 July 2009 reported that some Government officials including hon. Omara Atubo, Minister of Lands Housings and Urban Development, and hon. Jessica Eriyo, Minister of State for Environment in the Ministry of Water and Environment, had surveyed off part of Namanve Central Forest Reserve and allocated those plots to themselves and other persons. 

In this regard, my ministry, and in particular the Minister of State for Environment, who was shocked by the allegations and did not have facts about Namanve Central Forest Reserve, directed the Director of Environment Affairs and National Forestry Authority, to establish the status of the reserve and verify the allegation. I would like to add that this had become a tough issue in this House.

An inter-ministerial and agency committee was formed comprising of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Water and Environment, National Forestry Authority, National Environment Management Authority, Uganda Investment Authority, and the Ministry of Finance in the person of hon. Kajara.

The following was established:

1.	That Namanve Central Forest Reserve was gazetted in 1932 and it covers an area of 2300 hectares. 

2.	That the statutory instrument of 1997 No.1 signed on 3 January 1997 excised off approximately 1600 hectares, comprising compartments 1,2,10,13,15 and 16, to the Uganda Investment Authority to develop Kampala Industrial Business Park. 

3.	Uganda Investment Authority had further on occupied compartment 12 illegally and had allocated industrial plots to Roofings Uganda Ltd and Platinet Industries among others. 

4.	Kampala City Council had sold off part of the public cemetery in compartment seven to an investor. 

5.	That Buganda Kingdom was claiming compartment 15 and was encouraging farmers to use it for crop farming. 

6.	That a total of 87 private free farmers were licenced and allocated part of the Namanve Central Forest Reserve to plant trees for production of poles and fuel wood for urban dwellers.

7.	A total of 456.2 hectares were by then planted. Some plots that had been allocated to private farmers in compartment three, four, five, six and seven had been converted to rampant crop growing and sand mining. 

8.	Again, rampant clay mining and brick making was ongoing in the adjacent area. 

Based on the above findings, the inter-ministerial committee agreed to make a follow-up and verify the following:

i)	The Forest compartment boundaries;

ii)	Claims by Uganda Investment Authority regarding compartment 12;

iii)	The demarcation of wetlands within the Kampala Industrial Business Park and management plan for the demarcated wetland.

The committee further recommended that the entire forest boundaries be re-opened, maintained and publicised to all local councils and communities surrounding the forest reserve in addition to establishing the exact location of the 1050 hectares which were established as per Statutory Instrument No.1 of 1997.

Last year, on 18 October 2010, hon. Werike, Minister of State for Housing, came to my office to follow-up with hon. Jessica Eriyo on the recommendation of the committee and a proposal to have the remaining compartment of Namanve Central Forest Reserve de-gazetted for purposes of constructing low-cost houses. 

Since hon. Jessica was not in office, I personally led the hon. Minister to the office of the Director of Environment Affairs and asked the director to determine the current status of Namanve Central Forest Reserve to guide the course of action.

On 12th October, Mr Onyango, the Director of Environment Affairs in my ministry, in an internal memo to me - and that memo was laid on Table by my Shadow, and I have also made a copy and laid it on the Table - the Director recommended that the remaining compartments be considered on condition that all water bodies in the reserve are protected from any further encroachment. 

The Uganda Land Commission by virtue of being the custodian of all Government land should take over the proper planning of the area for allocation to viable developers excluding wetlands.

Mr Speaker, I want to go to the document which I have tendered here – annex II. In this letter – in the memo to the Minister of Water and Environment from the Director, Environmental Affairs, dated 12 October 2010:

“RE: Acquisition of  the remaining compartment in Namanve Central Forest Reserve. “Reference is made to your directive to me to determine the current position of Namanve Central Forest Reserve after the Statutory Instrument No.1 of 3 January 1997, which established compartments 1, 2, 10, 13, 15 and 16. These compartments were specified for the Uganda Investment Authority for the establishment of an industrial park near Kampala City. 

In the company of the Minister of State for Housing, Hon. Werikhe Gafabusa and the technical team, we moved around  Namanve Forest and established the following status on the ground.
Compartment 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 14 , which had not been specified have been under NFA management and are under pressure due to the expanding urbanisation of Kampala City. 

The industrial park and other illegal encroachment activities - for example, Compartment 12 has already been allocated to investors by Uganda Investment Authority despite the fact that it is still under the Central Forest Reserve under the management of NFA. This trend seems not to stop now. 

Therefore, with the continued encroachment on the remaining area and the government need to acquire land in Namanve to relocate people from Kisenyi, Nakawa and Naguru housing estates, I recommend the remaining compartments, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 14 be specified on condition that all water bodies in the reserves are protected from any further encroachment.

The Uganda Land Commission, by virtue of being the custodian of all Government land, should take over the proper planning of the area for allocation to the viable developers excluding the wetlands.” 

So, that was the guidance I got.

On the 18 October 2010, I communicated this advice to the hon. Minister of Lands with copies, and I said, “To the Hon. Minister of Lands and Housing -” and not to honourable Werikhe, because by then, he was holding the portfolio and I addressed it to the honourable minister with copies to the relevant offices, including the chairperson of NFA Board of Directors. Hon. Members, this is the communication my Shadow got hold of and used to attack me. 

Challenges raised by hon. Beatrice Anywar

In her statement, hon. Anywar raised five challenges facing the forest sector as the basis of her attacks on me.

One, breakdown of law enforcement as elected officials usurp and take over the mandates of law enforcement agencies. 

This is wrong because elected officials – elected leaders - only deal with policy. In this case, a policy issue came from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development which requested for land to construct low-cost houses. I concurred with the proposal and directed the technical officers to handle and advise. Later on, when enforcement was necessary as it is now, the Police was called in. So, I did not want to challenge my Shadow to substantiate further.

Two, encroachment from land-hungry protest population

That is true –(Interjections)- and this anger is bound to increase. Why? Because the population keeps growing; the boundaries of Uganda are inelastic, so increased pressure on land is expected. It is the duty of the honourable member and indeed all of us leaders, to discuss the matter with sober minds instead of looking for scapegoats.

Urbanisation is growing faster in Africa than anywhere else at this present time, and Uganda is not an exception. Therefore, the problem of housing is bound to increase and the Government and any sober leader would have to handle - to strategise - to find a way of handling that problem.

Soil fertility 

Soil fertility has decreased drastically such that food production will strain more land than before. Forests and wetlands are the obvious targets. 

Three, another challenge that my sister identified was an apparent alliance between greedy businessmen and the political elite to win political support. 

It is indeed unfortunate that this statement appeared. However, I intend to request my sister to substantiate this allegation since no politician I know of is reflected in the copy I have attached. I hope colleagues you have got the copies. I managed to get this copy through difficulty because I had to go to all the sites, even Kira Police Station in Bweyogerere and finally, I got a list of the people who were encroaching. When you study this list, I have not found a single politician. Maybe my sister knows who is the politician here will be able to substantiate. 

Four, perpetual under-funding of the environment natural resource sector and its forest services 

While this had been true in the previous year, NFA has been receiving substantial financing from development partners and from the sale of wood products and licensing. NFA’S budget for the financial year 2010/2011 includes Shs 1 billion for afforestation and this is mainly for community tree planting. In the coming financial year, a further Shs 1.2 billion has been provided. This cannot be said to be a regression in funding of the sector. On the contrary, it demonstrates the willingness of Government to address environmental degradation.

Five, absence of effective or failure of political leadership in the environment sector

Colleagues, as you realise, she elaborated on this challenge from page 4 of her statement to page 8. That is where she misfired. If only she had taken  time to find out more about the problem and facts as given now in my annexes 1, 2 and 3, she would have had a different opinion. 

However, I beg to clarify, Mr Speaker. Members should note that I did not initiate the process to allocate land in Namanve Central Forest Reserve, but rather, the request came from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development as far back as 2009. So, that was not my initiative.

My letter of 18 October 2011 clearly outlines that the degazettment process, which is clearly known to hon. Anywar, ends with Parliament’s approval, where she has got the opportunity to reject the request.
 
All communication has been copied to the permanent secretaries both in my ministry and the Ministry of Lands, and to the Chairman, NFA Board. It should be remembered that the inter-ministerial and the agency committee that recommended surveying and opening of boundaries included the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA), Uganda Investment Authority, Wetlands Department and the two ministries of water and environment, and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

Furthermore, the Shadow Minister encroached on the manifesto of NRM. I am using the word “encroached”. The NRM manifesto is very clear and I thought I had brought a copy. I should be having one. On page 90, it is stated that, One, “We shall enforce a deliberate afforestation policy to cover all bare hills.” This is ongoing and a number of bare hills have been identified and some of them planted. To be frank, we have so far planted 19. I actually wrote to Members of Parliament to help me identify bare hills in their localities so that we can target them.  That notwithstanding, we are making our own effort to reach out to various districts and get to the chairmen of the districts to identify the bare hills.

To review the policy on forest reserves to ensure equitable use of forest resources. I want to assure this House that a consultant has already been recruited. It was not easy to get the resources, but finally, NARO gave support and the consultant is on the ground.

“Pursue policies to ensure a clean and safe environment.” This is on page 92. I want to report that NEMA has already initiated solid waste management in eight towns. Another 9 are coming on board the next financial year. 

Stakeholders’ involvement in cleaning up the environment in form of community policing and the neighbourhood watch are being incorporated. Right now, we have got the Nakawa Community Policing. We are trying to initiate one in Nateete and we are working with the Minister of Internal Affairs to establish the Environment Police Unit.

Another accusation was turning a forest reserve, part of the permanent forest estate, into a housing estate. I want to state that Namanve is not one of the permanent estates. A permanent forest estate is defined as land set aside for forest activity in perpetuity and it includes forest land, forested areas in parks and wildlife reserves. Namanve Forest Reserve was a forest established and has since been managed as a pole and firewood production forest. Even those who got licences to grow trees there are not supposed to keep the trees permanently, but they are supposed to harvest them and earn money. No wonder hon. Anywar recognised that fact in her statement in the top paragraph of page 6 of our statement. 

My investigations reveal that the destroyed forest in question was a second generation of a eucalyptus crop. The celebrated honourable cares so much about the 75 licensees but less about those Ugandans living in a sorry state in Kisenyi slum. I wish to inform her that where she lives in Akright was once a forest, which was cleared a long time ago that she now enjoys the affluent lifestyle to the envy of the Kisenyi slum dwellers- (Laughter) On the other hand, it is only strategic national planning to have a low income housing estate next to the industrial park. I thank you.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament advise the House on the content of speeches and rule 59 talks about the content of speeches. It says that it is out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous and unbecoming words, or to impute improper motives to any Member or to make personal allusions.

I have been listening very attentively to the honourable minister. She has gone to a level where she is talking about where hon. Anywar resides. In my view, I think that the honourable minister is trying to tie up the statement hon. Anywar made in good faith and try to impute improper motives to it.  Is the honourable minister, therefore, in order to proceed in such a manner as to impute bad motives on this statement made by hon. Anywar by personally bringing in matters of where she lives as though all of us do not live in good places? Some actually live in swamps. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what you know - if you look at page 6, the sub-heading under which this statement has come is e), turning a forest reserve, part of the permanent forest estate into a housing estate. I think although she used the example of hon. Anywar, this is what she was demonstrating in that the area where she stays was once a forest, but now it is a housing estate. I think that – perhaps she should have used an example of another person. So, she is saying that where Akright Estate stands, was a forest. 

MS ANYWAR: Order!

THE SPEAKER: No, please. Let us listen to this because apparently hon. Alaso you have to see the genesis to the statement  in that when hon. Anywar was making her statement about the environment she ended up accusing hon. Mutagamba. She is answering her statement and, therefore, to refer to her sometimes is unavoidable. But this point was to demonstrate that certain areas which are now housing estates were at one time forests.  But I think we can stomach this. Okay, continue and please avoid offensive language.
 
MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, on the other hand, it is only strategic national planning to have a low income housing estate next to an industrial park. 

Another point was that the NFA staff was working in a state of fear and one of the staff is likely to already have been sacked. This is wrong because nobody has been sacked in NFA. The statement is put as a ring fencer so that the mole in NFA may not be touched. Colleagues, these are the people or employees who steal official documents in order to tarnish the good name of Government. So, I want to note that. 

Private tree growers took Government for unfair takeover: Mr Speaker, I have not seen their communication. I have walked to Kira. I have even talked to one of them. They are only wondering what to do next, but I have not seen communication from the private tree dealers. But in any case, if this forest was to be de-gazetted, compensation would be one of the issues, and so, I do not want to deal with it. But as of now, I have not received communication.

Lawlessness by veterans

Yes, lawlessness prevails at Namanve Forest Reserve but my research revealed - and I know you do not want to hear my research - that it is organised, in part, by one Hassan, an FDC candidate for the Kira mayoral race, who in a meeting at Patiko Restaurant, instigated lawlessness among the people there and led them to the site, that is Namanve Central Forest Reserve, with placards. They even gate-crashed the Namboole NRM presidential candidate campaign rally and made their point. It was at that point in time that the President promised to send a team of investigators. These people took this gesture as a licence to vandalise the area and they are still there.

Attached, as I have said, is the list of the people that I have managed to identify, who allocated themselves land. But in the copies I have laid on Table, there are even sale agreements by people listed there - people who are selling - and the amount of money stipulated. But when we go to identify who these people are, you can see that these are people who are really against Government. So, that is my research. I have checked with Police, with CID and with everybody and that is the information I have.

The Presidential directive of July 2008

This directive was to halt the selling and licensing of forest reserve land to tree farmers. It is true the selling of forest land was being abused by land grabbers and speculators. Some of them, after getting licences, cleared all the natural trees found in the areas and others sub-leased to local farmers of maize and others to sand mining and this has been the case in Namanve. Some of those allocated went sand mining. Until such time -(Interjections)– this is my statement. Until such a time when I am empowered to police these forests, my political guidance is not to give any licence except on the bare hills which we require to have forests. So, giving of licences to any area apart from bare hills is not going to be done. 

Therefore, land grabbing at Namanve is illegal and outside the normal procedure of licensing and degazetting. The perpetuators of this act should be dealt with by the law enforcement unit, and already the Inspector General of Police has deployed and if need be,the Army should be required to move in.

As I conclude, I would like Members to note that the allegations contained in the statement made by hon. Beatrice Anywar and presented to Parliament on 29 March are not true. The Ministry of Water and Environment has not allocated any land in Namanve Forest Reserve for distribution by Uganda Land Commission and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. We have not yet allocated anything.

My ministry has received a request from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to be given land for relocation of residents of Kisenyi slum as well as Naguru and Nakawa housing estates.
The Ministry of Water and Environment has no objection to part of the forest reserve being excised to resettle people of Kisenyi slum as well as Naguru and Nakawa housing estates provided due care is taken to map and preserve the wetlands found in this area and the process of land appropriation is in accordance with the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003.

The Ministry of Water and Environment in conjunction with NFA will continue to carry out eviction of encroachers currently occupying compartments six and seven of Namanve Central Forest Reserve. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Members, you remember early this week, we had in the gallery students from Midland High School, Kawempe. This afternoon we have Senior Six students of the same school. They are represented by hon. Latif Ssebagala, but as I informed those who were here last time, I granted leave to your Member of Parliament to go for Umrah in Mecca – he went to pray for you so that you perform well in exams – that is why he is not  here, but you are welcome.

RESPONSE TO ALLEGATIONS MADE BY HON. BEATRICE ANYWAR ON THE ILLEGAL TAKEOVER OF FOREST RESERVES AND IN PARTICULAR NAMANVE CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING & URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Mr Michael Kafabusa Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I would also want to submit a statement in response to what hon. Anywar presented to this august House on 29 March 2011. On that day, she made misleading allegations against me as a person, my ministry and Uganda Land Commission, purporting illegal takeover of Namanve Central Forest Reserve, which I want to respond to. I am responding to this statement as a minister who was holding the portfolio of Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, not as Werikhe. It is a personal response to allegations made.

In her statement, hon. Anywar claimed that my ministry and Uganda Land Commission allocated the remaining parts of Namanve Forest Reserve for construction of houses to resettle people living in Kisenyi slum, Naguru and Nakawa estates without following the right procedures for degazetting the forest reserve. She also said that my ministry and Uganda Land Commission illegally allocated the forest reserve land to politicians and top Government officials. She said that in doing the above, my ministry and Uganda Land Commission failed the President and Parliament in protecting public property.

On allegations that my ministry and Uganda Land Commission allocated the remaining parts of Namanve Central Forest Reserve to resettle people living in Kisenyi slum, Naguru and Nakawa housing estates without following the right procedures:

My ministry and Uganda Land Commission involvement in the matter dates back to August 2009, when an inter-ministerial agency committee was established to look into the matter of the Namanve Forest encroachment. There is an overlap; a lot of things that I am going to say have actually already been alluded to by hon. Mutagamba; so, I will try to summarise. 

The committee comprised of representatives from the Ministry of Water and Environment and other departments that were mentioned - but I think for the record, I should state them. Those are the departments that were involved in the initial meeting and this meeting was by then attended by hon. Omara Atubo on behalf of the ministry.
We can now go to page 2, on the findings.

a)	Under Statutory Instrument No.1 of 3 January 1997, 1,006 hectares comprising compartments 1, 2, 10, 13, 15 and 16 were excised for Uganda Investment Authority to develop the Kampala Industrial Business Park;

b)	The external and internal boundaries of the compartments of the forest reserve were not known on the ground;

c)	Compartment 12 had some proposals for allocation made by Uganda Investment Authority, which would be taken-up after the process of degazettment was completed;

d)	Kampala City Council had sold off part of compartment 7 to an investor and turned part of it into a public cemetery;

e)	The Buganda Kingdom claimed compartment 15 which it has gone ahead to allocate to private developers; and

f)	There was cultivation of crops and mining of clay and sand in plots allocated for private tree planting and those adjacent to wetland areas.

It was agreed that there was need to identify and verify the following:

(i)	Forest compartment boundaries;

(ii)	Claims that Uganda Investment Authority, Kampala City Council and the Buganda Kingdom had encroached on the forest reserve and made illegal allocations; and

(iii)	Ensure the demarcation of wetlands within the Kampala Industrial Business Park for the protection of the wetland area.

Mr Speaker, the committee further agreed that the entire forest boundaries be re-opened, maintained and publicised to all local councils and communities surrounding the forest reserve, in addition to establishing the exact location of the 1,006 hectares which were excised as per Statutory Instrument No.1 of 1997.

It is true that my ministry on 18 October 2010 received communication from the Ministry of Water and Environment in response to the request made for land for relocation of residents of Kisenyi slum as well as Naguru and Nakawa housing estates, to pave way for re-development of prime areas in the city. There are letters of communication between the two ministries – I will also lay them on the Table because hon. Anywar did lay them – but the most important thing is we should know what is enshrined in these letters. 

What they allude to is acknowledging the fact that before the degazzetement of any forest reserve, there is need to follow a legal process. But when you read this, you realise that there is nowhere in any of this communication to show that there was an allocation to be made. I lay these letters on the Table.

Thereafter, my ministry communicated to Uganda Land Commission to take appropriate action, taking into account the Ministry of Water and Environment concerns. Appropriate action in my letter, meant opening the boundaries because that is what my honourable colleague was referring to – appropriate action to establish the extent of the forest reserve, and report back to me and the Minister of Water and Environment, before a formal instrument to dispose of any land was prepared for degazzetement.

May I, therefore, inform this august House that my ministry and the Uganda Land Commission are not aware of any allocations purported to have been made in the forest reserve. As an MP, I am aware and mindful of the Forests and Tree Planting Act of Uganda, whose sections 7 and 8 provide for the procedure of de-gazzetement before any allocations can be made.

On page 7 of hon. Anywar’s statement, it is alleged that lawless elements, mostly veterans, were moved into the reserve to cut down the planted trees and start constructing houses. On this, I wish to inform hon. Members that to the contrary, it was the actions and efforts of my ministry together with State House that ensured that the illegal encroachers are evicted by Police. 

We also asked Police to take safety action to prevent the seemingly planned move by illegal encroachers, to occupy the vast chunk of wetlands and forests. I have attached my communication to the Inspector General of Police on the same issue, for your information as annex 1.

An instruction to survey, that is the opening up of boundaries of the forest reserve, was issued by the Commissioner of Surveys and Mapping, to survey land at Kirinya and Bukasa on behalf of the Uganda Land Commission. The purpose of the survey was to open up the boundaries and determine the size of land available so that the protected wetlands and waterways would be demarcated.

The role of my ministry and that of Uganda Land Commission, as custodians of Government land was, therefore, only to facilitate the verification of the size of the current Namanve Central Forest Reserve, the demarcation of the protected wetlands and waterways, and to establish the extent of encroachment on the forest reserve.

On the second allegation that my ministry and the Uganda Land Commission legally allocated the forest reserve to politicians and top Government officials, I would like to categorically state that this is not true. Hon. Anywar should provide evidence in form of any allocation instruments to support her claim that land was allocated to these categories of persons. Those allegations are aimed at tarnishing my name despite the efforts I have made to protect the remaining forest reserves from encroachment.

I have specifically visited the forest in the company of the DPC of Wakiso, the Regional Police Commander, the Uganda Police Land Protection Unit Commander, the Mayor of Kira Town Council, the liaison Police officer attached to the National Forestry Authority and officials from State House.
In all the instances, the encroachers we met were advised to vacate the reserve in order to maintain its integrity. The encroachers included those who claim the land was part of Kabaka’s land given to them by the Buganda Kingdom. The Police intervention has led us into the arrest of some of the ringleaders in Bukasa and Kirinya though they are still detained pending further investigations.

To claim that the political leadership at the Ministry of Lands has failed the environment and natural resource sector is, therefore, incorrect. There is no evidence to show that the political leadership or Government officials sanctioned the illegal occupation of land in the said forest reserve.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, it is not true that my ministry and the Uganda Land Commission allocated the remaining part of Namanve Central Forest Reserve to politicians and top Government officials. It is also not true that my ministry and the Uganda Land Commission failed H.E. the President and Parliament in their effort to protect public property. 

Therefore, I wish to categorically refute all the allegations made against my ministry and the Uganda Land Commission. The allegations are deliberate and just intended to mislead the august House. 

Mr Speaker, allow me submit that my ministry and the Uganda Land Commission have made a positive contribution to the protection and preservation of the national forest reserves. I beg to submit.

3.41
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for responding to my question, which I brought as part of my duties of a Shadow Minister for Environment.

As I respond to what the minister has said, I would like to make a few observations. As I present my reaction to the minister’s response, I would like to say that I am a Member of Parliament. I am an intelligent Ugandan with qualifications to a level of a Masters Degree and with a passion for environmental matters.

Therefore, I stand to respond to the minister’s response as a national issue, not as a personal issue. I would like to distance myself from the talks outside Parliament – I love to engage myself as a parliamentarian and be on record only as such. I do not always like to involve myself in women talk –(Laughter)- that is personal and I intend to react only in that direction.

My reaction will first deal with the response made earlier on by the Minister of Water and Environment. Other factors left constant, I observe that she has not refuted the fact that there was communication to do with the giveaway of land at Namanve. She has not, for example, refuted any of the copies of those letters that I laid on Table, which means there is a lot of truth in them.

Two, in her letter, the minister has not refuted the fact that there are illegal activities going on in Namanve, which was also a basis for my statement that I presented to this House. This means that is also true.

Three, there is no denial that there was and there is still  a will by her ministry to give away land for the low housing access as it had been proposed and referred to in my statement, which also means that was also a fact.

Basing on that, as I rest my case, it is true that illegal activities are going on; and as the minister outlined here, honourable members are aware of the procedure of degazetting wetlands, but this process has not yet been done, hence, the reason for raising the concern. In my submission, I said the minister has the will to give away the forest reserve at Namanve, which she has acknowledged. I see that she has alluded to the issues in my presentation, but she also thought that while I was playing my oversight role, that I made a personal attack. This is not true. The facts, as presented in my statement, have been alluded to in her response. There is nothing she has refuted. The issue which I should have talked about is me not being the author, but the facts as they are, are true. 

I would like this House to note that a natural resource of this country is for the good of this country – Members of Parliament and Government are custodians of these natural resources. Therefore, all of us should be concerned about any fraud. It was on that basis that as a Ugandan concerned with the welfare of the whole country, I brought this to the notice of this House, and the whole country that the ministry and the minister, my colleague, who is supposed to be the custodian and guardian of this resource – she is in the know of this process; she even proudly said that where I currently live used to be a forest and it is now an estate. 

This is one of the problems I have with the minister and it reminded me of the Mabira Forest case. As much as we all want development, should we do it at the expense of the long-term sustainability of this country? Surely, I am not against development. And when we raise this, it is not because we are trying to encroach on the NRM Manifesto, as you said. Today, I am confirming that the NRM is only you and the few, and not all Ugandans. If it was that all of us were not to be heard - from the honourable minister - who would be the agent of change on that? 

I want to state that we shall fight all acts of quick development which are not sustainable for this country, and which are going to let even the very poor people that you are talking about – the ones you are constructing low cost houses for – suffer long-term environmental problems.

The Minister of Water should be in the know of the effect of climate change. You have been flying all over the world, but you are coming back with nothing home. Really, these are issues which we should take very seriously. If we are looking at how to combat the effects of climate change, you cannot just go for easy prey. That you are going to build houses for low income people as if we do not have alternative pieces of land elsewhere; and you have to go and encroach on Namanve!  For sure, this is not justifiable.
 
We still have good land in the country where we can settle our people. Who are the owners of these low-cost housing estates we are creating? The very poor from Kitgum and from your constituency might not even afford them. That is the truth of the matter; it is just an investment by the rich investors in this country.

Therefore, I am not happy when you gloss around the issues that I raised, specifically, in order to save this country, and in order to plan and preserve our environment in a sustainable way. I am not going to mince words if the minister, who is supposed to be the main protector of our environment, can still give leeway and encourage our wetlands and forest reserves to be encroached upon. It is a shame.

Mr Speaker, responding to Minister Werikhe’s statement, there was communication, which is also not refuted, according to his statement. My only worry is that we are now dragging in State House; that State House helped to repulse the encroachers. 

I do not know whether State House is now in charge of our environment. What then is the use of the ministry? What is the interest of State House? It is fishy. We have a whole ministry with ministers and then you tell me if State House had not come in you could not have done otherwise? That is my worry. 

Secondly, the minister brings in the issue of Buganda Kingdom – [Mr Werikhe: “Information”]- You will be given time. Buganda Kingdom is one of those that are alleged to have given out some of the pieces of land. Buganda Kingdom is not here to defend itself. This issue has now become broader. It looks like we are trying to allocate blame. It will be very unfair for Members of Parliament or for a minister to bring this issue up and we push it under the carpet. 

Therefore, to be fair, if the Buganda Kingdom issue has cropped in, it now becomes a wider issue than probably what the ministers are presenting to us. The big part of it is that they are trying to wash themselves clean and they are allocating blame and probably trying to disown the communication they made. 

Parliament should further investigate this issue, make it broader and get a full report on the ongoing activities in Namanve and probably also have an opportunity to hear from Buganda Kingdom and from private tree planters who have been licensed, and who cannot be here to give their views so that we make an informed decision on this issue. As per now, the issue has gone beyond the bars. The minister’s response cannot satisfy -

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you should read the statement as it is. The Minister’s statement, on page four, just says that the encroachers, the people now under investigation, are the ones who claimed that they were given that land by Buganda Land Board. That is what they have said. That is on page four of the last statement.

MS ANYWAR: Yes, Mr Speaker. But as we all know, there are so many other interested people in this case of Namanve, who cannot be heard or who cannot contribute to this debate to help save Namanve itself, and that is why I am making my submission.

Lastly, I just want to make a passionate appeal to my sister that as a minister in the government of the NRM, you stand to inform the country through this Parliament, as a representative, on what is within your ministry. There is no way a question put to you concerning your ministry is personal. I pray that you go beyond seeking personal sympathy and stick to what is supposed to save this country.

The letters you write like this, which are personal, I will not present, but I hope that you stand as a minister and defend this country and not personal interests. For God and my country.

3.57
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page four, the minister who graduated with a BA in Economics in 1976 possibly needs to be informed about the economics of this country at the moment. 

She is claiming that population growth is the reason we are encroaching and we are likely to encroach on our wetlands. I want to bring some factual statistics to your attention. One, in Uganda today, our urbanisation rate is just 2.6 percent per annum. Two, Uganda has 11 million hungry Ugandans; and thirdly, 90 percent of our farmers do not use artificial fertilisers. So, when you are bringing your argument as far as agriculture and things related to food security are concerned, assuming everyone of those 11 million hungry Ugandans were encroaching on a piece of wetland, how much wetland would you have next month? Absolutely nothing!

As a country, we should be talking about how to improve agriculture in terms of providing artificial fertilisers and how we can use intensive farming other than encroaching now. This is because 25 years down the road, with a population growth rate of 3.2 percent and a maternal birth rate of 6.5 children, we will not have land; so, this cannot be an argument.

Let us look at issues like this –(Interjections)- you know, when you are always providing sense to the other side, they will just do that, but we will give them time. Let us look at the dynamics. Currently, our population is standing at 33 million, and 25 years down the road we are going to be 150 million. If we started encroaching now, 25 years down the road, what shall we have? The Minister of Housing should tell this country the housing plan.

Look at where we could resettle people in Kisenyi. When are we going to think about sky scrapers? Because this is a fact that is facing us. When are we going to begin talking about these kinds of issues? Planned settlement - and the honourable minister is talking about hon. Anywar living in Akright, which is a wetland. Why? The private developers of these housing estates are now looking for cheap land and cheap land is found in wetlands, and that is encroachment. What are you doing?

I want to bring to the minister’s attention something hon. Wadri raised here and I have raised it to her before. Barifa Forest Reserve is 265 acres. This was fraudulently raped by none other than Gen. Salim Saleh and he still sits there. He has invaded over 15 acres and if you so love the trees and the environment, how come until now, without even getting the authority of the district and that of NFA, Gen. Salim Saleh encroaches on Arua Barifa forest? Why? And yet the municipality has acquired land. If you want the evidence, fly there now and find him; he is still there.

Why is it that when it is Gen. Salim Saleh, it is not an issue; but when it is somebody else, it is an issue. This is an embarrassment. If I were you, I would find all the facts about the forest reserves in this country and see who is encroaching. If I have an opportunity, I will fly you to Arua to see what is happening; it is an embarrassment to your ministry and to your Government too.

I am disturbed because the minister claims that there are employees in her ministry who steal official Government documents. What happened to the Access to Information Act? How come that your ministry’s information is so secretive that you assume your employees are just stealing it? There is access to information. This is something you passed here, although I was not here. (Interjections) Ask her because it is in the statement you are holding.

This tells you that hon. Anywar’s fears that the employees of that ministry are working under fear are justified by her statement. How can a country continue like this? That means that you are terrorising your employees in that ministry and the only thing they can afford to do is say, “Please, can I sneak this to you?” 

Therefore, when we are talking about the environment and the soul of this country, we need to talk as a united front because these things affect us. A tsunami is not selective when it comes. It could even begin by sweeping the minister’s house. Thank you very much.

4.03
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank  the shadow minister, the Minister of Water and Environment, and the Minister of Lands for giving this Parliament very useful information.

I am happy to be a Member of the Eighth Parliament, which is the first multiparty Parliament after many years. The sector we are discussing is very sensitive. It is a matter of common good bordering on the security of this country. When it floods and Bududa has a problem and there is a drought, it does not know a shadow minister and a Government minister. As an advocate of national building, I think this is a bi-partisan subject matter, which we must address with a lot of soberness.

When Industrial area was moved from Jinja, we should have expected more pressure around Namanve. So, though my bazukulu in Jinja are now languishing, we should expect human settlement pressure around Namanve. We are at a very sensitive moment when this Parliament is supposed to be adopting climate change adaptation arrangement. So, when I was listening to the first and second presentations, I thought that it was a very important subject matter that was being addressed possibly with a wrong tone. 

The tone could have been wrong; the partisan tone should be condemned by the Eighth Parliament because this is a very sensitive matter where Parliament needs to be united. And what I am looking for is a unanimous policy direction. With a unanimous policy direction, this Parliament can get a lot of value in terms of our time if the shadow minister and the government minister are in agreement with what we are going to do for this critical sector. Unfortunately, this sector continues to be underfunded by this Parliament. I hope that we shall have more resources for the environment sector in the next Parliament. 

The question I would want to raise is: What is the way forward - because this ping pong does not help us. Accusations and counter accusations do not help us. Denials and whatever will not help us. What is the way forward? How are we going to make sure that the equivalent of the biogas that has already been lost in the industrial area is being developed somewhere? 

I was not in Parliament when that very good Act was put in place. I would, therefore, really want to thank those who were here when that Act which makes it very hard to degazette was enacted. I hope that those who have come after that Parliament will make use of that good spirit - that good intention. If you read the Act, the tree planting and its - the intention is that you should find it impossible to degazette. That is what I find in that Act. And the Eighth and Ninth Parliaments of which I am happy to be a member, should try as much as possible to do that. 

So, possibly what we would request from the Minister of Water and Environment - my sector minister, because I am also a member of the Natural Resources Committee, and I am always happy when I hear my minister speaking in defence of the sector. The other ministers can come and tell us how they want to grow sugarcane and the like in the forest, but the sector minister must defend the sector. (Applause) So, I would like to hear - because nobody has denied encroachment; it is a fact - what we would like to hear as we wind up the Eighth Parliament, are the plans that are in place to address what is seemingly going wrong in that area. And if we do that, I think that we shall have helped.

I am more interested in that effort. I want to thank the Ministry of Lands – somebody was whispering that because hon. Werikhe is a man, he did not use that tone - but we would want to thank the Ministry of Lands for making efforts towards defending the sector.  However, we should also help the minister of Water and Environment; we need development, but it must be sustainable and not risking he future of our grandchildren even when we already have floods and drought around us. I thank you so much. 

4.09
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Members for their two statements.

THE SPEAKER: May I ask? When we have an opportunity to have these kinds of statements made by ministers, is our debate confined to Namanve, which is a few miles from here?  Should it be that we concentrate on Namanve or is it a general debate on the situation in the whole country? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, because the two statements have been an eye-opener because in so many places around the country, our forests and forest reserves are being encroached on unabated. 

On the fate of the slum dwellers from Kisenyi, I would like to thank the Minister of Lands for thinking about resettling them. We sympathise with them, but I only pray that when it comes to resettling them, we will not find big shots masquerading as part of the beneficiaries in this project.  

I am a bit disappointed with the Minister of Water when she referred to one of her officials as a mole. To me, she should appreciate that she has bold officials in her ministry ready to fight corruption and even expose corrupt officials at whatever cost whether it means losing their lives and jobs. I pray that they will not lose their jobs, but we need this calibre of people in this country where corruption is eating us up left and right. 

As there is a scramble for Namanve, we cannot rule out that the list the minister has given us – these are handwritten names which could be an intentioned list, where big shots are excluded. I am proposing that this matter be referred to the relevant committee and investigations be made so that a proper report is laid before this House to prove the exact names. We cannot depend on the list presented by the accused. We need an independent list. 

THE SPEAKER: No, your argument was that the list was handwritten. Assuming that it was not handwritten, you mean one cannot exclude some names? Is it the handwriting that excludes the names or is it the decision? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I would be very comfortable with a list from the relevant committee, and that is the Committee on Natural Resources; I believe that they have the capacity. At an appropriate time, maybe in the Ninth Parliament, we should even focus on other forest reserves that have been encroached on by big shots and they bring these names such that a decision is taken for an official eviction. I know these could be people whom Police can evict. But there are those ones who are beyond the powers of Police and their names were deliberately crossed out. That is my concern, Mr Speaker. 

4.14
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Namanve has been causing debates in Uganda for a very long time. During Idi Amin’s time, Namanve was used to dump dead bodies of people killed by Amin’s soldiers.

In the early 1990s, I was given responsibility to chair an inter-ministerial committee to look for a site for a national stadium when the Chinese gave Uganda money to construct a national stadium. We went to very many places. The Chinese wanted the entire Lugogo including the indoor stadium and the Uganda Government rejected it for the second time. We went to Wankulukuku and to Kawempe and all these places were built up. Namanve then became the only choice left, where compensation would be minimal. There was a lot of debate between the Minister of Sports and the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development because at that time, the World Bank had a programme called pre-urban afforestation and it had given Uganda US$ 5 million to improve Namanve. So, the then Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development fought his way and stopped what we now know as Namboole, from being built in Namanve. I am saying this because all over the world, this World Bank programme is ongoing. 

To improve urban life, you must have trees around urban areas. It is unfortunate that we are destroying ours. We have already taken over 1,000 hectares without replacement. I would like to get assurance from the responsible minister that the remaining 1,294 hectares of Namanve will not be degazetted again. Otherwise, we shall find this city lying there unprotected. The environment is important for all of us. I would like to get that assurance. 

My second point is actually a word of advice to my sister, the honourable Minister for Water and Environment. I know when you are faced with a fellow woman, the situation is different from when you are facing someone of the opposite sex. So, my advice is that in future, even if you are confronted with a fellow lady, self-restraint is necessary -(Laughter)– so that you moderate well and remain a leader, because if you fight until the end, then you destroy things. 

Lastly, in developed countries, low income earners are housed near the town centre in council flats because they are poor and they do not have personal cars, so that mid-month, they can walk to their places of work and back. Right now, people are walking from Ntinda to come and work in the centre here and walk back. You are taking away these poor people from Kisenyi, Nakawa or Naguru all the way to Namanve -(Laughter)– how will they walk from and back home? I read in the papers this week that these people have been given two weeks to leave Naguru and Nakawa. I would like to know from the minister whether they have already constructed shelter in Namanve for these people to move into in the two weeks. These are very many people - over 7,000 lives. How do we expect them to go to Namanve and start clearing the bush and build for themselves? What I am saying is that Government activities should be coordinated and harmonised. I thank you. 

4.21
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, given the areas where we come from – 

THE SPEAKER: Allow me to interrupt you; I have been informed that one of us, the honourable shadow minister for environment, hon. Beatrice Anywar, has been nominated for an award as a woman of courage on environment –(Applause)– and the award is being presented to her at the US Embassy in Kampala. Because there is a ceremony for that, I will allow her leave while we continue with the debate, to go and be entertained at the dinner and I wish you good celebrations. Congratulations. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Given that I am the first Member of Parliament to make a contribution after her nomination, allow me on behalf of the Members of Parliament, to congratulate her. Given that she is going to leave while I still debate, I will miss the opportunity to accompany her for the dinner. (Laughter) If we all looked around our respective areas, we shall see that human existence is threatened to the level of near extinction. It is disheartening; if you took a sample from this House to find out how many Members of Parliament use electricity or gas for cooking at home, you would be surprised. All of us depend on trees and forests like monkeys because most of the Members of Parliament use charcoal and without charcoal, we are likely to have a problem. If people of our calibre and level can have such problems of living, then what about the people we represent? How many of them will be able to use electricity? How many of them can afford gas? You can see the problem that we are likely to face because of this. 

Therefore, the responsibility is on us to ensure that we make modest policies that will not only ensure the prevention and protection of the environment, but that will ensure that the people have access to services. There is no way we can protect any forest when people do not have firewood. Whether you bring tankers to protect it when people do not have food, even the soldiers themselves guarding it will be the first to cut the forest and sell the firewood because they too must survive. Either way, the onus is on this House and we, the current leaders, to make sure that we develop policies that will protect our people, but which will also protect the environment. 

Unfortunately, in this statement, they gave us the findings of the committee, but they never gave us the terms of reference because I wanted to find out - one of the things the committee did recommend was the transfer or the degazetting of part of Namanve so that we can construct a housing unit. I want to find out whether this was part of the terms of reference of the committee. When you read the reason why the committee was set up, you would see that it was to establish the boundaries of the forest and also advise the minister about the boundaries. But at what level did it graduate into advising the minister into degazetting and creation of low housing units?

The second one is that, assuming the recommendation of the committee is carried, are you going to conduct an environmental impact assessment to find out the impact on the environment, the water bodies and swamp, and the type of population to introduce in that area. Is it viable and is it going to work? Because in your report, I can see one officer recommending that, “Yes let degazetting go ahead and let the housing units be constructed”, but will the available resources hold in case this project is carried on? That is the clarification I would want to seek. I thank you.

4.26
MR  PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to help the ministers to get information in case they are not aware because I have listened to them and I have read their report but the events seem to be overtaking them. I stay in Bukasa and I see what happens in the forest when I am on my verandah. There is a plot there; I do not know the number, which was allocated to Rubaga Hospital. I think it was leased for 25 years to plant trees and true as you are saying, there is a surveyor on the ground; but I think the surveyor has gone beyond what he is supposed to do.

If you walked there now with Shs 100 million, you will be given an acre. If you want to prove me right, give me that money and tomorrow, I will bring you documents for a plot of an acre. That is what is happening on the ground. I just sleep next to that forest; I see what happens in the forest when I am on my verandah and so in case you are not aware, that is going on. Thank you.

4.28
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will take this opportunity to thank the two ministers for the statements and also the shadow minister for bringing this to our attention.

This has opened our eyes and somebody stated the land is inelastic. There are so many groups competing for this land; the people, the animals, the plants, the rivers, the lakes and all of us are fighting for land which is inelastic. This, therefore, puts pressure on Government to ensure that we look at the issue of land very critically. Do we need all these forests, national parks and game reserves that were all demarcated when most of us were not here? Maybe now we need to change. 

Government should go and critically look and see whether the forest reserves deserve to be forest reserves. How can we live so much for the animals when people are here? I think Government should get a project to see that we rationalise the use of this land and after doing that, then we shall know what should be done.

On the issue of the houses, the honourable minister is saying that they are talking about helping the poor. They had a project in Namuwongo; I want someone to go to Namuwongo and see if there is anybody who was there and is still there now. People are living artificially. Even Government made a mistake; civil servants were being housed in Nakasero artificially. By now, they have gone to their levels. If you get people from Kisenyi slum to that place, it will be above their level and they will not stay. They will sell and go to their level.

So, let us not get artificial things. We do not want people to live artificially. Kampala, Mukono and Jinja are becoming one; let us be very serious when we are thinking of where to take these people to stay.

Lastly, I want the minister to assist me. I have not got all the information on this recent project of the sewerage treatment in Lubigi. I do not know whether that was the best place. In my view, they are going to do a lot of pollution. There is no guarantee that we shall run that plant properly. The sewerage plant here in Bugolobi is basically doing very little; raw sewerage is going into the lake and now we want to tamper with a swamp. I want the minister to assure us that it is going to be safe so that our people do not get contaminated water right from Kampala because that water goes up to Bunyoro. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.31
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the colleagues who presented the papers and those who responded. There could have been emotions in the presentations ,but let us not lose the point. Definitely, there are issues regarding Namanve. I serve on the committee of COSASE. One time around October and November, we went to Namanve Industrial Park, but we were informed by one of the directors in charge of that KIBP project that there are duplicate titles. Uganda Investment Authority is struggling with some people because as you stated here, you gave the land to Uganda Investment Authority, but other people have the land titles.

There is also a fight between Uganda Investment Authority, Buganda Kingdom and those businessmen. I did not know we were coming to this and unfortunately, my office is very far across the road at Baumann House. I would have picked those documents and given you the specific names. There is a problem in that area. These issues which are raised here - I do not know how that happens.

You have stated here that this issue of allocating forest reserves and degazetting has been stopped, but planting on bare hills can still be granted. I just wanted to find out the aspect of ecotourism whether you still make provisions for people who want to do ecotourism in some of these forest reserves or forests in this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have debated this statement, but I have gathered that from some of the contributions, people were suggesting that we send this statement to the appropriate committee of Parliament for further investigation.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you have anything to say before we decide?

4.34
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the honourable members including my shadow minister for coming out with a number of ideas. I want to congratulate her for having been nominated for an award and I want to nominate you for tree planting also if you plant trees.

A number of questions came up that the honourable shadow did not confirm - that I did not refute that the letter I wrote, and indeed I did not have to refute it, because I read it and in there I concluded that whatever is going to be done has got to be done in the process of degazetting, which starts with an application from the developer or whoever wants to degazette, to NEMA with a work plan and an impact assessment carried out.

NEMA would then go to the area and carry out a public hearing with the people in that area. If they approve, it should make a report to the minister and the minister carries that report to Cabinet, which looks through it. If they approve, we come to Parliament, which is the last stage of degazetting. So, I did not have to deny that.

Secondly, I have not given away land because all the forests are on Government land, but the process of acquiring land in a forest reserve is well stated. So, until such a time, that area is still a forest reserve.

Then, it is true activities are going on and on Monday this week, I actually tried to access that place. I went to Kira Police Station, and I talked to the DPC and she told me I could not go there because of the lawlessness prevailing in that place. I thought I could find my way, but she referred me to the Regional Police Commander (RPC). I talked to him and he told me, “Madam, we cannot allow you to go there because we cannot guarantee your security.” 

Eventually I called him to my office to give me the details of what is happening there. I told you how this lawlessness started; it started in a hotel called Patico in Kira by a one Hassan who mobilised people with placards and went to the site. Since that time, these people are occupying it. 

But I know that these people who were mobilised - a one Kiggundu Moses, who is the LC 1 Chairman, has been selling plots; he is the one the honourable Member is talking about. Among the papers which I have brought here, are agreements which were signed and the maps drawn for that purpose. So, there is lawlessness in that place.

MR OMOLO: Mr Speaker, one’s frequency to an area reflects his interests. There is a person whom I am not going to mention in State House who goes to that place every three hours. He is not an LC 1 and you will live to see for yourself –(Interjections)– I can tell you the name in confidence. 

MRS MUTAGAMBA: That is better because personally, I have not been allowed to go there. Secondly, I have received signed papers of people who are selling. Even those who bought have acknowledged –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has repeatedly told this House that she is not able to access Namanve. I would like the Minister in Charge of Internal Affairs to take the minister to Namanve so that she can deliver to this House a full report. 

How can a minister be so helpless before illegal occupants when we have a fully paid Police Force; we have an Army; she is seated near the Minister of Defence – how can this helplessness continue in Government?

I would like to have that undertaking made on this Floor that if Internal Affairs fails, the Army will deliver the minister to Namanve. 

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, there is a state in Uganda and I am fully in charge. The honourable minister cannot fail to access a place because there are hooligans. I want to assure my colleague that tomorrow, I will give her all the Police she requires to access that place. 

MRS MUTAGAMBA: I would like to appreciate the honourable minister because as I said, on Monday, I signed all the visitors’ books in Kira because I went to the Police post in Kira; I went to Bweyogerere, and I talked to the RPC; and I invited the RPC to my office. But now that there is an assurance for protection, I am prepared to go there even tonight. 

The next point raised by hon. Anywar was the area of natural resources - she used the word shame. The fact is that we have serious encroachment on natural resources. On this, I brought out areas that we have to focus on. And as leaders, I would not expect people to come here and burn their wrath; I want us to be sober. We have an exploding population and the boundaries of this country are not going to expand. We must come out as Parliament with a solution on how we are going to feed the now 34 million people.

The forest estate in this country was supposed to be 30 percent of the total land mass. As we speak now, it is 22 percent. The Government has recognised it through my ministry and we have planned to go for the bare hills because we know they can be re-afforested and people kept out. This is how we intend to recover the 30 percent land mass. So we have to discuss this matter – the Committee on Natural Resources can start debate on this and I would like to invite hon. Anywar to take part in the debate rather than trying to put up a dagger. 

She also said that she does not deny the fact that there is lawlessness. I want to say it again because this lawlessness started in a hotel and this person is well-known to hon. Anywar –(Interjections - I have the information that this person is well-known to you –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us not continue in that direction.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Okay, Sir. The other question was, how did State House come in? It started when this person, Hassan, went round the security and then started the demonstration at Namboole with placards demanding for their forest. At that point the President promised to send investigators to Namanve. When the people went back they took it for a right – they actually started demarcating the land and put up building materials and uprooted trees. That was between 9th – 18th of February. It is not because the President was appeasing the people; those people were led by a one Hassan.

On Buganda Kingdom - I am also a Muganda. Although I come from Kooki, I am a Muganda and all my relations come from Buganda; so, I am concerned. People have been encroaching on Buganda land. So, the issue of who owns what is an issue that has got to be determined by the Ministry of Lands.

Hon. Bako talked with steam and anger. I am sorry if you were angered, but you need to be sober. We have to be sober when we are tackling these issues. (Laughter) Please, let us find time, talk about it and see how to progress. 

Then she said that stealing Government documents –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable; you will betray yourself because you have said we should be sober. When you react, they will say she is not sober –(Laughter)- Please, you should be able to absolve some of these - 

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter. Barifa Forest was meant to be used by the municipality for expansion. We were asked to buy alternative land. We acquired this land. The process of partitioning it had not started; then Gen. Saleh went to Arua, felled down all these trees on about 15 acres and is now settled there. I went there and when I reached I asked, “Who is felling these trees?” The only answer I was given by a certain man wearing a blue shirt was that you go and consult the powers that be in this land. Then I asked him whether he really knew who I was. When he was not able to answer that question, I drove back to the office of the RDC. He hid. To this day, nobody has answered that question, not even NFA, and not even my sister the minister. This tells you the powerlessness of my minister. She cannot answer me neither can the people from NFA. So, what is it? You cannot go to Namanve at the same time! That even explains further how powerless you are. And now, tell me honestly, what is happening with Barifa? How did Gen. Saleh find himself without your presence? That is a sober question –

THE SPEAKER: But please conclude your response.
 
MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If I may talk about the existence of Gen. Saleh in Barifa, she is bringing this question here for the first time. She has not been to my office –

MS BAKO: Hon. Wadri raised this issue here when hon. Anywar laid all those papers here and several times I have attempted to call you so that I can discuss this face-to-face. I even tried in vain to talk to your colleague, the sister from Adjumani, in vain. So, it is not true that this matter is coming to your attention for the first time. Even when we were trying to demonstrate in Arua, your ministry was aware of this. Your colleagues in National Forestry Authority are aware of this matter. How come this has not come to your attention? I am surprised.

THE SPEAKER: No please, wind up.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: I am winding up. I promised to give you an answer within the next three days because –(Interjections)- two days? Okay.

THE SPEAKER: We assigned this statement to the committee. The thing is not ending here.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Now, on Government documents - we have a problem and my colleague here said I should be ashamed because I called them moles. We have a problem because if this person who happens to be my staff had any problem, my office is open. She can always come in and tell me there is a problem. Instead of doing that, he walks to another office, steals the document and he has sworn not to divulge information. But these papers were laid here. That means they got out of office stealthily and I have to condemn whichever staff did it. If they have a problem, they have got a mandate and are free to come to the office and point it out.

Now, the board issue; you talked of board officers who come to defend the environment. It is their mandate, even in the office, to defend the environment. So, I do not think they need to go outside the ministry to show their boldness.

Hon. Okello talked about Namboole Stadium. That was the first incident of degazettement of Namanve Central Forest Reserve. Then the industrial park and they wanted to find out or to get an assurance whether we are not going to degazette the remaining part. As I have told you, the request is on Table and if Parliament does not want to degazette it, it is going to come here and you reject it. You have got the mandate and the power to do so.

Somebody talked about relocating people. Relocating people is not my job. For me, I am looking after water and the environment. If the Ministry of Housing is going to relocate, that is their job. They only come to me and when they come to me and they want anything, I come back to Parliament. 

And then there was a question, “At what level did the issue of low-cost housing come in?” I think the honourable minister will answer that one.

And then, “Are you going to carry out an impact assessment?” Yes, because that is the requirement of the Forest Act.

Somebody put a question on sewage treatment in Lubigi. We came here with a document and a request for funding from the World Bank. This Parliament studied the document and sent it to the Committee on Natural Resources. The finance committee looked at it; you approved it and made sure that this project takes off. Now National Water has started construction with borrowing from the World Bank. I think this House should wait for the development and can monitor the project as the impact assessment says. I want to assure you that this project was meant to carry the waste further away from Lake Victoria so that we can have a longer distance of pre-creation before it reaches Lake Victoria, to reduce the cost of dirt in the water or contamination.

Duplicating titles - my colleague will talk about them. 

Then eco-tourism - Yes, we stopped the licensing of allocation in forests, but we are looking at case by case to see whether the project presented is sustainable and the impact assessment carried out is satisfactory. If that is done, then we approve. If it is not done, we do not approve. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank Members for that.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is not the end of this matter. You have agreed that the Committee on Natural Resources should study what has been stated here, make further investigations if necessary and come back and report to us. Therefore, the two statements, that of hon. Mutagamba and Werikhe, are committed to them to study and promptly bring the report to the House.             

4.53
MS BEATRICE Anywar (FDC, Woman, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just for the benefit of having this debate enriched, I would also like her, my honourable colleague, who now looks more sober than before, to also clarify on the issue which came up in the media about the pending proposal of trying to relocate some people on Mount Elgon and trying to remove the forest. I want you to give us a clue on that because it was in the media. Actually, I saw it myself on television that the President was authorising part of Mount Elgon Forest Reserve to be degazetted so that some people are settled there. I would want some clarification on that so that we do not leave any stone unturned. 
I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: On Tuesday.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION 
OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE  COMMONWEALTH  HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM)

(Whereupon Members of the Opposition withdrew from the Chamber.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Of recent, there has been communication to the effect that the Leader of Government Business has been given instructions by the appointing authority on the action to take, and since the subject we are handling really involves those persons named, maybe for the sake of that fact, we do not proceed when issues have been decided in one way or the other. Are we procedurally right to proceed on a matter that the Executive has already taken a position on? And having taken that position, aren’t we really flogging a dead horse? Wouldn’t it be better for the Leader of Government Business to withdraw any further debate on the matter and say he is now in charge and indeed he can assure the country that he is taking all the necessary corrective measures on the topic we are handling -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I happened to attend the budget review conference where His Excellency, the President, gave a directive to the Prime Minister in front of the donors. Maybe my brother hon. Ssekikubo was not there, and the President was very serious that the issue of CHOGM has embarrassed this country and he wanted the Prime Minister to take stern action against the people implicated. So, this is the information I wanted to give my brother, that indeed the President spoke in front of the donors, ministers and chairpersons of parliamentary committees.

4.57
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apollo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, the President’s directive does not violate separation of powers. Parliament is handling this matter and Parliament must conclude this matter.

The President also directed that the IGG and CID should also investigate this matter. So, there is no problem whatsoever and I suggest that we proceed with this matter and conclude it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what we are considering is a report of our committee on the Auditor-General’s report. That material for the committee is the Auditor-General’s audit. We are not a court of law. Many people have been using terms that I do not understand; that we have acquitted. This term is used when somebody is tried by a competent court and the court concludes by acquitting him or her. What was done here, or what is being done here, is to study the report of our committee on the assignment we gave them. My understanding of what you have done so far is that some recommendations - because we shall come to a stage to adopt the report. When we adopt a report we say, “Subject to what you have done, the report is adopted.” 

So, what has happened is that we have been studying this report and its recommendations, and as far as you are concerned, you have said, “Well, we are not satisfied with this recommendation you made and, therefore, we do not take the recommendation because of this and this and the other.” And, therefore, this is not a hindrance to other agencies of state which do not depend on the findings of Parliament to carry out their work. We can today say there is no evidence, but another agency can go and find sufficient evidence to do its work. So, we have not acquitted anybody. 

And again, people have been referring to the Temangalo issue. We did not conclude the Temangalo issue because after studying the Constitution, we realised that we were interfering with the mandate of another institution created by the Constitution. We said, “Let that agency created by the Constitution undertake it and do what it wants to do.” 

So, let us not really give wrong information or make impressions that we have acquitted some people. You have only said the recommendations are not supportable with the contents of the report. 

MR EKANYA: The Constitution gives Parliament power to make rules for its operation. The Public Finance and Accountability Act and the Constitution create organs like the Auditor-General. Within the Constitution, Parliament has power to write off debt. The issues that have been raised in the CHOGM report implicate some people to have been involved in misusing public funds. If this Parliament acquits a Member and says that so and so was not found to have abused his office and did not misuse public funds that is just the same as us writing off Government debts. So, I find that we are going to tie the hands of the other institutions. It becomes very hard for other institutions like the IGG and CID to say, “You still have a debt to pay,” when Parliament has cleared an individual. Today, when we are in the parliamentary committee - as you know, every year we write off several debts that Government has failed to collect or from individuals who have failed to pay Government’s debts. It is laid here when we are discussing the Budget. And so, I find us in a very tricky position that we may need to really -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, the term “acquit” comes after a due process; a trial where evidence is given by the prosecution on oath and the other side is given an opportunity to say what it wants to say or decide not to say something. It is after that process that a person is acquitted. And when he is acquitted then there cannot be another trial unless another higher court takes it on. But this is not what we have done. We have not had evidence on oath; there is no trial. We are only talking about the report and recommendations made in the report. And this will not bar other institutions, be it CID or what, to make their independent investigations. I believe that is the case here. I do not know, but we have the Attorney-General here and Deputy Attorney-General and maybe they can assist us to elaborate. Let us hear from the Attorney-General. 

5.04
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddhu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have some difficulty understanding the problem because there is a report from a committee of Parliament and we are in the middle of discussing it as Parliament with a view of taking action on the report. I have some difficulty as to why this exercise must now be stopped. I am completely puzzled because these are the rules of procedure; a report comes, it is debated and Parliament says, “Yes” or “No”. I think Parliament can accept the report and adopt it as it is, reject it, or adopt it with amendments. What is the problem now? That is what has been happening. We started on this process and I am not convinced that we should depart from these procedures. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, we continue and let other agencies of government in their independent way take necessary action.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I think the Attorney-General was right to get puzzled. He certainly understands the rule of nemo judex where he as a person is involved. So, to make him rule on a matter, you are putting a strain on him. It is appreciated that he indeed had to be in that kind of dilemma. 

Having said that, what I am looking at is the dignity of this House. Recently, the newspapers wrote that Parliament had acquitted some people, but the following day we saw indictments served on those responsible. Our moving not in tandem – 

THE SPEAKER: This is what I want to say - Parliament has not acquitted, but we have decided not to adopt some of the recommendations made by the committee because of one reason or the other. What is being done is to adjust or amend the report because eventually we shall adopt it, subject to the observations we have made on it. This is what is going to happen.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I kindly beg your indulgence. I am a bit stressed seeing us proceed on a matter yet we know the Leader of Government Business has informed this House that he has received a directive from the appointing authority to that effect. Like we did the other time - I want members to remember - we said that the Temangalo matters be referred to an appropriate agency to handle. Why are we now insisting on exoneration on this one? We want to proceed with it by hook or crook; why don’t we relent and we regain or maintain our dignity?

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Ssekikubo, we have not heard the directive you are referring to, but  is it your understanding that the directive says that Parliament stops dealing with this matter and the Prime Minister takes appropriate action? Would you think that should be done? Would you think Parliament should be stopped from handling something under its mandate? I do not think he said that. Personally, I do not know, but let us proceed with the debate.

5.09
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance you have given us. I think we are all right-thinking members of society and I want the press to be on the same page with us. We are not acquitting anybody. We are handling a report which was sanctioned by Parliament and we know all reports are always debated here. If the President comments on every report, shall Parliament ever debate these reports? So, we take the President’s comment as a comment towards his Executive; he wants the Executive to also act in line with their work.

As Parliament, we started by hearing out those who were mentioned in the report by name. We were not looking at the whole report. They were given a chance to defend themselves - and those are the ministers - and one by one they gave their defence. However, the chairman of PAC never came back to say that all the defences given were wrong. In case someone has not rebutted the responses, we take it that the material in black and white that we are looking at is genuine and those people are free to be left out. However, they are not acquitted as the newspapers are saying. Thank you.

5.11
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report we are discussing is very important. Unfortunately, from the Auditor-General to our committee, something has gone wrong. 

Mr Speaker, as our leader, you have correctly told us what we are supposed to be doing here; that we are not acquitting but just debating the report. However, as our leader, our colleagues have continued to walk out; have you explained to them the same thing and they have refused to heed? I believe what you are saying is correct, so where is the problem?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think when they decided to walk out you were also here. They explained that they foresaw your predetermined position and the decision you had made was to exonerate or acquit the accused Members. So, they did not want to be part of such a decision – that is what they declared – and walked out. Isn’t that what they said?

MR MUKITALE: I would like to suggest that at times we may be over stretching the Speaker. 	The question of walking out clearly illustrates that there is a communication gap between the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business. As a result, whenever there is a sensitive item like that, there should be a meeting point on how to proceed as Parliament because I think we are truly looking for efficiency in the use of Government money. The moment the others walk out and we comfortably continue on this side, I think it is over stretching the Speaker to say he should come in. 

I would like to put forward a request. I know the substantive Leader of the Opposition is not around but there is somebody who should be the equivalent. That vacuum seems to be causing us a problem. There used to be a lot of dialogue between the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition. What can we do for the sake of this Parliament, for us to proceed?

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you very much, my brother. Mr Speaker, the problem is that whereas the Government side tolerates this method of work and corruption, the other side does not.

I want to be on record that I really sympathize with them –(Interjections)– Yes! The way we have handled this CHOGM report - and again I want to be on record - is not good; we have not handled it well - this blanket exoneration of people who have blatantly done wrongs and we accept it. Ask yourself a question; how many are we here now? A question is about to be put upon which we shall vote in favour for the Speaker to say, “The ayes have it”, but remember such a decision shall be binding on the entire Parliament.

This method of working – we must confront the issue of corruption squarely. The CHOGM report is about corrupt leaders. It is about political leaders who are not taking responsibility, but we are here letting them off the hook. That is wrong and it is not acceptable to the voters and the people of Uganda. I want to put that on record.

MR MUKITALE: That was a submission from the MP for Rubanda West. I am really concerned because as I said before, a monologue is not good for Parliament. It is not intended for Parliament, and that is why this country thought we should have a multiparty system. 

In regard to this matter, I do not even think the entire Opposition is in agreement with the walkout. They also have some challenges. I would like to appeal to the leadership to find some time to talk as leaders of the Parliament of Uganda.

5.18
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I have been listening very attentively to hon. Mukitale on the point he is raising about our interactions with the Opposition. I would like to assure him and other honourable Members of Parliament who are here that the Office of the Leader of Government Business is in constant touch with the Opposition. We meet, discuss and generate consensus on many issues. That explains why the debate that we have been having in this House has been relatively smooth and harmonised.

It is also true that under the multiparty dispensation, it is not unusual for the Opposition to take a stand and agree not to be party to some issue, however reasonable Government position may turn out to be. So, I would not want us to apportion blame on Government that simply because the Opposition walked out, therefore, Government effort is wanting in regard to generating consensus on critical issues. 

There is a term called filibustering that is commonly used in multiparty systems. I am sure hon. Mukitale is aware of those who come to the House with a clear agenda to filibuster whatever business Government comes up with. What can you do to help people with such an agenda? The best you can do is to put up a fight and pursue a principled stand on some of these issues and that is what we are going to do.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are two principal issues at stake at the moment in the debate. The issue of the members of the Opposition walking out in the course of the debates is a very serious matter. This is because in a multiparty political system, it is assumed that the Opposition is the alternative to Government. Being an alternative to Government serves this country better when the disagreements between us are heard on the Floor of the House. That is very important because it makes Government work better and it is beneficial to the country. However, when the Opposition as an alternative to Government chooses to walk out of a debate, in a way it is an admission that they cannot be an alternative to Government. (Laughter) If they were to be an alternative, they would remain to battle out everything from here to help the country make a judgement on which side is better. By walking out, it clearly shows that we are indeed in charge and so we should not abandon this debate. 

It is entirely their choice to either remain or walk out. What I know is that the court of public opinion is judging whether they have the capacity to challenge Government ideas on the Floor of the House or whether they have superior ideas to those that Government generates. So, I would like to concur with what the Government Chief Whip said. However, I want to appeal to him to do everything possible to engage the Opposition, though the choice of whether to stay or walk out of the House must remain entirely their decision. It should not halt the work of Government from proceeding. 

The history of Opposition walkouts of Parliament is known. Even at the time of Independence, it is clear that the Opposition walked out, but that did not stop those who remained to proceed with House  business. Of course, later it  was regrettable because sometimes people still think that had they remained in the negotiations, some of the provisions of that Constitution could not have been included. It is regrettable that this culture, which is unacceptable, still continues. We should do everything to discourage it. Let us battle it from here to show the country which side has superior ideas to govern. (Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Prof. Kamuntu. Your contribution has reminded me of the time of the Constitution-making process of which I was a member. At some point, the Opposition walked out but some of them who contested for Parliament positions in 1996 were sworn in as Members of Parliament using the very Constitution they had refused to sign when they walked out.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much indeed for your information. In fact that reminds me of another point, Mr Speaker. In a multiparty political system, we have the frontbench, which is covered by the Members on the Government side. When you sit on the frontbench, it means you must be directly facing your opponent on the Opposition side. Consequently, when a frontbench Member is facing an opponent across, for example, a shadow minister, it is undermining of this process of a multiparty political system for a back bencher to be shooting through the back of that frontbench Member. (Laughter) What kind of army will you be building?

THE SPEAKER: We are prolonging this debate. This debate came about because one Member said that the Prime Minister has received a directive from the President to take action and he thought this should stop us from proceeding. However, I have explained that this does not stop us from doing our work. We should handle this report up to the end and adopt it subject to amendments. So, we should continue. 

However, because of what you have said, and maybe because you want to talk to our friends, I will adjourn the House, but we are going to conclude this CHOGM report one way or the other on Tuesday. It will be the single item we will start with so that we clear it and proceed on other matters. 

What we have done is not an acquittal; it is a rejection of recommendations in the report. House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 April 2011 at 2.30 p.m.)


