Wednesday, 1 April 2009

Parliament met at 3.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting. I would like to apologise for the late start. Today the Appointments Committee sat until 2.20 p.m. hence the delay, but we shall try to catch up. Thank you for coming. 

3.08
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of national importance. In today’s New Vision, there is a front page picture showing gay activists addressing a press conference. To the best of my knowledge, homosexuality is illegal. I know that our cultural norms, our religious norms, and even our Constitution do not allow homosexuality. However, these people have now been given the opportunity to address press conferences. I am quite disappointed that the Minister of Ethics and Integrity can allow these activists to address journalists and at the same time we are saying that this is contrary to our cultural and religious norms. 

My fear is for our young generation - our sons and daughters - especially those in schools. We have heard that there are some foreign NGOs that are funding these activists. It is also alleged that the government is turning a deaf ear to what is going on. We know that these countries, it was alleged, are threatening to stop giving us foreign aid if government intervenes. 

I know that as we speak now, we are funding 70 percent of our budget. If we are funding 70 percent of our budget, let us be dignified beggars. If there are some conditions these countries are putting on us, we should say, “no”. This is because what these people are doing is contrary to our Constitution, cultural norms and religious beliefs. I believe that next time these people will be addressing journalists at the Media Centre. 

I beg that the Minister of Ethics and Integrity comes out on this. If we are protecting our sons and daughters in schools, and if these activists have gone to the extent of having ambassadors in various schools and we are seeing the government very silent, maybe this is silent approval that these people can now do whatever they want. Next time we will be witnessing situations where rebels, thugs and thieves will be addressing journalists. Madam Speaker, that is my plea.

3.12
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Madam Speaker, I rise to ask a question to the Deputy Attorney-General. On the 5th March, the Minister of State for Gender gave a statement to this House on International Women’s Day celebrations. As debate arose, the Attorney-General assured Ugandan women that before the end of March, he would bring to this House the gender related Bills. Today is the 1st of April, when is the Deputy Attorney-General going to bring to this House the gender related Bills, that is, the Domestic Violence Bill, the Marriage and Divorce Bill and the personal Moslem administration law as he promised?

Secondly, before we went for the December break, the question of people collecting money and operating illegally was discussed in this House. The organisations I refer to are Dutch International, Team, COWE and African Christians in Development (ACID). I remember the ruling was that in two weeks’ time, the Minister of Internal Affairs together with the Ministry of Finance would present a statement to this House as to what government is doing. To date, I have not had that response. 

I am very concerned because ACID collected a lot of money from my constituency, Oyam. Those are people who have just come out of camps and they are extremely poor. Each person paid Shs 54,000 per child. There are people who registered as many as five to 10 children, and that was starting October 2006. Today, ACID has disappeared in thin air. I am aware that they are operating in many districts in this country. What is the Ministry of Internal Affairs doing? Why have they not responded to the ruling of your Chair? Thank you.

3.15
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter of national importance. Last weekend I attended Women’s Day celebrations in Paya sub-county and among the reports that I received from the LC III chairman was that from January to 28 March, 124 girls had been defiled. This is in one sub-county, and those are just reported cases but there are cases which go unreported. This case has been talked about. The officers in the parliamentary research office are carrying out a study on the dropout rate of girls and this was among them - teachers are engaged in defiling girls. 

When a child leaves home, the other parent to that child is the teacher but now the teacher is the one defiling this girl. What is this teacher instilling in this girl as a person of moral authority? I am requesting that when these cases get reported, they are dealt with without fear or favour. Now they get reported, people get arrested but it just ends there; they are not followed up and people go scot-free. So, that is why there is a lot of defilement going on. People know that after all, there will be nothing done to them. I am requesting government to actually ensure that those who defile children are punished accordingly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Leader of Government Business wishes to say something about this matter? 

3.18
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start with the first two issues that were raised. May I call them the anti-women –(Laughter)- as you know, government is certainly very pro-women and it has in fact proceeded quite actively in trying to respond to this matter. Two draft Bills are now almost with us. We hope that in the next few days, we shall be able to present them to the House. They were passed by Parliament so government is actively pursuing the matter. 

On the issue of the molestation of young people, it is a pity that our society has declined pitifully. This is a matter which is of great concern to all of us, whichever side of the House we happen to be. We have had discussions with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to legislate in an effective manner that will ensure that all those who are caught involved in these matters will be treated severely. 

As you will have read in the press, the Inspector-General of Police has been in Kiboga with his dogs and you know what he has done. You know the number of people who have been arrested, and he continues to be there in search of such criminals. So, the decision has been taken that government will –(Interruption)

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Leader of Government Business for having given me this opportunity to seek this clarification. 

One of the reasons why cases of defilement are not successfully prosecuted is because of the mandatory or legal requirement that after such an act, the victim should be subjected to a medical examination by a police surgeon, and these things are not free. Of late government came up with a promise that it has now made medical examinations in Mulago Hospital available free of charge. Could the Rt Hon. Prime Minister explain to this House whether they have been able to decentralise this free service to the other district hospitals so that a child who is defiled in Paya in Tororo District does not have to come all the way to Mulago in search of free medical services? That is one of the reasons why the cases do not succeed in the course of prosecution; the victims are expected to pay money. 

You know what it is. It is not an ordinary crime like theft where you can come and say, “Yes, I have stolen and I am being arraigned”. This is a crime of moral turpitude and people always fear going to medical units for examination, more so when they are asked to pay money on top of the injury that they have suffered. Is that possible? Can you please explain to us? Thank you.

3.23
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, whenever a crime is committed and there is need for an examination by a doctor, a policeman can ask - in a way order - any doctor to carry out an examination without being paid -(Interjections)- let me explain. In case of molestation, if there is rape and someone reports to the police, that policeman can take that person to the nearest hospital and that person is examined freely; they do not have to come to Mulago. That doctor will be required to go and give evidence in court without being paid. They might pay for his transportation. That is the law. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me give some information. I was in Kapchorwa last year on the 30th November for the annual Cultural Day. After the ceremony, I sat with the civil servants and they told me that there is no police surgeon in the district of Kapchorwa. If there is a case of murder, they must go to Mbale, get somebody from Mbale and they must pay for the transport of that person. So the law is different and the reality is different. There are no police surgeons in the districts.  

DR MALLINGA: A police surgeon is a title but any doctor can examine any person who has been wronged. If in Kapchorwa there is a need for somebody who has been wronged to be examined, the policeman goes to the hospital, finds the doctor to carry out the examination and that doctor is bound to come later and give evidence in court. So there is just a misunderstanding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the victim must fund the transport back and forth. The victim has to fund the transport of that doctor and the police, back and forth. That is the problem.

MS LAGADA: Madam Speaker, I am convinced that the Minister of Health is not on the ground in matters of defilement and what people go through. These police surgeons I think are at regional level. The people of Lango have to go to Gulu to find a police surgeon and I am sure it is the same case in all the regions. 

The Committee on Gender just went to the Northern region and what we found there was terrible. You cannot ask somebody in Pader whose child has been defiled not only to transport the victim but the policeman to Gulu as well. The whole process is so complicated that it is just not worth the bother. Can the minister please tell us whether he really knows what Ugandans whom we represent are going through?

DR MALLINGA: I have seen more cases of defilement, I have examined more cases of defilement and I have given evidence in cases of defilement more than the hon. Member of Parliament can ever see in the whole of her life. I am an obstetrician and gynecologist and that is my area. (Laughter) So, for the hon. Member of Parliament to say that I am not on the ground; this is part of the training of a gynecologist, to be able to deal with cases of defilement and rape! We just have to put things in order and let them be streamlined. To say that I am not on the ground is very unfortunate. (Laughter)

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I just want to give some information because hon. Lagada made reference to Gulu. Actually, there are a lot of rape cases in Gulu and these so-called police surgeons are nowhere to be seen to address them.  

Secondly, with these rape cases that are taking place, the most vulnerable are the poor. These doctors in hospitals have procedures and processes that are not transparent and the victims do not get the justice they deserve. At the end of the day, even the examinations are never promptly done. The referral takes time and at the end of the day, the victims suffer.

Lastly, this defilement does not only affect girls, even young boys are being defiled by mature women. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.29
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very concerned when serious issues are raised by Members of Parliament and then ministers do not take them seriously. This is the reason why we are having such kind of anarchy in this country. 

On a question of enforcement of laws, why should the Minister of Health come here and start defending. This is within the ambit of the Minister of Internal Affairs. We are talking about Police; we are not talking about the Ministry of Health. When you come to start defending such kind of actions within the Police who are not enforcing the laws, that is why we have homosexuals addressing press conferences and that is why we have children being sacrificed and nobody cares. All they have to do is come here and deny. Why are you living in denial? Own up!  

I feel that as Parliament, we should pronounce ourselves against these ministers who do not own up to these issues. Maybe we should move a motion of displeasure because that is how they will learn. If we do not do this, we shall keep on raising such issues and all they will do is come here and make fun of our concerns. This is very unfair and we need to [HON. MEMBERS: “Move.”] at an appropriate time I will move. (Laughter)

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The issue before us is a grave one indeed and there is no intention of underrating it. I would like to promise the House that this matter will be given active consideration and action will be devised. We should be able to report within three weeks as to what programme we shall follow in combating this evil practice. I thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I have been waiting for my response on the official government position on the issue I raised concerning homosexuals - the freedom they have been given that they can address press conferences as and when they want. I would like the Prime Minister to give us the official position. There may be silent approval by the government that these people are free and can practice whatever they want.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to give information related to the laxity at best or outright incapability of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to enforce the law. It seems to me that all the matters of public concern that have been raised this afternoon point at government’s incapacity to enforce the law.

A few months ago in this House when we were talking about human sacrifice and what was happening to children, the Deputy Attorney-General, sitting there, stood up and actually told us that sorcery - witchcraft – is illegal in the books of Uganda. We have witchdoctors who advertise publicly on radios, billboards, everywhere. They say that they practice sorcery, that they send mayembe away and so on. They do that everyday in the media and yet the Deputy Attorney-General stood there and told us that sorcery and witchcraft are illegal in Uganda. 

So when you see known homosexuals, known defilers, known murderers like Magara and known rapists on the streets walking, then it is not surprising that homosexuals are addressing press conferences. It is not surprising that we have advertisements of such criminal activities.  

I just wanted to give the honourable member information; it is not only homosexuals that are addressing press conferences but sorcerers as well - openly. I needed to give that information.

3.34
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, on the issue of homosexuality, the Minister of Ethics and Integrity has been very clear on this matter. He has come out with the government position on this matter on a number of times. 

It is also true that to hold a press conference, you do not need to get permission from anyone. These homosexuals decided to go for a press conference and they have exposed themselves. Now those in charge of law enforcement can be in a position to follow them up. Otherwise, on homosexuals, government is very clear; it is illegal here and I want to assure you, hon. Latif Sebaggala and hon. Betty Kamya, these guys will be followed up by state agencies. 

Secondly, on the issue of native doctors - the issue of witchdoctors - our position on is also very clear. However, it is also true that we happen to have native doctors who use native medicines - (Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Hon. Government Chief Whip, it was thoroughly discussed here and we did make a distinction between traditional healers that use herbs, which most of us use, and witchdoctors that sacrifice and claim to deal in spirits. We are talking about that. We are not even discussing the position of government; we are discussing the law in our Penal Code. There is a law that says that it is illegal. However, these people go ahead and advertise themselves as people that deal in spirits, as people that can handle spirits and as people that solve spiritual matters. They do it everyday. You drive by them everyday yet there is a law against them. 

To wind up this matter, surely, hon. Migereko, if it is true that these people have exposed themselves and that they should be handled by the law enforcers, why are we discussing this? Why is the Front Bench defending some of these things? There is the Minister of Health who instead of showing anger and saying “I will go after those people” he is saying that we should do the impossible, which we all know that you cannot do. Are you aware that to get a Police report in this country you have to pay Shs 60,000? If I want to give free information that some people stole a boda boda in Kampala, I have to pay Shs 60,000. So, people just live with suffering in their houses because they cannot raise Shs 60,000. It is not a bribe because you get a receipt, but it keeps people away from the protection of the law.

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to thank hon. Kamya for that information. Our position as government is very clear and unequivocal. Homosexuality is illegal and those involved in homosexuality will face the long arm of the law. This press conference -(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I know that hon. Daudi Migereko is the Government Chief Whip and his mandate is quite clear but he is usurping the roles of the responsible ministers. A few minutes ago, I saw the Minister of Ethics and Integrity outside this Parliament. Now he is trying to fight hard to speak on behalf of those responsible ministers who should account for their laxity within their sectors here.  

Is he right to do such a job instead of looking around for these ministers to come here and respond to queries and concerns of Parliament? He has forgotten that he is no longer in charge of a ministry but he is a chief whip whose work is to coordinate and make sure that the Members of Parliament from government side are present and state the position of government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there is also collective responsibility in the Cabinet. Let him answer.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance. I even do not know under what rule you are raising that kind of procedure. 

On the issue of witchdoctors and those involved in human sacrifice, government has clearly mounted a campaign against those guys who are involved in human sacrifice. A number of arrests have been made in several places in the country and this hunt is going to continue. The Minister of Internal Affairs will soon be coming to the House on this matter. 

Similarly, on the issue of homosexuality, hon. Nsaba Buturo will come and appraise Parliament on the steps that are being taken to ensure that the country is not taken over by rapacity. I thank you.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I want to seek some small clarification from the Leader of Government Business. There is talk that when this issue of homosexuality came, there are some donors who threatened us – they threatened to cut aid. I want the nation to be put to rest. At what cost are we going to get these donor funds? Should we even undermine our own morality and destroy our cultural norms and bases just because we want to get donations from some countries? 

I am reliably informed that there are some donors who made very strong statements when the President made a strong statement that he was going to arrest the homosexuals. The President then cooled down and coiled. So, let the nation be assured that we are not dancing to the dictates of the donors but that we are running our country basing on our values - the values of our society, today, tomorrow and for the future generations to come, but not basing on the donations from abroad.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I do not know if the Leader of Government Business can assure the country that we are not being held hostage.

3.43
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our ethics of conduct in this country are very well known. I do not know whether there is any society in Uganda that does not abhor things like homosexuality, the molestation that is going on and all the other things that we read of in the press. 

I want to assure you that government will show its teeth in the very near future in handling these matters. We have no wish to compromise on our morals. We are Ugandans, we are Africans and there is no reason why anybody should push us. It happened once; the President was not in Uganda and there was an exchange between him and some groups which wanted to promote that bad practice. Those who are here now know our stand. Please assist us by providing information which we can follow up so that we can punish and deal very firmly with these not so respectful individuals. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2003

3.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you Madam Speaker and honourable members. This report was distributed to you, so I will just give a few highlights and the rest you can read and debate. 

Madam Speaker, rule 148(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament assigns the Public Accounts Committee the duty of examining audited accounts showing the appropriations of the sums granted by Parliament to meet the public expenditures of the central Government and the Judiciary on behalf of Parliament and report its findings to this august House. This is done in fulfillment of Article 163(5) and Article 164(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which mandate Parliament to monitor all expenditure of public funds and report excesses of government as observed by the Auditor-General. 

This is the report of Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s report for the year ended 30th June 2003. 

In the performance of its mandate, the Public Accounts Committee interacted with all accounting officers who had queries to answer during the year in question. However, this report is not only based on the findings of the Auditor-General for the financial ended 30th June 2003 and its final accounts, but also includes close scrutiny of policy matters relating to financial management, compliance with the Constitution, the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, the Budget Act, the Appropriation Act and other laws governing the management of public affairs and points of reference in our discussions with concerned accounting officers 

The committee made effort to uphold accountability in the use of public funds and the delivery of goods and services. 

Terms of Reference 

The Public Accounts Committee proceeded with its work under the following terms:

1. 	Evaluating the effectiveness, efficiency and economic value of governmental projects and programmes according to their set objectives. 

2. 	Assessing the consistency of budget outlays in relation to the increasing over-spending by ministries and departments of governments, which act amounts to violation of the Constitution and the commitment control system.

3. 	Demanding, in writing, from the concerned ministries/departments all information and all public documents deemed necessary in the assessment and fulfillment of its oversight function.

4. 	Assessing the accounts of ministries/departments and the overall management of public funds with special attention to allegations of fraud, corruption, waste, abuse, diversion and all sorts of irregularity that may constitute abuse or misuse of monies charged on the Consolidated Fund. 

The committee used the report of the Auditor-General as its primary source of investigations for questioning the concerned accounting officers. 

The committee is, therefore, happy with the additional technical staff or support it received from the Auditor-General, the office of the accounting generals – that is Treasury Directorate, Office of the Clerk to Parliament, and Criminal Investigative Department - during its work. 

Allow me also to pay tribute to the members of the Public Accounts Committee for their tireless efforts to have this work done. I can report here that the committee has worked hard and as I talk now, we have three more reports waiting to be presented. The names of the members of the Public Accounts Committee are attached at the end of the report. 

The committee interviewed the accounting officers of various government ministries in the process and set out time to meet with the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Public Service, the Attorney-General and Solicitor-General to clarify policy matters that arose in the process. 

Observations and Recommendations

Diversion of Project Funds

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that most ministries had resorted to borrowing funds meant for project implementation to fund their other budgets. Although these funds are borrowed for purposes of funding urgent needs of the ministries, they are not refunded for the implementation of the activities they are meant for. 

The committee observed that the practice of borrowing project funds hampers the timely implementation of project activities and leads to failure in achieving the project objectives. 

Recommendations 

1.	The committee recommends that this act is destructive, costs the taxpayer, and should stop forthwith.
 
2.	Any accounting officer who acts to the contrary will be charged with abuse of office and corruption.

3.	The committee also observed that some accounting officers are yielding to pressures from politician for activities like travel and always take decisions that are contrary to the commitment control system.

4.	The committee directs that accounting officers would first seek the authority of the permanent secretary/secretary to treasury before diversion of any project funds and the agreed effects of such diversions should be made known to the secretary of treasury, who in turn should inform Parliament.

Advances Not Accounted For

Madam Speaker, one of the main problems in ministries is non-accountability for money advanced to public officers. The accounting officers give advances to various beneficially but fail to give accountability at the end of the financial year.

During the year under review, over Shs 439 million was advanced by accounting officers. The ministries/departments involved include: Gender, Labour and Social Development, State House, Local Government, Prisons, Office of the Prime Minister and Police. 

A closer scrutiny of these advances by the committee showed a tendency by public officials to loan themselves public funds to fund their private activities. Unfortunately, even the political leadership of these ministries/departments have fallen in the trap of this evil. By the time of writing this report, for example, hon. Semakula Kiwanuka still owes the Office of the Prime Minister unaccounted for advance totalling to Shs 365,812. (Laughter)

The committee reiterates that all advances be accounted for by the end of every financial year and on failure, the accounting officer responsible will be held accountable for abuse of office and will be made to refund the funds accordingly. 

The officers who take advances and not account for them should be charged to theft and corruption.

The committee observed further that the accountability should be done at the time of the audit. Failing to account at the time of audit shows the extent of poor management of public funds in the ministries. 

It noted that long delays in accountability undermined and compromised the management of public funds and makes it difficult to pursue any disciplinary action.

The accounting officers should be able to track all the advances unaccounted for in their ministries/departments appropriately and be able to take firm stand where accountability is questionable.

The committee recommends that advance ledgers be maintained to track performance and accountability. 

Madam Speaker, substantial amounts of money continue to be lost by government on payments which could be avoided for fright decisions that are taken by those who are supposed to manage public funds. 

These are many losses associated with court awards, payment on demurrages, compensations and default on contracts. During the year under review, for example, Shs 6.9 was awarded by court to an individual who had won a case against the forest department for illegal confiscation of his timber. The case was not adequately defended in court by the Attorney-General who would not even seek information regarding the ministry, nor did he ask the ministry to give evidence in court. 

Under Ministry of Defence alone, over Shs 800 millions was lost under nugatory payments. In Uganda Police, Shs 120 millions –(Interruption) 

MR KAKOBA ONYANGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand up to seek your guidance in accordance with Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure; that is on the issue of presentation of papers. My understanding of this rule is that the paper was supposed to be presented without reading the report. But the way I see it, the report is being read. I seek your guidance on rules 28 and 29. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, as you stood up, I was also trying to check the rules to see – I do not know exactly what you are doing. You were supposed to present it, make a small explanatory statement and leave it for the House. Give just the highlights. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this is not a paper. The procedure has been that we give this and then we come and give a summary. The whole report is read later by Members; and that is what has been happening. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give just the highlights.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Uganda Police, Shs 120 million was lost against four cases of breach of contract, unlawful detention, shooting a civilian and loss of a minibus under Police custody. 

Under the Office of the Prime Minister, it was reported that failure by the office to clear Emirates items led to the payment of over Shs 42 million. As noted above, these are losses to government that arise out of failure by the respective departments –(Interruption) 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. According to rule 29 on presentation of papers it says: “Mode of presentation of papers” –(Interjections)– yes, he has raised it, but is it procedurally right for hon. Nandala to continue reading the whole report when it is supposed to be a short explanatory note? He is actually making a presentation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, you are an accountant and you know how to summarise things; just say there is this and that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am an accountant and I am happy to note that you are aware. Unauthorised expenditure totalled to Shs 68 billion in ministries; it is yet to be accounted for. Over Shs 1.4 trillion was lent to individuals which government seeks to have written off. And the committee observes that there are a few members of the society and it is not right to write them off as this benefits a small group of the population.

There is need to reconcile the Consolidated Fund Reserve Account because it showed balance of over Shs 6 trillion and in the next financial year, they opened with only Shs 99 billion. The difference is not known.

The committee is of the view that the Auditor-General audits accounts in bank of Uganda which it manages on behalf of government to see all these discrepancies because we have seen many central banks being involved in frauds.

In conclusion, the decisions and recommendation and most of the omissions by the Auditor-General have been highlighted in the body of the report, which you have. The committee requests you to read and debate it from a well informed point of view. I would like to thank all Members of PAC for the tireless effort they put in to make this work a success. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this report be debated and adopted and the recommendations therein be implemented immediately. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala and the Public Accounts Committee in general. I note that the presentation has improved with the text being in a well-written font. So, I would like to urge the Members to read this first, before we set a date for debate. 

MR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think my colleague inadvertently went away; he had to lay the document on the Table. (Laugher)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I hereby lay the report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I understand that there are copies outside. I know that it is a voluminous report, but as I said, the font is quite big, you can take some time off to read it before we appoint a date for debating it next week.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REQUEST OF GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $10 MILLION CREDIT FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR THE AVIAN AND HUMAN INFLUENZA PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE PROJECT

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, the government has negotiated a loan of US $10 million from the International Agency for Development Association of the World Bank Group. This loan is intended to finance the Avian and Human Influenza Preparedness and Response Project. I request to lay the terms of the proposed financing on the Table for study, scrutiny and approval at an appropriate time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the request is committed to the Committee on National Economy for scrutiny and report back.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE CONCERNS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE ALLEGED DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC LAND

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you remember that yesterday we received the report in regard to this and adjourned so that we can debate it today. Yes, hon. Obua.

4.03
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to make a contribution on the report of the ad hoc committee of Parliament. 

As we consider and adopt this ad hoc committee’s report on the concerns that were raised by the Auditor-General on the alleged distribution of public land, I think I will restrict my submission to the legal implication of the sale of land vis-à-vis the legality of the issues raised by the committee in its report.

I would like to give a piece of information to this Parliament. I hope this is not going to pre-empt the report as presented to us yesterday: on 16 March, the Social Services Committee of Parliament took a visit to Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital with the overarching goal of assessing health services’ delivery. In the course of our discussions with the hospital staff, this question of the alleged sale of Butabika land also came in, although we had gone there only to asses the health service delivery.

In that meeting, we were told three things regarding this particular land, by the acting director of Butabika National Referral Hospital. The first point was that under the laws of Uganda, Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital had never owned land legally. What we were told was that the 670 hectares of land present there were in the name of Uganda Land Commission, which was holding the titles in trust of the Government of Uganda.

The other thing that we were told was that at the moment, arising from the sale of public land, and because powers are vested in the Uganda Land Commission, Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital has acquired its own title on a piece of land measuring about 190 hectares. That is the piece of information that we got from the acting director.

Madam Speaker, that now takes me to the provision of the Constitution especially Article 238, which establishes the Uganda Land Commission. Though this Article establishes the commission, part IV, Sections 46 to 55 in the Land Act, Cap 227, gives the details of the establishment, membership, tenure, functions and the powers of the land commission. For example, one of the functions of the Uganda Land Commission that is contained in Section 49(a) is to hold and manage any land in Uganda, which is vested in or acquired by the government in accordance with the Constitution. When you get to Section 49(c), you will see that it talks about the commission being empowered to procure certificates of title for any land vested in or acquired by the government. That means that this commission has got a lot of powers. And this takes me to my last point.

To be honest with you, hon. Members, that land has gone and will never be recovered; that is the legal argument. I am saying this because the title was in the name of the Uganda Land Commission, holding it in trust of Government of Uganda. That brings me to the last point that all public land in Uganda seems to be having titles in the name of the Uganda Land Commission. This commission has a lot of powers given to it by this Parliament. I am equally afraid - I am not a prophet of doom, but I am going to come out with my prophecy - that even the land where this Parliament is located, I do not know who owns the titles? Otherwise, I am afraid that if the titles of this land are in the name of the Uganda Land Commission with all the powers given to it by this Parliament, one day we will wake up - I still see a lot of vacant space within the premises of Parliament - and find part of this land is sub-leased to an investor because we have given Uganda Land Commission the powers on public land. That is my submission, Madam Speaker. I thank you for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable commissioner.

4.09
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not actually ready to debate this report, but I want to give some information and make a request as well.  

I was the commissioner of land registration for ten years, ending in 1996. During my tenure, many illegal titles were issued over this Butabika land, but we cancelled all of them to preserve this land for Butabika Hospital. I do not know what has changed since I left.  

If the Uganda Land Commission had a title in its name, which I believe it had, it was holding this land in trust for the people of Uganda not for sale to any private person. When you are a trustee, you do not sell off the property you are holding for the beneficiary, under our law!  

Madam Speaker, I have looked at the two reports; one from PAC and one from the ad hoc committee and I believe there is some vital information, which is still missing. I would request that we stand over this matter to get more information. I am saying this because, in my view, if we pass this thing it will be the second time this Parliament is validating corruption, the first validation having been done during the Temangalo time. I think it is very dangerous for Parliament to go in this direction. If we validate corrupt practices, where will the people of Uganda go? Who else will be there to fight corruption if we join in? I request that we stand over this matter to get more information. I think there is some vital information that should be brought to light. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, yesterday I heard that this report was made in April last year; that it has been in our hands for almost one year.  I do not know why this vital information has not been brought. Having said that, I would like to say that as a Member of the National Resistance Council, I was assigned the responsibility to investigate some fraud in the land office. And as far as back 1991, we recommended that all government land be issued with title deeds; that was as far back as 1991. I think nothing has happened. I think life goes on with nothing happening. 

So if there is no title deed, who is the owner? What are we going to correct by delaying? Why do we not move forward and instruct the Minister of Lands to do something now and give them a timeframe? Why don’t we save what is in the future? As the honourable commissioner has said, maybe Parliament is going to be sold. I do not know what you think, but I do not see what benefit there is in going back. Why do we not move forward? Anyway, it is up to you. I am just throwing my ideas around. Hon. Kagwera, I am happy to see you in one piece. Welcome back to the House. (Applause)

4.14
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree with my brother, hon. Obua’s statement that this country has problems especially when we stand here as Members of Parliament and say, “Do not do this” and a certain body continues to do it. I am saying this because in this report it is indicated that at one point Parliament stayed the sale of this land. And I believe the land commission, as put by hon. Okello-Okello, holds this land in trust - remember that they should be knowledgeable about the land use. 

Butabika is a mental referral hospital, but the land commission, in its own wisdom, decided to give away this land to investors. How can these two things live alongside one another? Supposing people wanted to put their bars there, would such businesses run in such a place? That is why I am saying that there is a problem in this country. But, as Parliament, we must stand up and be frank to ourselves and to the people of this country that there is a problem. (Applause)  

If the Uganda Land Commission can lease out public land to any willing tenant regardless of anything, why shouldn’t we come up as Parliament to look at the future of this country? Otherwise, whoever was involved in this - you may play around with the law, but you are on the wrong side of history. Thank you.

4.16
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am first going to react to the issues raised by the ad hoc committee, which morally shot down all the arguments that had been advanced by the Public Accounts Committee regarding the Butabika Hospital land. If you may refer to page 8 of the ad hoc committee report on issue No.1, whether there was a sale of land for Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital land, you realise that the land for Butabika Referral Hospital is clearly stated as being on Blocks 237 to 238, Plot No.2, Kyaddondo. 

But when the ad hoc committee concluded on that matter, they simply said that the allegation that Uganda Land Commission sold out land belonging to Butabika Hospital was baseless. I did not see anywhere where the ad hoc committee states which land the land commission leased out. Which land did the land commission sell? I would not want to believe that the director of Butabika Hospital was writing all those correspondences demanding for the land title out of the blue.  

I remember in one of the meetings that we held with the Ministry of Health over the Butabika Hospital land, the minister, who is right here, hon. Richard Nduhuura, told the committee that he was quite surprised that after having got a land title for Butabika Hospital and handing it over to the director, I think shortly before he reached, the Minister of State in charge of Lands had gone to Butabika to withdraw the title and they chopped off some other acres only to take it -(Interruption)

MR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you very much, colleague for giving way. I would like to put the record clear. What actually happened on the referred to occasion was that I was invited to Butabika Hospital to receive a land title from the Minister of Lands. Indeed, the Minister of State for Lands then, hon. Kasirivu, turned up, handed over the land title to me and I in turn handed it over to the director.  

What I do understand is that there was an official of the Uganda Land Commission at the function, who later took away the land title. So, it is not the Minister of Lands who took away the title after he had handed it over to me. Rather, it is an official of the Uganda Land Commission and that is what I reported to the committee. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for that further clarification. When we later pressed the Minister of State for Lands as to why the title had to be withdrawn he said, “No, that title was too large, we had to chop off some parts because it did not belong to Butabika Hospital.” I wanted the ad hoc committee to help us. Which land, therefore, did the land commission give out?

In infrastructural development and in the case of an institution of that nature, that is, a national referral hospital, we ought to leave room for future expansion perhaps for a school. But now if we just besiege all our infrastructural facilities and leave no room for future expansion, are we planning properly? 

In my opinion, I would like to concur with what hon. Okello-Okello has proposed, that there is need for us to really stay over this matter. If we adopt this report the way it is, posterity is going to judge us harshly.  In fact, the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee then, to me, are what we should go by. 

There were other terms of reference of the ad hoc committee about whether there was breach of the Leadership Code Act. I think even the IGG has to be attracted to this matter.

Madam Speaker, I think the way land is given out, not only in Butabika Hospital and several other institutions, is grossly irregular. We are not planning and we are really putting posterity in danger. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.22
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we are talking about power and when we are talking about power, we have visible power, invisible power and hidden power. Which one did the land commission use to give away the public land? Which one do we have that we cannot stay this alleged give away of public land? Because I see that there are now three problems.  

The first one now to us, which is a priority, is the investors. Anytime any investor shows interest in Uganda, it is a priority. Our public land is no longer a priority -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank hon. Gutomoi. Yes, there were some I think four big investors but the remaining land was given away in form of quarter an acre, half an acre, two acres to officials mostly from the Ministry of Lands and others. Therefore, the so-called investors took the biggest portion, but there were also local investors in form of small ones.  

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, for your information. You can now see the types of investors who have taken up this public land. Why can’t we therefore take action now?  

As I said, our first problem is an investor, and now we are making the power of Parliament to also be a problem. And then the giving away of public land by the land commission is also a problem to us. But I think we are disillusioned. Let us solve it by staying as has been proposed by the committee. There is no other option.

I went to Butabika sometime before this land was given away and I met the in charge who showed me the land and proposals for expansion for the future as well as those facilities which are still lacking at Butabika. So when we begin to give it away, are we serious? If it is this Parliament, in our time, giving it away, are we serious? I think I have just come to say that let it be stayed and then those smaller investors, if they are from Uganda, they will have to excuse us and walk away from that land. We have the powers to request them to do so.  

If the hon. Okellos of those days could not allow the land to go, but thereafter the new commission has come in and given away the land, what is the difference between the Okellos of yesterday and the current commissioners? I think this is an abuse of power. So, to me, there should be no giving away of any public land forthwith with this kind of arrangement. Thank you very much.  

4.26
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have something very brief.  

First of all, I have heard the concern of Butabika Referral Hospital. The report of the Public Accounts Committee is not coming from the blue; it had a basis. However, yesterday when I listened to the report of the ad hoc committee as it was being read by the chairperson with all the confidence, I felt that there was something wrong with this country. This is because I was in this House when the report of PAC was read and if my recollection is still correct, the concern of the Speaker was that the issues raised in PAC needed some legal clarification. 

In particular, the clarification that the Speaker wanted was to get the legality of cancellation of land titles. That is why a team of lawyers from amongst Members of Parliament was drawn up to look into this. When I listen to this report, it saddens me because it went on to look at the entire report of PAC while belittling it sentence by sentence, word by word and paragraph by paragraph. I think that there is something wrong in this country. We have a responsibility as Members of Parliament and this is why the Uganda Land Commission reports here.

The question of government land is becoming a big problem all over; it is not only Butabika. The moment we handle Butabika with kid gloves, land elsewhere will also go. Most government land is not titled and it has been the recommendation of this Parliament year in and year out that - (Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. The information we now have is that even land at Gulu University has been allocated to investors. New as it is and while it is demanding a lot more land, the land has already been given out. Even part of Mulago Hospital land has been sold out. Likewise, the land of Kirinya Prison, Kigo and Kinyara Prison farm have also been taken away. If these pieces of land are being held by Uganda Land Commission in trust and at this rate, we are going to be in trouble. I thank you.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, some clarification and information. The Kigo land actually belongs to Buganda Kingdom. As regards Gulu University land, government has never acquired it. The land belonged to the local people but before government acquired it, the university administration sat down and decided to allocate what they are trying to acquire from the people for the university to investors. So I think that there is a problem in this country. We must act responsibly otherwise the future will judge past leaders very harshly. I would not mind if government land was being taken for government activities. If the Ministry of Defence land was being given to Ministry of Health, I would not mind this. If prison land was being given to the Ministry of Defence, I would not mind because all would be serving government but the rate at which we are going, I do not think that government is going to have any land left.

We really have to be careful. Sometime back, the Sixth Parliament proposed that government should build offices. Government then came up with a proposal of building offices but somebody within government said, “No, it is very expensive to maintain offices, it is cheaper to rent”. Yes, it was in this Parliament! Government then decided, at that time, that it would be too costly for them to build. Sincerely speaking, are we serving this country or are we serving our private and personal interests? Because if you are serving this country, everybody knows that it is cheaper to build and maintain than to stay away and rent. 

Regarding the question of land, I don’t agree with the entire recommendations of the ad hoc committee. Their task was simple: to get the legality of cancellation of land titles and it was sad for them to go into details and areas where we had no problem with the PAC report.

Lastly, when a committee of Parliament presents a report on the Floor of Parliament, it is not final. It is also not a condition that government must implement all the recommendations that we give to them. Rather, government will go and implement those ones, which they are able to implement and they will report back to Parliament with reasons as to why they were unable to implement the rest. I thought that this is how checks and balances work between the Executive and Parliament. If we are to start throwing out all the recommendations of Parliament and creating ad hoc committees to handle committee reports then I don’t think that we are going to achieve much. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.32
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of the ad hoc committee, I signed this document and for the time being, I stand by its content and the recommendations. 

Early this afternoon hon. Okello-Okello talked to me and gave me some information, which I seriously wanted to share with my chairman. Unfortunately, we did not meet. I think you saw me going in and out of the Chambers as I was looking for him.

It is my considered opinion that if the information that hon. Okello-Okello gave to me is true then it is going to fundamentally alter the very basis of this report. I would therefore urge you, Madam Speaker, that if it is not too much, we should stand over this matter, go into the details of the information or ask hon. Okello-Okello to assist us to go into the details of this information and see whether it is necessary for us to include an addendum or even ask Parliament so that we can come up with some other report. It is my sincere wish that we stand over this matter for some time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wacha, if you had stood up when we called the item, I would have listened to you but you sat there, we started debating - now you make it appear as if we are running and you wanted to walk. I don’t know what the chairperson has to say. Hon. Wacha says that he has information, which he would like you to receive. Hon. Nyombi?

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I cannot be intimidated by Members who say that if I stand by this report it will be thrown away. We were given this assignment as lawyers. We considered the issues in the report as lawyers. The terms of reference that were given to us by the Speaker - I have his letter here, because hon. Okumu Regan did say that instead of considering the assignment we had been given, we meandered into other issues.

I have the letter of the Speaker here and we were to consider the concerns of the Auditor-General as spelt out in the report of PAC. We studied the issues and addressed the issues as lawyers. You cannot reinvent the law; the law defines when you can cancel certificates of title, because it was one of the recommendations. Within the report of PAC, was that the titles should be cancelled and so as lawyers we looked at the law and had to decide whether it was possible to cancel these certificates of title.

It did not mean that we did agree that the land be given away, but we had to look at the law. Now the certificates having been given, is it possible here as Parliament, can we sit here and say that we can cancel these certificates? And so, we addressed these issues.

If we want these certificates of titles cancelled, we will have to look at the laws that regulate the cancellation of certificates of titles. One of them is the Land Act. It means we will have to amend the Land Act in order for the registrar of titles to cancel these certificates of titles, because we quote the section that gives the registrar of titles powers to cancel these certificates of titles.

Secondly, the registration –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let the chair explain their terms of reference and how they wrote their report.

MR NYOMBI: Secondly, the Registration of Titles Act also provides as to when the title deed or a certificate of title is void. None of the circumstances that were spelt out in the report of PAC did qualify the cancellation. Now we were discussing the report of PAC as lawyers because the recommendation was to cancel the certificate of titles. It was not that we justified the actions of the Uganda Land Commission. 

What the Speaker wanted of us is advice. Can these certificates of titles be cancelled and we gave that advice. Now if we are going to cancel these certificates of titles, we must be prepared to look at the Land Act and then have it amended in order for the registrar of titles to cancel the certificates of titles. That is up to you. We have no problem with that.

If you want to amend the Registration of Titles Act so that these title deeds can be rendered null and void, fine. I do not think as an ad hoc committee we had any stake in that. We were merely helping by giving legal advice. As to whether Parliament can sit here and wish away these certificates of titles is another thing.

Now it has again and again been said that the Uganda Land Commission sold land. Selling land and leasing land are two different things. When I sell, it means I have given out totally. When I lease, it means I retain some residual interest in the land. What actually happened is that the Uganda Land Commission leased land, and again it is not for me to justify that the Uganda Land Commission should lease this land, to these people. For us we were given the assignment to give legal advice, so we should not be condemned for spelling out the law clearly.

Madam Speaker, I think hon. Obua stated that under the laws of Uganda, Butabika Hospital has never owned land. As far as we were concerned from the report, Butabika Hospital sits on land designated Kyaddondo Block 237-238 Plot No. 2. That is the land over which Butabika Hospital sits. What was leased out was not Plot No.2. It is the adjacent land and we know it as lawyers, once there is a title deed, you cannot create a second title deed over the same land. Now, Butabika Hospital, the title deed is there. What was leased out was the adjacent land. We as an ad hoc committee had no hand in this -(Mr Okello-Okello rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I wish you could allow him finish. The honourable members were given an assignment and terms of reference. He is explaining to the House what they did. Listen to him when he has finished, then you can contribute.

MR NYOMBI: So, as far as we are concerned, according to the report of PAC, this is not our invention. Butabika Hospital is the sitting tenant of land Plot No. 2 Block 237-238; whether they leased the adjacent land we as an ad hoc committee we were asked to give advice as to whether the title deeds can be cancelled. And maybe let me mention this -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t you listen? Please, listen to his explanation and then you can respond.

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, the question has been raised as to what happens when land is leased to an institution? When land is leased to an institution, it is held by the Uganda Land Commission but the title deeds, the Uganda Land Commission normally holds has Uganda Land Commission – Ministry of Health in brackets. At Mbuya, Ministry of Defence has land on top of the hill and the title deed is in the names of the Uganda Land Commission brackets Ministry of Defence. So, it is possible for the ministry or a government institution to hold land through the Uganda Land Commission, but Uganda Land Commission holds land and in brackets they spell out Ministry of Health, Ministry of Defence so that is possible.

Even Parliament, they say Uganda Land Commission then in brackets Parliament. Then it is known that that land is intended for the Parliament of Uganda or belongs to Parliament because Uganda Land Commission is the one holding it.

Hon. Okello-Okello said Uganda Land Commission should not have sold out this land. He worked in the Ministry of Lands for a very long time and I believe he knows very well that the Uganda Land Commission does not sell, it leases out land. And it is also –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I never used the word “sold”. I only said that Uganda Land Commission holds land in trust for the people of Uganda and I said if you are holding in trust, you cannot dispose of whatever you are holding in trust because it is not yours. I never said that it should not have sold the Butabika land.

MR NYOMBI: Hon. Okello-Okello has made the situation even worse. The Uganda Land Commission has title deeds for land in Uganda and as along as it is not earmarked for a ministry or an institution, it can lease out to any willing tenant. And then hon. Okello-Okello said the title deeds should be cancelled. I do not mind whether they are cancelled; I have no stake in these title deeds. But you see in order to cancel the title deeds; you must follow the Land Act because Section 91 of the Land Act spells out as to when you can cancel a title deed. You just cannot wish it and then cancel a title deed. Short of that –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I am not sure that the honourable chairman of the ad hoc committee was listening when I was speaking. I only asked for standing over this matter to get further information. I never said that any title should be cancelled. Is he in order to put his own words into my mouth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are many words which have been said concerning the title deeds; he is responding to all of them.

MR NYOMBI: I was recording notes as members submitted regarding this issue. And the honourable member said there is a problem; indeed there is a problem. As long as government does not have the land belonging to institutions surveyed and title deeds made for those institutions - and we did point this out in the report. We said if land belongs to the Ministry of Information, let government have that land surveyed, a title deed be made in the names of Uganda Land Commission and then it is spelt out that, “This land belongs to Ministry of Information”. If that is not done, an intending lessee will apply for the land and Uganda Land Commission will lease out this land. 

So it is important and we did recommend that government should take steps to ensure that land is surveyed and title deeds created, that is in the names of Uganda Land Commission but indicating what ministry. Uganda Land Commission has many title deeds but as long as it is not earmarked for a particular ministry, it is part of public land that Uganda Land Commission can lease out to any willing lessee.

Dr Epetait asked: which land was sold? First of all, there was no sale; there was leasing. I have already said you cannot create a second title deed over another one. The land that was leased out was outside Kyaddondo Block 237-238 Plot 2. It was not part of the land over which Butabika Hospital sits. You cannot even create a second title over the same land. As an ad hoc committee, it is not that we support –(Interruption) 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, hon. Nyombi Peter is saying that you cannot issue a title when there is another title. This is not the case. The title that Uganda Land Commission normally holds is a free hold and it is out of that title that Uganda Land Commission creates leases. It is wrong for him to mislead the House by saying that you cannot issue a title when you have another title. Is he in order to mislead the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think leave these small matters. First explain the reasons why you wrote that report and the rationale for it. Then the members can answer. 

MR NYOMBI: I entirely agree with hon. Okello-Okello and that is why I said Uganda Land Commission normally holds a large title deed from which it leases out. We totally agree. 

I want to invite you to read the letters that were written by the directors of Butabika Hospital and the PS Ministry of Health. We actually quoted them verbatim. They were complaining about the preparation of a certificate of title of the land on which Butabika Hospital sits. If you read those letters carefully, note the adjacent land. The land that was leased out was land that was adjacent to the land over which Butabika Hospital sits.

Again as an ad hoc committee, we were not concerned whether it was justified or not; for us we were giving legal advice. It would be wrong for hon. Reagan Okumu to say the chairman talked confidently; should I have wept?

And it has been suggested that we stand over this matter, if we were to stand over this matter, we must bear the law in mind. Even if we stand over this matter, shall we be able to cancel these certificates of title? As an ad hoc committee, we neither justified nor did we support but we were merely giving advice. But according to the Land Act, there are circumstances when the Registrar of Titles can cancel certificates of title. Even if we stand over this matter, unless those statutes are amended, we won’t be able to. 

The better option, in my opinion, Madam Speaker, is for government to take steps as you said to have land that is intended for institutions surveyed and title deeds made for those institutions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, let us hear from the man in charge of the lands; let us hear from the minister what he wants us to do because he has been listening. Maybe the minister has a solution.

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I associate myself with what the chairman has just said. However, in order to take into account what hon. Wacha has said, and by the way I hold him in high esteem, and in order to have harmony within the ad hoc committee, and in order not to create the impression that government is hiding something, we as a ministry have no objection to having a stand over and this matter is looked into further -(Applause)- that is if the rules allow it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are here to serve the people of Uganda but you know I am still in the dark about this secret which is between hon. Okello-Okello and hon. Wacha. Can I for the record of the Hansard know what it is that I am sending back to the committee? I want to know that secret which you shared between the two of you -(Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I think it would be very risky to disclose what we want to find out here; the information could be blocked. It is better we investigate. If we fail to find out; we come back and say that we have failed. But we believe there is vital information. I think one week is enough. 

4.56
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am just seeking clarification: I remember when we presented our Social Services Committee report on the policy statement we clearly brought out this issue. And when we presented that report, we requested Parliament to set up a committee to look into these issues of Butabika. I must appreciate on behalf of the committee that yes it has been done and I thank the committee because it has raised these issues. 

However, I remember very well we made it clear to this House that initially the total acreage of this land was 670 acres; it was reduced to approximately 300 acres. There was a function at which the Minister of Health handed over the title and it was withdrawn by the Commissioner of Lands but was later returned when the land had reduced to 190 acres [HON. MEMBERS: “Eh! Shame!”] and the committee took an initiative to put the Ministry of Lands to task to explain where the other land – the balance had gone. And the clarification we got is that the other land was a swampy area. Whether it was a swampy area or not, as Ugandans we thought that that was land for an institution where all Ugandans benefit. (Applause)

Nevertheless, in the request we presented before this Parliament we requested that whichever committee will be put in place to look into this issue, it must help us find out whether the other land, which was deducted was actually a swamp. But unfortunately when I was reading thorough this report I have not seen that clarity. So, as the committee goes further to look into this, I would like to request that this issue should also be clarified. 

Finally, like the chairperson, hon. Nyombi has said, in my observation our hands are going to be kept tied unless we amend the law. Because even if we pass or remove good resolutions we shall end at that if the law is not amended. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are two things: one, is the issue of defilement; that one there is no problem but I want to hear from the minister, when are you going to title the land of the Uganda Land Commission all over this country, which is being chewed? And we have been asking you and your predecessors; when are you going to issue titles properly to secure the land of the people? 

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Madam Speaker, we have put in place what is required to have all government land titled. It is that they had no resources to carry out the exercise. Since the budget is coming very soon, I would request Parliament to vote us the resources and the job will be done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe hon. Alaso is on fire over the land titles; say something. (Laughter)

5.00
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am indeed on fire. First of all, to think that the arguments of the chairperson of the ad hoc committee that are really based on the legalities as in our framework - while he seems to really emphasise the tied hands, I want Parliament to think that we have a moral responsibility beyond our legal framework. Beyond our legal framework, there is a moral obligation to this country to be fair. Can you imagine, at this rate we are actually just encroaching on the marginalized of the marginalized of our society. People who are mentally ill; those are the ones we have gone for? And I think that is terrible as a nation! You know, they walk naked; they are in all sorts of problems and the last thing they have is a mental facility and we dare go for that mental facility! 

Having said that, before I say what I want in very strict terms, I also wrote to a friend of mine in the House and I said:  “The blood of the people in the mental facility will not be on my hands and I hope it won’t be on the hands of this Parliament.” Madam Speaker, I want to disagree with the chairman of the ad hoc committee because here in his own report he refers to provisions in the Land Act where he says under Section 91(2)(e): “If the title is legally or wrongfully  obtained.”  So, don’t you consider the processes that went into the acquisition of these titles as illegal or wrongful? If that be the case, I would like to think that the chairperson of the ad hoc committee should not make our lives hard by making us feel like there is no hope to regain the Butabika land.

I also would like to know from him who the initial owners of the adjacent land were if he did investigations? I am saying this because he keeps saying that the land onto which Butabika sits - this gives me an impression that this land had mark stones and buildings; that is all he calls Butabika land. What about the fields and the adjacent land? Who owned that land before the new owners who the land commission leased it to got the titles? We must establish that. It is possible that that adjacent land, which we are now wishing away was actually part of this land and there should be evidence. But most importantly, I think the responsible minister should first come to this House with that land title of the so-called Butabika land – perhaps somebody has a photocopy of the old one before adjustments were made, which will help us to compare the two.

On a lighter note, and this is not meant to insult the chairperson, but listen to this. Somebody once said that a certain lawyer died and when a man passed the cemetery he said, “Here lies the good lawyer,” but somebody else said, “There are two people buried in this place.” I do not want us to think that because of our hard position as lawyers - you kept emphasizing the lawyer in you and that we can sacrifice the good man in you. We should be seen to be good. Otherwise, people will question us as to whether there are two people in the same grave, the lawyer and the good man. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

5.04
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read the report and when I listened to hon. Obua and compared to what hon. Nyombi has been telling us, it is like we are crying over spilt milk.

If Parliament continues at this rate with the land commission giving out land for institutions like schools, hospitals, prisons, defence and so on yet we know that our government has been saying all the good things about population explosion - how is government trying to prepare for the population that they are interested in, if they start giving away land that belongs to institutions like schools? How are they going to do that, if they are giving away land that belongs to hospitals, to investors? How has the land commission been choosing the individuals to take such land? How do they identify them? I am asking these questions because in the Seventh Parliament we got a rumour that Butabika land was being given away. In fact we moved up and down to safeguard this land, but we could not. But when the list came out, we realised that the land had been given to an investor to build a factory. All of us wondered why anybody would think of building a factory near a mental hospital.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I was not in the Seventh Parliament, but when the Butabika land issue came up, I wrote an article in The Monitor newspaper. After the article had been published, a senior personality in the ministry called me on telephone and said: “Why are you wasting your time writing in the press? Why don’t you come here and we give you one of the plots?” Maybe that is how they get people to give the plots to. (Laughter)

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, for the information. Madam Speaker, we should not start regretting as Parliament; we should quickly enact a law to safeguard our institutions because we are already in trouble. And if we continue like this we shall soon have no land. You have just heard what hon. Nyombi has said, the land where Butabika sits – you know, when you say where you sit, the way you are seated, I presume that is the only part you own. (Laugher) So, is that what hon. Nyombi is meaning? You mean Butabika Hospital is not supposed to have verandas? Do you mean the people who are sick are not supposed to have a compound onto which to move? Why should that happen, yet you know that this Parliament and many Ugandans are potential clients for that hospital? (Laughter)

When we visited Kayunga we got a 78-year old woman who said she has been crying over land for the last four years. I think we must handle the issue of land very carefully otherwise we are going to cause problems to our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think it is the desire of this House that this matter be stood over for one week to allow the retrieval of special information. Can you reconvene your committee with hon. Okello-Okello and report back to us next week?

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Odit to state publicly that a committee that has been appointed by this House is useless? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is the Speaker who appointed this committee and I know that all the members enjoy my confidence; they are in charge. So I will not reconstitute the committee. Only bring in hon. Okello-Okello; the committee is still in place.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, when hon. Okello-Okello stood up, he made an allusion that I also have heard elsewhere of plots of land being given probably to Members of the ad hoc committee. But I would like to say that I was brought up in a Christian family and I am a committed Christian. When I am given an assignment, I do it judiciously. I worked in the Office of the Inspector-General of Government for 15 years -(Interjections)- and nobody can point a finger at me. Nobody can point a finger at me as having taken any bribe. 

When we were handling this matter, our concern was not whether the leasing of the land was justified or not; we were assigned the responsibility of advising on the legal issues that were raised in the report by PAC and that is what we did. 

We have pointed out some of the problems that we may face. The main recommendations we have made are that Government should identify funds, have land surveyed and title deeds made for land that is meant for institutions. 

I also want to point out that one of the members of this ad hoc committee, hon. Asuman Kiyingi, has been elevated to the position of a minister. So, the committee is less -(Interjections)- by one member. As such, you may think of adding another member to the committee -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will do my duty. So, the matter is deferred for one week. We shall expect your report next week. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS BILL, 2009

5.13
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2009 be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Speaker, the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill has got some objects. Please allow me to highlight the issues. 

One of the objects is to combat trafficking in persons, a contemporary manifestation of modern day slavery whose victims are predominantly women and children. It provides legislation necessary for criminalising the offence of trafficking in persons and prosecution of offenders. 

The Bill provides for the prevention and suppression of the offence of trafficking in persons.

It provides for the protection, assistance and support to victims of trafficking in persons with full respect of their human rights. 

The Bill also promotes cooperation among countries in combating trafficking in persons.

The Bill is divided up into different parts. Part one, provides for the commencement of the Bill and interpretation of the words and phrases used in the Bill.

Part two prohibits trafficking in persons by introducing the offences of trafficking in persons and aggravated trafficking in persons as well as the penalties of imprisonment upon conviction. This part also creates offences and penalties for acts that promote trafficking in persons, offences related to trafficking in persons, engaging the labour or service of a victim of trafficking and failure to disclose a conviction, and imposes a duty on the community to report suspected cases of trafficking.

Part three looks at the protection of victims of trafficking in persons. This part provides for the protection, assistance and support of victims of trafficking in persons. It provides for non-discrimination of victims of trafficking on any basis and protects them from being penalised for crimes committed as a result of their trafficking status. It provides for protection, assistance and support of victims by way of giving them information and providing them with opportunity to express themselves on matters concerning their cases, and victim friendly investigations, court proceedings, including confidentiality of their identity.  It also creates a waiver on filing fees for such cases.

Part three also provides for the repatriation of the victims to and from Uganda, processing of the necessary documents and referring repatriation victims in appropriate cases. It also provides for restitution and compensation of victims of trafficking in persons, payable by the offenders.

Part four provides for the jurisdiction of Ugandan courts in cases of trafficking in persons including extra territorial jurisdiction with the consent of the Attorney-General. 

Part five looks at the prevention of trafficking in persons’ office which has to be designated by the minister.

Part six of the Bill looks at the miscellaneous issues. 

Madam Speaker, trafficking in persons is indeed modern day slavery. The Bill defines it in detail as recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability, or the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control of another person for the purpose of exploitation.  

This is a timely Bill. It is high time we looked at this modern-day slavery which has transformed itself into this kind of form, and provide legislation which has been missing. Because Uganda lacks a comprehensive piece of legislation, this Bill would go a long way to reduce the suffering of the children and women in this country and also in other countries. It is a move that at least all countries work very hard to prevent this kind of havoc that is covering many areas in this country.  

So, Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill gets a second reading.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Bill be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson!

5.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, on behalf of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, I would like to present the report of the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2009.  

The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 18 March 2009 and it was committed to the sessional Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs for consideration under Rule 133(a) and Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.  

The committee held meetings with the civil society organisations involved in child trafficking issues like Uganda Development Link, Law and Advocacy for Women in Uganda, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and that of Internal Affairs, Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, the International Organisation on Migration, Uganda Child Rights NGO Network in partnership with the United Nations Children Fund (UNICEF), and the American Embassy.  

The committee also held a workshop and discussed the Bill clause by clause. 

The laws consulted were: the Constitution, the Children’s Act, the Citizens and Migration Act, the Penal Code Act, the Convention on Rights of the Child, and international instruments pertaining to the rights of the child. The committee made on-spot visits to rehabilitation centres of trafficking in persons victims and held interviews with some of the victims who were affected.    

The Bill is geared towards combating trafficking in persons, a contemporary manifestation of modern-day slavery whose victims are predominantly women and children; and providing legislation necessary for criminalising the offences of trafficking in persons and prosecution of the offenders.  It also aims at providing for prevention and suppression of the trafficking in persons’ offence. The Bill further provides for protection, assistance and support to victims of trafficking in persons with full respect of their human rights and to promote cooperation among countries in combating trafficking in persons.  

Currently, Uganda has no specific legislation on trafficking in persons. The term TIP or human trafficking does not feature anywhere in our statutes. 

The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill comes amidst growing concerns about the gradual increase in the number of women, men and children trafficked within and outside Uganda. 

Global estimates indicate that approximately two million persons are trafficked per year, of which 1.2 million are children. 

Although there are no national estimates in Uganda, the International Labour Organisation estimates indicate that the Lord’s Resistance Army has, since 1990, abducted 25,000 to 30,000 children; 1.5 million children are working; 12,000 children are engaged in commercial sex exploitation; 10,000 children live on the streets and several children are engaged in cross-border trade, agriculture and fishing.  

Uganda has been classified in tier 1 as a source, transit route and destination country for men, women and children trafficked for purposes of forced labour and sexual exploitation.  

In Uganda, children are trafficked within the country as well as across borders. Some of the destination countries include but are not limited to Canada, Egypt, United Arab Emirates, Sudan and Saudi Arabia for forced labour and commercial sexual exploitation.

The committee noted that there is strong evidence that trafficking in persons exists in Uganda. It was observed that although cross border trafficking is a growing phenomenon in Uganda, domestic trafficking is a much bigger problem especially from rural areas to urban areas.  

It was noted that trafficking in persons includes four stages, namely recruiting, harbouring, transportation and receipt.  

Statistically, the United States report of 2005 on human trafficking estimates that 600,000 to 800,000 persons are trafficked across international borders each year.  Approximately 80 percent are women and girls and up to 50 percent are children. In Uganda, statistics are difficult to ascertain except the little known information about child soldiers.  

Uganda qualifies as a sending/source and transit country for children from Rwanda, Burundi and DRC Congo, and also a receiving/destination for children mainly for labour and sexual exploitation.  

The push and pull factors responsible for trafficking in persons are HIV/AIDS, poverty, conflict and wars, dysfunctional families, inadequate legislation, poor law enforcement, porous borders and migration patterns, child sacrifice, cattle rustling, early marriage, sex slavery and urban informal activities.  

The committee observed that the traffickers include the following: individual women and men; religious institutions; transport agents; pimps/brothels; employment bureaus; agents who use loudspeakers in towns and village farms; fishermen at landing sites; placement of adverts, especially on radios; NGOs plus business persons and organisations.  

The traffickers offer promises like employment/jobs, better life, money, school fees, marriage, good clothing, accommodation and remitting money to the parents of the victims.

The methods of recruitment were noted as enticement, kidnap/abduction both in war and non-war zones; force by parents and guardians as well as intoxicating victims.  

The exploitative activities carried out by TIP victims are domestic work, street vending, bar/lodge/restaurant attending, fishing, casual labour, sex work, working on agricultural plantations, smuggling, metal scrap collection, child soldiers and housewives.

Over 30,000 children were abducted in the Northern Uganda conflict over 20 years; 8000 of these are unaccounted for. Those abducted in the war are involved in fighting, carrying heavy luggage, cooking, fetching water, nursing children and serving as sex slaves to commanders. There have been cases where children have lost their lives and others have been exchanged for guns and other merchandise to people in Sudan and the Middle East. 

The destinations of trafficked persons especially children are Kenya, which is ranked high, followed by Sudan, Tanzania, Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo, Europe - mainly by relatives who have contacts - and the Middle East. The victims are faced with hazardous and risky activities like fishing in the wee hours of the night, carrying heavy luggage, working long hours, drug abuse conduits, abusive language, violence, smuggling, child sacrifice, removal of body organs for sale and death.  

In Uganda, there is less public education, rescue, restoration and rehabilitation. Child soldiers have received more attention though they are still faced with many challenges in delivery of intervention. Government efforts in addressing the issue of child trafficking are largely wanting and intervention in this evil by government thinly exists.  

Government needs to establish a strong recovery and rehabilitation centre with the necessary facilities. In addition, civic education has to be strengthened in Uganda where there is less public education. Of late, there has been an influx of children from Karamoja on the streets of Kampala and other urban areas. As such, government is faced with a problem of resettlement. 

Recommendations 

There is need for amendment of the law regarding registration of births and deaths so that government knows its citizens and the local authorities are able to identify their people. 

There is also urgent need for national identity cards. 

Government should set up measurers on sensitising its citizens about this evil since the majority of its citizens do not appreciate its existence in society.

Government should strengthen the fight against poverty and create income generating projects, which will prevent youth from leaving the rural areas in search of better lives in the city and other urban areas and eventually fall victim of trafficking. 

The Uganda Government should make efforts to ratify the Parlermo Protocol to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons to which it is a signatory. This is a United Nations protocol to which Uganda is a signatory but we have never ratified it.  

Government should also constitute a national task force composed of all the relevant ministries, agencies and stakeholders to ensure effective coordination and put in place a national plan of action to address the phenomenon of trafficking in persons in Uganda.  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee supports the motion for the second reading of the Bill. I will, at an appropriate time, move the proposed amendments to the Bill, which are attached to this report. I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much but before I say anything; is it in order for us to debate this important Bill when government is just represented by two ministers? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The Prime Minister is here.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: But this is very important. When we were debating the other Bill, this bench was almost full. This shows that government does not take this Bill as important yet the people we are talking about are Ugandans. They are voters and are the future generation of this country. Is it really in order for the Front Bench to be almost empty, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I see the Leader of Government Business and the Minister for Youth here. I think that the more we delay this Bill citing technicalities we shall continue to allow children to be trafficked in this country. The Prime Minister is here, the minister in charge is here and we are here. Please, let us move. We are in order to proceed.

5.34
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a representative of the young people in Northern Uganda, a region that has seen a series of young people taken, I have no option but to give overwhelming support to the report of the committee, which is also in support of reading the Bill for the second time in Parliament.  

According to this report, trafficking in persons has been described as modern-day slavery and I want to agree with the content. As a Parliament, I think it is important because when we look at the population statistics of Uganda, one realises that we have an extremely young population. So there is need to put in place legislation to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of this very young population that we have in this country.  

The population statistics available reveal that about 75 percent of the total population of Uganda are young people below the age of 30 years, and this is a very strong force even in terms of voting. If here we are saying ministers are not there but the Leader of Government Business and the minister is around, we must know that it is indeed this age bracket that determines whether we should sit on the right side of the Speaker in this Parliament or on the left side.  

This country is a signatory to a number of conventions on the rights of children. As a Parliament, it is important for us to have legislation with deterrent sentences to people who traffic young people from Uganda. Specifically, I want to put forward my humble appeal to government through the Leader of Government Business. The committee has gone ahead to give specific countries where, in their opinion, most of our young people who are trafficked are taken. Apart from putting in place this legislation, we must also have or establish diplomatic talks with governments of these respective countries to ensure that in situations where these people can be identified and brought back to the country, we have those who participated in trafficking succumb to this law that we are going to pass. I think that will also be important. 

Diplomatically, when we talk about these countries and we do not engage them in diplomatic talks, this can bring certain political problems between them and the Uganda government. Otherwise, I support the report and I urge Parliament to pass this law. It is good for our country and for the young people. It will protect them and give us a good way forward in this country.

5.39
MS JANE ALISEMERA, (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Bill. It is very good. It is timely because of some of the conditions we are going through like wars and trade. Trafficking in persons means recruitment, transportation, purchase and sale. So, if we are trafficking, we are selling and recruiting people and these are mainly the vulnerable groups, the children and the women. 

I had an opportunity of visiting one of the brothels in Thailand where young children are sold. Those who have bought them exploit them by giving them out to people who want to exploit them sexually. The young people are paraded in glasses and the old women who have overstayed, who went there when they were young, are also there. People come and choose the persons they want and those children are used as many times as possible, in the interest of the business person. It is so bad. 

As soon as you leave the airport, the taxis are there; they show you where you can go if you are interested in using some of these young people. It is very sad to see our own children also from Uganda, from Africa, going to be sold somewhere. Some are sold for child sacrifice; we have seen it. I hope the chairperson will insert something in the Bill to deal with child sacrifice. They are not only being exploited sexually or being used as labourers but they are also being used for ritual sacrifices.

I would like to call upon this Parliament to support this Bill. It is for a good cause. Before we get our young girls going to be used as sex workers in those countries, to be put in glasses like dead bodies, we need this Bill in place. I support this Bill.

5.42
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would to appreciate the work done by the committee and I also want to support this Bill. If it was not because of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, this Bill would have been passed yesterday. We are therefore late. It has not been done because of these procedures we have.

Last year the forum for children in this Parliament went to Masaka and we were so disappointed to find a Ugandan lady from Mbarara who was involved in trafficking a child from Rwanda. I do not know whether this Bill will also protect the children being trafficked from other countries to Uganda, because all of them are human beings and they must all enjoy their rights. Because we had no law at the time, what we did was just to instruct the police and we gave some numbers of agencies here, which could help that young boy to be transported back to his country. I hope this Bill will consider such situations.

Madam Speaker, there is too much trafficking in Uganda because of these porous borders of ours. In fact, Uganda has become so amorphous that it becomes very difficult to know where the borders are. Any person comes in at any time and leaves at any time. So, there is no doubt that we shall lose our women and our children at any time, which is not the case with our neighbouring countries. It is very difficult for you to go to Tanzania or Rwanda, for example. Our people are really suffering. Those who go there are tortured, but those people come to our country as they wish. Therefore, I appeal that now that we are enacting this Bill, whichever Bill is coming should consider our border issues. 

I also suggest that this Bill considers putting up of psychosocial centres in this country. We already have many people who have been trafficked and we hope that we shall get them back. However, when we bring them back they need to go through psychosocial training and counselling so that they become human beings. The activities they are involved in where they are now are inhuman. Those people are not human beings now, so we need to bring them back.

I sit on the Committee on Foreign Affairs and last week while meeting our ambassadors, one of them reported that we have girls who are desperate in Egypt. We should look for a way of bringing those girls back. The ambassador told us that when those girls are there, they are not even allowed to expose themselves such that they can get an opportunity to explain how they went there and what they are going through. When they reach those countries, they are completely enclosed. I do not know what we are going to do to get back those ladies who are suffering. 

Even this trafficking relates to Ugandans who are in China now. Some of them did not know the people who in fact deceived them so when they reached there they ended up getting into more problems. To me this law is very important. We should pass it to avoid some of these problems Ugandans are facing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, if the ambassador in Egypt is aware that there are some Ugandans there, isn’t it the responsibility of the government to arrange for their return? Prime Minister, the Ugandans who are stuck there should be facilitated to come back.

5.48
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Again I would like to applaud the Uganda Women Parliamentarians Association for this initiative and particularly our outgoing chairperson, hon. Masiko, for bringing this Bill and having it in Parliament.

Let me begin by expressing my fear; my fear is funding for the operationalisation of this Bill. It is common practice that certificates of financial implications are brought here but that does not mean that there will be money to operationalise the processes, and if we are thinking of getting back the children you have just talked about and the women in Egypt and the minister arranging for their return, if we are thinking of such incidents, then it is important that government commits itself to making sure there is money to help get back some of the people who are victims of trafficking in persons. 

Having expressed my fear, I would like to state that trafficking in persons just like HIV/AIDS, poverty, child sacrifice, has the face of the Ugandan woman. By passing this Bill and making it an Act finally, we will have gone a long way into empowering the marginalised sections of our community.

I would like to state that looking at the committee report and thinking about the 8,000 unaccounted for children following the LRA war in Northern Uganda, I am beginning to have a bit of hope because during the peace process pleas were made to the LRA to free the children. Unfortunately none of these 8,000 children were freed. Probably some of them are dead. And I am hoping that those that are alive - because there are claims that a number of these children are in the Sudan, in Libya and in parts of the Arab world – I am hoping that the provisions that address international relations to do with human trafficking should be able to help us get some of those children who are still alive. 

I also hope that by discussing this tonight, the Government of Uganda will be refreshed to look more into peaceful methods of conflict resolution before we go into details of war which becomes so protracted that we end up with the innocent women and the children being trafficked away from our borders and subjected to a life of slavery.

I also want to observe and emphasise that we need to include in this trafficking in persons the use of children as baby sitters and maids. I know that there are provisions in the law to do with the children statute, to do with labour laws but these have been very inadequate on their own to stop the powerful working women of this country from bringing children aged five, seven, eight years from villages and making those children their baby sitters and house helps. 

One just negotiates with a  parent and because of the poverty in this country, people go to the country side, negotiate with this lady, pull the child out of school even when we have universal primary education, then they buy a gomesi for the mother and this child is subjected to all forms of abuse. They beat them; they harass them and they will never grow up into all round citizens as you would want them to be. 

My thinking is that at an appropriate time, part of the definitions should include the use of children as baby sitters. If you go around this city, you will find so many of our children condemned to a life of no education and no future by people who have gone through an education system themselves. They were not deprived at any one point and now they are depriving these other children so that their children will have a future. That is the irony; you pick this poor child from a village in Serere where I come from so that she carries your child who in turn will go to a good school and this child is totally condemned. I think these matters should cause all of us to be concerned and we should address them.

Having said that, I support this Bill and I hope that it will go a long way into addressing issues of child and human trafficking in this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Arumadri, okay let me finish this side; three minutes each, please. 

5.54
MS REBBECA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker for having always given your time wherever we call you to look at this and that. I want to thank the chairperson UWOPA and her executive for the commitment and the chairman for the defence.  

The beginning of this problem goes to Uganda having no registration of their citizens. We have taken too long to have the national identity card and we cannot move on without that. This traffic has come in and out unnoticed and they recruit our own people to continue doing their work.  I want us as Parliament to look at the area of national identity card and if possible this financial year. 

I want to give some testimonies so that you know how serious this case is. In one country which I will not mention, I got two Ugandan girls: one was 13 years and the other was 15 years. These children were taken by people who pretended to be religious people. On reaching there, the children were put in the brothels and were being used three, four or five times in a day. They were only discovered by a Ugandan lady, medical personnel, when they went for treatment and they were both HIV positive; that is the level -

In another country, I discovered – we are talking of the Ugandan children who are girls - I discovered the boys were trafficked and they were being used by dogs; not even human beings this time. Madam Speaker, we cannot proceed like this. Even in our own country sometimes we say we are victims but we are also perpetrators. In my place I have discovered the Congolese girls who were brought in and they are hanging. They do not know where to go; they were trafficked into this country by our Ugandan soldiers. We are also perpetrators. If we do not look at this, Ugandan children are going to be a basket from where terrorists are going to be recruited. Because when our children are trafficked, we do not know what they are used for. Those who come from abduction will tell you that they have been trained even in terrorism. We are sitting on a time bomb if we do not pass this law.

I would like to request that we put in a provision that by the time this law is passed, those who are out should be repatriated because we have our missions abroad; we are not going to say that we have heard about them and we cannot bring them back. They can still be repatriated. I support this Bill and I want to say that it must be passed and in totality. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.58
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to commend the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for the expeditious style in which they attended to this Bill. It was read for the first time in this House exactly 13 days ago. How I wished we could handle all other business in this style; we would do a lot of work in a short time; I commend you, Mr Chairman and your committee.

I would like to start from a point of - maybe on a lighter note - there are some fears that some issues of the certificates of financial implications may become impediments to this Bill. I am also saying that whoever will attempt to oppose this Bill, I will very fast categorize such a person as a perpetuator of trafficking in persons.    And, therefore, whoever will come up with any statement to oppose anything in this Bill, we shall have to impose some investigations.

The estimates that the chairperson read in his report are conservative because there are a number of unreported cases; some Members have already attested to this. There are a number of people suffering out there incommunicado; they have been locked up and so there is no clear information available as to how many victims of trafficking in persons we have now. And in fact we talked about international trafficking and also local trafficking. Thank God that possibly when this law comes into commencement maybe some people will have escaped because even locally here you all remember this popular programme of recruiting children into the army. These are facts but now that there may be no application in retrospect maybe some will escape.

Madam Speaker, allow me say one other thing: among the drivers or the push and pull factors for the trafficking in persons, I noted silently that there was something missing and that includes drug abusers. In fact I am aware of a Narcotics and Psycho traffic Control Bill before this same committee. You know it takes a lot of courage for one to start thinking of abducting, taking somebody and selling a human being; it takes a bit of courage and some of these drug abusers actually have that kind of courage. In their drunken state they can do anything.  

Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Chairman of Defence and Internal Affairs Committee now that I have given you some praises, I would like you to use the same gear in handling the Narcotics and Psycho traffic Control Bill so that it helps to reinforce this particular Bill of Trafficking in Persons.

Lastly, there are a number of protocols that this government enters into; so many protocols but locally here, they are not popularised. I think there is need for government to take a bold step whenever it signs any protocol; it must be popularised in the local media so that people get to know. I have to confess that it is today that I am hearing about the Palermo Protocol. On that same note, I would like to say that this particular Bill will not have to wait for it even to come into law; we should start right away and popularise the provisions in the Bill on all local radio stations and demand that media houses should put some specialized messages like we did with HIV/AIDS control. Popularise the messages before or after all local news broadcasts in all languages so that people are in the know. 

And in fact the punitive measures that we should put in this Bill when we eventually go to consider clause by clause, the punitive measures should be so deterrent that the whole project of trafficking in persons should be detested and rendered repugnant for everybody who has such an appetite. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Arumadri.

6.03
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Madam Speaker, last week when this Bill was on the Floor of Parliament, I sought guidance from the Speaker about human sacrifice. I wanted, in this Bill, the element of sacrifice to stand out clearly. Somebody can traffic human beings while knowing that they are going to be sacrificed. That is actually pre-meditated murder. I am praying that this matter comes out on its own so that the penalty is spelt out more clearly. It should be heavier than for those who are thus trafficking for other purposes.  

Currently in neighbouring Tanzania there is a high demand for albinos and those who will want to ship albinos to Tanzania knowing very well that they are going to be sacrificed should be mentioned, spelt out properly so that their penalties are so deterrent that they will not even venture into this business. Madam Speaker, I pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Nampijja, hon. Kamya and then hon. Wacha.

6.05
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Masiko and her team and even the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for this initiative.

This Bill has come in at the right time when many young men and women are being subjected to prostitution, child labour, child sacrifice, commercial sex and so forth. As we debate this Bill, I would like to get some clarification on the definition of a child. In our Constitution, under Article 34(5), a child is a person under the age of 16 years. But I think there is conflict between our Constitution and the Children’s Act. That inconsistency is likely to allow abuse and violation of children rights. We need to harmonise the two laws.

Secondly, I wonder why the committee did not put in a provision to target human sacrifice. Human sacrifice, you know very well, is an issue that is escalating today with many children being sacrificed; with many children being subjected to murder and their body parts being hacked off. Others have been beheaded and their body parts dumped, but government is keeping quiet. There is no law to target the ritual murderers. It is a pity, Madam Speaker. I would request that the committee considers this as an important issue.  

You know very well that trafficking in-persons is profitable business in Uganda. People do it to get money. But if we can consider a case where a person is being trafficked - how are we going to go about it? If a child is trafficked, for example, to Rwanda - because different countries have varying agencies for different purposes - how are we going to go about this? We already have an office under Police, which handles all cases of trafficking and human sacrifice. If we strengthen Police by facilitating them, recruit competent and well-trained staff; form a computerised system, we will be linking to other law enforcement departments like Interpol. I think this way we shall be able to address the problem of trafficking in persons.  

I would also suggest that since the Bill mentions - the minister would set up an office to deal with issues of trafficking in persons. I would also suggest that if this office is established, the people who will be in charge should be responsible of coming up with annual reports, which they will submit to Parliament for consideration. These reports should show the state of trafficking in persons in Uganda. They are supposed to be submitted to Parliament for scrutiny. Madam Speaker, that is all and I would like to thank those who initiated this Bill. Thank you very much.

6.05
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): Madam Speaker, I support the introduction of this Bill into our statutory books. I also wish to thank UWOPA, which conceived the idea of this Bill and I want to thank other people who may not be in this House. 

Specifically I want to thank Law Reform Commission of Uganda, which I know put together a group of drafters to draft and redraft this Bill to the position where it has now come before this House.  I think they did a good job, and I also want to ask the honourable Chairperson for UWOPA to please, pass our thanks to those people who drafted this Bill. 

While addressing our minds to the various clauses of this Bill, I do not want us to lose sight of the fundamentals which cause the problem of trafficking. I want us to direct our minds to the issue of poverty. 

Because of the high level of poverty within our society, parents can willingly part with their children without knowing what is going to happen to those children. Because our people are so poor, parents can be deceived that the child is going to be taken to school in Kampala, for example, and then in good faith they part with that child. The example that hon. Otengo talked about could have arisen because somebody who was abroad deceived some person here that he was going to give the children a better life than they were having.  

Recently, you heard in the press of a pastor in Gulu who was in the habit of collecting children and deceiving the parents that they were going to be brought to Kampala for education. However, for two, three, four years these children have never gone back to Gulu. This is because of poverty. It is important that government looks much more deeply into the causes of poverty in our society and try as much as possible to deal with it.

The other issue is the issue of dropping out of school; the issue of education. It is also tied to poverty. Children drop out of school and then as a shortcut; they find themselves doing odd jobs. And because they become frustrated in the households that they are doing the odd jobs in, they become open candidates for prostitution. This is a shame. We should try to find a way of getting our children some education which can make them self-sufficient even if they do not go for formal education. 

Government has been talking about this modern secondary technical education and creating two technical schools per sub-county. I think that should go a long way in ameliorating the problem of dropping out of school and the children going back to stay in the villages without any prospects of any better life.  

Then there is the issue of conflict in society like it happened for 20 years in Northern Uganda with the LRA and in Western Uganda with the ADF. Let us try as much as possible to settle our problems without ending up in armed conflict since that is the surest way of opening avenues for trafficking.

Also, somebody raised the issue of implementation of this Bill. I do not want us to imagine that we did not have any laws about this issue that could have protected us. I do not want us to leave this Chamber thinking that this is a panacea. We had a lot of laws. We had offences created under the Penal Code; we had provisions in the Immigration Act and we had provisions in the Children’s Statute. All those laws were there but they had their own shortcomings. For example, they were not dealing adequately with the central issue of exploitation of the trafficked; exploitation of the child; exploitation of the woman; exploitation of the man who has been trafficked. That was one of the shortcomings.

There is also the problem of adducing evidence. For example, in trafficking you tend to depend on the evidence of the victim because this is an offence which is carried out against an individual and you will not find too many people knowing about it. But there are certain offences which need corroboration and if you are going to depend on corroborative evidence, you are not going to get anybody under trafficking laws.

Then there is the element of jurisdiction. Most of our Penal Code offences only deal with offences which are committed within Uganda, except for example political offences like treason. However, a number of these trafficking offences, as you will come to find out as we deal with the Bill, deal with extra territory offences. So we thought it was necessary that we should have a Bill which will go across the border so that even if you commit this offence in Kenya, in the UK or in India, as long as you are a citizen of Uganda, or a resident of Uganda, wherever you are, whenever you come back, you can still be dealt with under this Act. 

So, Madam Speaker, I thought I should say those few things. The issue of human sacrifice will be handled as we come to the amendments. I thought that I should handle straight away the issue of the child under the Constitution vis-à-vis, the provision under the proposed Bill. What the honourable member was talking about, under Article 34(4) and (5) of the Constitution is actually self-explanatory. The child referred to under 34(4) is limited to 16 years because of the employment nature which is being created under Article 34(4). Let me read: “Children are entitled to be protected from social or economic exploitation and shall not be employed in or required to perform work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with their education or to be harmful to their health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development.”  

And then the child is defined under Article 34(5). “For purposes of clause 4 of this Article, children shall be persons under the age of 16 years.” That is limiting.  

The Constitution also defines a child under the interpretation section to mean a person under the age of 18. This is also provided for under this Bill. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.21
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the chairperson and the committee, and of course UWOPA, especially the former chairperson of UWOPA.

Like my colleagues, I also think that this Bill was needed yesterday and should have been passed yesterday because the most painful thing that a responsible adult can witness is a suffering and abused child. For that matter, I stand to support the motion.  

However, I have a few matters of concern that I wish to raise. One is the widespread concern about government capacity or will to enforce laws. We have a lot of laws in our books but they are not enforced and we just said that at the beginning of this session.

Madam Speaker, what are we going to do with the general failure of government to enforce laws, with the failure of Ugandans to respect laws as well as the abuse of laws through corruption and other methods? We sit here and make laws but enforcement becomes a problem. As a result, we have traffic problems, hospitals, prisons and police cells that are full and vehicles in dangerous mechanical condition on the roads. It is terrible. There is just no respect or enforcement of the law. As we consider this Bill, I think that at some point as a country we have to consider very seriously the question of law enforcement.

I have also noted another concern in this Bill, which is the lack of statistics. This makes us debate a very important Bill without knowing the extent of the problem. The methodology on page 1 says the committee held meetings with civil society organisations involved in human trafficking and they are so many eminent and international ones. They look very committed, including the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Uganda Women Parliamentarians Association and others. Don’t any of these organisations have statistics in Uganda and outside that they could have given us to get a feel of the extent of this matter? Research and sample studies conducted normally; opinion polls are conducted –(Interruption)

MR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank my colleague for giving way. It was an oversight and I think for purposes of the record we should clearly define what these civil society organisations are involved in. I think what the committee meant is that they held meetings with civil society organisations involved in the fight against child trafficking and not involved in child trafficking. This is for the sake of clarity in our records.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know for instance that information regarding the issue of children in Northern Uganda is in the public domain. Who doesn’t know that over 30,000 children have been trafficked from that part of the country alone? Isn’t that justification enough to make a law?

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a figure of 30,000 as you say. We all know that there are 30,000 children that have been missing because of the war but there are many other incidences. The war will end hopefully but this problem will not go away because children will still get abducted. There are many other reasons that we should know. War, I think, is one thing that we can understand easily but there are many other cases like children that are taken from the villages and towns. 

I think that these organisations would help by availing this information. War is one category but what about all the other categories? It would be a good thing to know that -(Interruption)

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the spirit in which hon. Kamya is raising this issue of statistics. However, I think that the committee has endeavored to show us the estimates. If you look at pages 2 and 3, they have tried to categorise the numbers and I feel that they have really tried their best to give us this data otherwise if anyone would like to go and get the specific totals, it may not be so easy because there are those who come and go without documentation. So the estimates I think should be appreciated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamya, supposing I asked how many children have been trafficked from Kooki where I know you come from into the city of Kampala in the last one year, would you be able to tell me? This is internal trafficking, forget about cross border.

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that a lot of work has been done but if I think that more can be done, there is no problem in raising the matter. I do appreciate the work but I could have done with more. That is all I am saying and I don’t think that there is anything wrong with that.

There are also problems of statistics in this country. We cannot depend on them. You can walk into any office and walk out with a document. You can walk into the registrar’s office and walk out with a marriage certificate, a death certificate, a passport - some people carry several passports. We need to know how to handle these things. There are adults who have so many children because they hold birth certificates. They get them from the villages and are taking them to London and so they get a birth certificate and make claims. What are we going to do about this forgery or lack of seriousness in documentation? I think that we need to know how to handle this. 

I would also like to have more information on adoption laws, whether we have such a law and how much of it is considered because like someone said, they go to the village, bring a child, get a birth certificate in their own names and claim that this is their child. I know it happens often but how do they get around the adoption laws if we have any?

Finally, I would also like to consider the question of poverty. Most of these children are lured and not really abducted or captured. They are lured to go with the perpetrators because of promises of greener pastures. The question like my colleague asked is: how are we going to handle the question of poverty? If someone sells or gives up their child and they are rescued, where are you going to take them if their mother or father is the one who asked them to be taken in the first place, or are we considering building rescue centres? If the parents are the ones that are selling them for a busuuti or for money, if you rescue a child under this law, where are you going to take the rescued child? There are many questions that need to be asked. 

But all in all, I wish to thank the committee and add, like my colleagues did, that we need to save these children for the future of this country. Thank you.

6.31
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to speak on behalf of the opposition in my capacity as the deputy chief whip not as –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, congratulations. I didn’t know that.

MS AKELLO: Thank you. Not as a member of the committee. Madam Speaker, I want to commend highly the great work done by hon. Masiko. All her efforts are being answered today. I am very glad that today we are debating this Bill. Thank you so much, hon. Masiko. We are going to live to remember you. 

Allow me to also thank the chairperson of the Committee on Defence for all the effort put into this. In addition, I would like to thank all the women Members of Parliament for all the effort that they have been putting across because I have been following the way they have been sitting in round table talks about this Bill and these efforts are being rewarded today. I want to thank you so much. Of course our male counterparts; thank you also so much for the support.

I want to say that this Bill is a very straightforward Bill for anyone who has been following the debate and as the Opposition; we have no problem with it. I am also glad that the shadow Minister in charge of Internal Affairs has wholly embraced it. He has reported to our office that there is no problem with the Bill and he fully supports it. 

Therefore, I want to call upon both sides of the House to display commitment. I don’t want to hear tomorrow that the Minister of Finance says that there is no money to put in place the necessary measures. I want to call upon government to be very vigilant in operationalising this Bill.

Because of the concerns that have been raised from other members, in case of any loopholes in the amendments and because I know that at an appropriate time the chairman will come with some amendments, I am not ruling out the fact that perhaps members of both the Opposition and government side may have some input. Otherwise, I want to thank you so much and also thank Madam Speaker for the support. Thank you.

6.34
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the initiators of this Bill and any person who has done anything to make sure that the Bill is on the Floor of Parliament today. I also want to thank all the Members that have debated before me and who have supported this Bill. I also want to support the motion. 

In modern times, one might think that slavery is non-existent. I want to inform you that slavery does exist but in a more organised form. I have two scenarios that I have witnessed, which I want to share with you. One is internal and in my home district. 

A number of children have been taken to different islands and made to work extraordinary hours. They are sexually abused, denied education and the people keeping them disguise themselves as adopters. Some of them say that they are relatives but these children are kept against their will. They are locked up on islands and in fishing villages where they cannot cross at will to come back and join their relatives. So, I think that this Bill is going to intervene in such situations and that is one reason why I support this Bill.

Another scenario that I have experienced is external. There are some organised agents in Uganda that take people to other countries. They are so organised that they even process visas for those people. They are seduced and promised good jobs but when they reach there, they are made to work long hours like on farms. They are also given conditions for example that they are supposed to work on those farms for about five years without looking for alternative employment. They are faced with stringent conditions like not being allowed to marry. In effect, they are denied conjugal rights as well as other rights.

I think that this Bill has come at a right time and I request all Members of Parliament to support it. However, I have a word of caution and it is that this Bill cannot work in isolation. Therefore, I want to request government to make sure that other related laws are implemented like the Child Act, the Labour laws and also policies that address poverty. This is because many of these people who are trafficked are just seduced by way of promises of money and good jobs. Madam Speaker, I support this motion and I thank you.

6.38
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, and also thank my colleagues who have put a lot of effort into ensure that this Bill is at this stage. I remember way back in 2006 when we had a workshop with people from the American Embassy to sensitise us about this Bill as women Members of Parliament; we have been looking forward to the time when it would come to the House.

I think that this law will be welcomed by the public because it has come at a time when the issue of human sacrifice is making headlines in the media. This law is therefore going to be very useful.

One other thing that I would like to bring out is that our government also needs to embrace its responsibilities. For example, in this country we have a lot of orphans and vulnerable children in the community. You find that this responsibility has been delegated to well-wishers and relatives. Our institutions do not provide for these children and I find that this is fertile ground for child trafficking because you find that many people in our communities are living at the mercy of others and yet these people also have rights. Government should address this issue so that we develop institutions that cater for orphans and vulnerable people.

For example, today we have been talking about issues of land and institutions. We have an institution like Kampiringisa that has never been expanded and it is not coming out to embrace problems of vulnerable people. Maybe in a way it would also assist us to avert the problem of trafficking of our people to other places.

I come from a border area and I would like to tell the House that this problem is real and we live with it. You find that in the communities, it is known that children have disappeared; people have vanished, in the name of going to offer help to certain other families; in the name of getting income for their own families; in the name of going to serve in brothels. So this problem is real. This law has actually come at the right time.

Another perspective that I would like us really to focus on is that we have grappled with the issue of our local leaders not having income. So you find that when some of these cases come up, they are easily silenced by some little pay; they will accept some gifts, they will even sign immigration documents, authenticating citizens, those who are trafficked in from other countries will easily be accepted and allowed to settle in and whatever follows, nobody really knows.

Looking also at the perspective of countries that receive children from our country, I am sure they also have a problem receiving a new and big population into their economies. So on both sides, that is on our side as receiving countries and those countries that get populations from our country, it is a problem that we need to address. For that matter, I would like to support the motion. It is long overdue and I would like to urge my colleagues that we support it to become law. I thank you very much.

6.43
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee and the mover. I thank everybody who has contributed to this motion. I just have a few concerns. I would like to say that unless - through the Ministry of Internal Affairs - we have national identify cards, this Bill will not really work. Because in most cases, if you cite defilement cases that have been failed because of parents conniving – because if a child is 15 and the mother says she is 18; there is no data.

I want to really urge the chairperson of the committee to take this issue very seriously. This morning we had a meeting with the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. He has actually told us that they have a road map for the national identity card. They have already presented it to Cabinet, it is only awaiting funding. For us as Members of the Public Accounts Committee, we urged the PS to put it in the coming financial year so that Parliament can really fund it. I want to assure Members that if we do not have national identity cards, with all the data, we shall be having very good laws but they will not work.

It is true there is poverty. However, government is trying to eradicate poverty. It might take years but if we have laws and we have institutions we can really get rid of child trafficking. So, I really want to emphasise the issue of national identity cards, to make sure that - we could even set a target as Parliament as we are passing this law. Because without national identity cards, whatever we are debating at the rate at which poverty is, even a child of 12 years will be upgraded to 18 because people have got something small.

Madam Speaker, last week on Tuesday I happened to be on a team which went to Ssese islands to inspect the palm plantations. I want to confess that on the ship we went with a team of about 20 to 30 children up to the island. These children were guided as animals. All of them had taken a minimum of three days without bathing, and even some of them were child mothers. As MPs, we wondered where these children were being taken. I just want to confirm -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You were moving from where to where?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: They boarded from Entebbe, Nakiwogo up to Kalangala and when they reached Kalangala I do not know where they actually proceeded to.

MR BADDA: Madam Speaker, it is good hon. Nsubuga is supporting the kind of witness I was giving you. You know, there are a number of children mainly from the districts of Kampala, Wakiso, Mukono and Masaka who are trafficked to Kalangala to isolated islands and they are mainly girls, who are taken to work in bars, restaurants and for sex trade. And the only portion, the only one that hon. Nsubuga saw on the ship is just a small population. Many of them are transported in boats, to very far off destinations in isolated islands. So the problem is grave.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get a clarification from hon. Nsubuga, because as a leader I once also participated in rescuing children who were taken from Pader and Kitgum. Could you clarify to us you leaders who were there, after knowing that these children were really being taken illegally, what step did you take? Really you already told us the problem and it was bad. What step did you take to make sure that you rescue these children?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, my colleague, for the clarification. If you have been attentive, the first weakness was they looked to be young; if we had laboured interrogating them, they would have been above 18. I was with the Minister of Agriculture and we were a full committee but we would have done nothing much because they had no identification and even communication – the language. Many of them were talking in Madi – a language from West Nile. The issue is we need to have identification because it would be telling the date of birth and the origin.

MR BADDA: As I told you, Madam Speaker, these business people are very well organised. When they are transporting these children, they have even documents from LCs and some even have letters –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I am disappointed in you, hon. Nsubuga and the Committee of Agriculture. You are now creating excuses why you did not intervene. How could you and the Minister of Agriculture travel for three hours with these children suspiciously and you did nothing? I am disappointed in you.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Allow me to continue because I was just giving an example of Kalangala but I also represent islands. Whenever I visit these islands, I find child labour. It is true. I have been talking to the traffickers themselves and we even have police posts on every island. How do you want me, Nsubuga, to go on arresting the employers – I cannot. There is Police. Even if you report –(Interruption)

MR DENNIS OBUA: Thank you honourable for giving way. The information I would like to give is that under our laws, I think apart from Police, I can cause an arrest if I suspect someone has committed a crime or is about to commit a crime. I have all the powers, not even as a Member of Parliament - even if I am not in this Parliament, I have the powers and authority to effect an arrest. And in this case, if they had a minister, all ministers have escorts who are Police. These people would have been arrested and this is the position of the law. Whether you are a civilian and not even a policeman or woman, you have powers to cause an arrest and you would have arrested these people.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Masiko and the committee for bringing up this report so that we can be in a position to access this kind of information. 

We are having a lot of problems particularly in regard to children who register for UPE and while so many start primary one, in many cases we find that the bulk of them cannot complete primary seven. Clearly these are some of the leakages in the system. The information we have received is information we should be able to take up and be able to act on particularly in regard to what is taking place on the islands because it appears there is something that we do not quite understand which is taking place that is worth following up. But it has also helped MPs who did not know that they also happen to have powers of arrest despite the fact that they may consider themselves not policemen and ordinary citizens in the country. I thank you and we shall be able to take up this matter.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Allow me to conclude. I want Members to bear with me because when I talk about islands - and it is good the minister has just raised it - many pupils of school going age are fishing. I have a small boat; how do you expect me to arrest the bourgeois, put them under my boat and you cruise for four hours? People are talking because they think you just go to the street down there - if Kampala can have street children even around here what about for us hard-to-reach areas?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, supposing hon. Masiko had not brought this Bill, when was this House going to hear about this matter?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, if you could check the Hansard, my cry has been a school for every island because some of the islands do not have schools.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are talking about islands; do not divert us into the schools. We are talking about trafficking which you accept has been going on.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, following the information hon. Nsubuga brought up that most of those children are from West Nile - this is a very appalling issue. As a responsible Member of Parliament, you would have taken action immediately. And I am glad that the Government Chief Whip has promised they are going to take action. I only pray you take the action as immediate as possible because this is very appalling. And the other bit of the story where you said some of them are holding letters from LCs yet you know that LCs I and II are not working; they are illegal. I want to call upon the government for immediate action. Thank you.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, let me conclude by saying that there is need. I agree that without this law, we would have addressed the issue of child labour but the question is why has child labour been persistent especially on the islands? It is because other law enforcing institutions are not doing their work. Buvuma is in Mukono - I do not think everybody would believe that the DPC and all law enforcers do not know what is going on in the islands – they know. Parents give away their girls at the age of 15 and they are aware of the law. But they have been frustrated because of lack of identity cards. When you go for registration, birth and death, whatever you tell them is what they insert.

So I just want to conclude by urging government to make sure that we have a national identity card, which can capture all: date of birth and also let us try to make sure that we eradicate poverty. With the persistent poverty, people will be disguising and doing all sorts of child trafficking. I thank you. 
   
6.59
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Budaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this time to say something. I also add my voice to my colleagues’ who have spoken before me to thank the presenter and the committee together with all those people who drafted this Bill.

Allow me start from where hon. Nsubuga ended. From what I heard from him, the argument he was putting up, it is about the attitude which we have. We must own the children in that every child you see should be taken as your own child. Anything which is done to that child must concern you as your own child would concern you because either it should have been reported immediately to the Police on the island or here in Parliament so that action is taken.

The other thing I would like to talk about are the push and pull factors; these children are given out by their parents willingly to come and work because they think that if they go in the urban areas it is better life.  And one day I argued with a very important person and the argument he was putting up was that because when they leave the villages and go to urban areas they get better accommodation; he has a mattress; he has been sleeping on a mat or a papyrus mat and now here he gets better meals; is well looked after - so that is the attitude we have. Unless we change and it is good that this law is now coming and I am sure we shall pass it. What disciplinary action shall we put there? Or what punishment should we give a parent who willingly, especially under UPE, gives away a child to go and work?

Another thing also which we have to look at are these early marriages because some of the parents we are talking about are children themselves. And that brings me to the enforcement of the laws we have. We have a law which says nobody should marry a person who is below the age of 18 and whoever is below 18 is a child and should not go into marriage. But then you find that most of the mothers especially on the side of the girls those who are 12, 15, 16; they are mothers. Sometimes you find a girl with a baby and you think that it is either a brother or a sister but when it is her child. 

So, I hope government will see that there is enforcement of this law because if there is no enforcement we shall make a law which shall be shelved. It shall be shelved and then once it is shelved, very few of us will know that there is even a law. 

That is why I am glad that the Front Bench has improved because we needed even the Minister of Finance to assure us that the law will be enforced. We must have programmes of sensitisation of the population, and how will that one be done? We need maybe drama groups to do the sensitisation in the rural areas. We need radio programmes to make sure that everybody knows; everybody understands that there is a law and if you are found to have broken that law, this is the punishment; at least something to deter somebody who is doing it.

Madam Speaker, I wanted to talk about parents’ denial of their responsibility, especially now with UPE where somebody does not mind; they call those children government children, others call them Museveni’s children. There those who go outside for commercial sex; as they are taken, there are some groups which may be here; they recruit them promising them better jobs abroad – in developed countries and when they arrive there, the first thing that they do is to take away their passports. They take away their passports and push them in a house where there is even a reception especially for the girls. So they go as if somebody who has gone into a bar and orders what they want to drink.  They end up without any way out since they do not have their passports on them and are in a foreign country. 

It is just like home here under these fenced houses; when you go in those fenced houses it is the same story. These are children who are taken and are not allowed to go back home. And the parents do not mind to say that they have taken two or three years without coming back so long as the person who took them gives a gomesi and some Shs 20,000 or Shs 30,000 to the parents and they comfortable. So these are the situations when we talk about trafficking in persons. What is really happening? 

And you know sometimes when it is commercial sex; they do it to them through the mouth - (Interjections)- you can imagine somebody being in such a situation. So I am glad that this law is going to be passed but I am also worried about enforcement. If the Minister of Education were here, they would also tell us what has happened to vocational training for those who drop out. At least to minimize the push and pull factors. If there are vocational trainings, some would do tailoring; some would go in craft making; some would go in tie and dye at least if they are involved in an activity they would spend most of their time. 

I would like to end by saying when they fail to work with these children; they throw them on the streets. There are some children who we took back home from my very sub-county and another sub-county next to mine. These were children - the first one was a child between six and seven years of age. When she failed to work for the person who had brought her to Kampala, she was given Shs 1,000 and told to go back home. This child moved, and when she got to Jinja Road, she tried to buy some groundnuts, but she failed to communicate to the seller. This attracted the attention of the policeman who later established that the child spoke Lugwere. While my husband was in his office at the ministry of gender, he just saw some people enter his office with this child having picked her from the street. We had to take that child back to her home. 

There were other two, a girl and a boy; they were also picked from the street because they had failed to speak Luganda. The person who picked them took them to Simba Radio from where some employee took them to Kiira Road police station where we picked them to have them taken back to their homes. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me contribute to this report as we enact this law. I pray that we pass this law without any - except some amendments.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, Members, the motion has received overwhelming support from both sides of the House. I think I will ask the chairperson to give some concluding remarks.

7.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank honourable colleagues for their sincere support to us towards passing this Bill into law.

However, allow me highlight a few issues. I think ever since we started debating this Bill and scrutinising it as a committee after the mover presented it in Parliament, there has been a lot of publicity so far, as far as child sacrifice is concerned. The mass media for example, have done quite a commendable job in bringing out the real issues regarding child and human sacrifice. Even the Ministry of Internal Affairs, through the Police Department, has tried its best in handling this issue. 

As I talk there is already a unit in the police handling human trafficking and sacrifice. I think this law is going reinforce and put in place further enabling mechanisms to ensure the enforcement part, which I think all of us are still cautious about – we urge Government to make sure adequate resources are provided and the necessary action plan – actually we intend to make further amendments to put in place an inter-ministerial committee that will ensure that an operational work plan is put in place immediately this Bill is passed into an Act of Parliament. This will help in massive public sensitisation against the vice and the phenomenon. 

Eventually we should put in place mechanisms to trace children right from their villages, to district and national levels so that we are able to prevent trafficking in persons. It is very unfortunate; it has been happening as Members have given test cases; it is real; it is happening beneath us, within us, amidst and even some of us are using children within our homes as house girls and boys. It is time for us to be aware; to fight it and bring about a lasting solution to this problem.

I would like to thank the mover of this motion and everybody who contributed to it. We need to work towards improving the welfare of our people. The biggest challenge is the poverty, which I think Government is trying to tackle; we shall continuously urge it to work towards eliminating poverty amongst our people to enable them live in better conditions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2009 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we need to give time to the committee and the mover to incorporate new amendments – the Opposition said they have some amendments that they would like to move. So, we shall go to the committee tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.13 p.m., and adjourned until Thursday, 2 April 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)


