Wednesday, 9 April 2008

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. Today in the gallery we have the leadership of Kamuli District led by the chairperson, Stephen Mubiru, the speaker and all the leaders from Kamuli. You are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

Hon. Members, there are some arrangements for tomorrow. The Minister of Health has organised a briefing for us tomorrow in the Members’ Lounge on cervical cancer prevention. This will be in the morning and you are encouraged to attend this briefing from 9.00 a.m. to 10.00 a.m.  

There is need to adjust the Order Paper because as you may recall yesterday, I indicated that the Minister of Education would be making a statement on Kyambogo University but this was not indicated on the Order Paper. So, let us adjust to give space to the minister to make a statement. Also yesterday, the Shadow Minister for Energy and Member for Jinja Municipality had raised a matter on the source of the Nile. The Executive had indicated that they would make a statement today. I do not know whether they are ready with their statement. Otherwise, we are accommodating you to make that statement. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I brought the copies and they are going to be distributed.  

Mr Speaker, the immediate causes of the closure of Kyambogo University was as follows: Kyambogo University was closed on the 8 March 2008 to save life and property as a result of violent strikes and demonstrations by the students and staff for over one week. There was confrontation between the Police, the students and the staff. Two cars were burnt to ashes and Police vehicles were damaged. There was growing tension on campus and programmes came to a standstill. 

The academic staff was protesting a slash in their salaries following instructions from the Auditor General that salaries should be paid based on establishments, posts, qualifications, duties and responsibilities as provided in the Public Service and Public University Orders. Treasury, that is Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, also wrote giving similar guidance on the issue.

With the staff on strike, there was no teaching and the students were idle and redundant. The staff was busy holding meetings to strengthen their strategies for the strike. Some staff supported the strike while others opposed. There was chaos at the university and nobody was sure what would happen next.  

For safety and security, Police were deployed on a full time basis for over one week. Students and some employees did not turn up for their respective duties and the attendance declined. Due to redundancy and in support of the striking staff, students decided to conduct demonstrations where neighbouring communities in Banda were affected and two cars were burnt. Those who did not support the strike suffered intimidation. Several meetings were held to address the issues by the council but the staff did not respond. Council committee was put in place to draft a staff structure and salary scales but the staff put down their tools even before the committee did its work. Efforts by council to persuade the staff to resume work while issues were being addressed did not yield positive results. The strike continued.  

Mr Speaker, the council committee has now completed the report to guide the forward process and the council is to meet to discuss this report.  

Since the academic staff hold varying qualifications, there is need to validate their qualifications and fit them into the university staff structure and salary scales as provided in the law and in the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act. The search committee has made several adverts to solicit for applications for a vice chancellor and the process is continuing.

Mr Speaker, academic staff vacancies, including posts of professors, have to be filled. Recruitment could not be done due to a case in court where an injunction was put on staff recruitment in 2006. However, the injunction was removed recently and the case settled out of court. That means that the recruitment can now be conducted.  

Last year in 2007, Cabinet put in place a committee chaired by hon. Kamuntu. Recommendations were made focusing on the need for strengthening administration, validating academic staff, improving and funding of the university, improving the academic programmes and students’ welfare and drafting a master plan and strategic university plans covering short, medium and long terms. Council has since embarked on implementation of the recommendations.

The White Paper has been drafted for discussion by Cabinet and the Social Service Committee where some of the recommendations will apply to Kyambogo University management and academic programmes. This will be harmonised with other recommendations on Kyambogo University to stabilise the institution.

Mr Speaker, the way forward includes the appointment of a substantive vice chancellor. As I have said, advertisements have been placed and we have in place a search committee for the university chancellor and deputy vice chancellor because we only have one deputy vice chancellor at present.  We should have at least two deputy vice chancellors.

We must also approve a staff structure and salary scales for the staff at Kyambogo University as well as validate all the academic and support staff and give them appointment letters according to the staff establishment, qualifications, salary scale, duties and responsibility. Mr Speaker, this is very crucial because when the three institutions were merged, they were merged with different scales; some were under Public Service, some were under governing councils while others were under the Ministry of Education. When they took the ministry to court, the ruling was that all the staff must be paid and they should not be paid less than what they were getting in their former institutions. 

Therefore, we have now the opportunity to rectify this and appoint people according to their qualifications and according to their experience. We shall also try to fill as many vacant posts as possible to strengthen the academic staff and the general management of Kyambogo University. 

Furthermore, we have already made financial estimates for the financial year 2008/09 as well as the MTBF focusing on arrears and deficits. The financial base needs to be strengthened and we are already discussing this with the Minister of Finance. We shall also review the students’ enrolment and welfare with a view to improving them. 

We shall also implement a master plan for the development of the university. Furthermore, we shall strengthen the university council/ senate and draw a work plan/road map for the reopening of the university in the near future. Fortunately, the old council is expiring on the 25th of this month so we have the opportunity to strengthen it. 

The ministry has already appointed three prominent academicians and one prominent administrator to be on the university council because the government is only entitled to three positions. We have already directed the relevant body to get all the interested bodies to send in their representatives so that come 26th of this month, once the other council has expired on 25th, there must not be a vacuum. We shall have a council in place by 26th of this month and draw a work plan or road map for the reopening of the university in the immediate future.

I appeal to all stakeholders that they should remain calm to allow government time to address the issues of the academic staff and students of Kyambogo University so that the university can be reopened as soon as possible. Strikes and demonstrations lead to loss of time and they are diversionary. 

The academic programme will be covered through reviewed semester planning to make up for lost time and this is where we have problems especially with students who pay. We must make sure that there isn’t too much loss. We may have to do like we did in Makerere and increase the number of lectures so that they are covered and so that we reduce or limit the excesses due to the payment of fees by private students. Even government does not want to pay and not get the value out of the money. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: For God and my country? (Laughter) I thought it was part of the statement.

2.50
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the honourable minister for this statement and for asking all stakeholders to remain calm. As a former university student leader in Mbarara University and as a former leader for students at national level, we had an association called Uganda National Students’ Association and I remember that when the honourable Prime Minister was still Minister of Education, he was always very receptive to the leaders of this association, I inclusive. In a week, he had dedicated a day for the student leaders. By then that association was very vibrant. 

I am bringing this point to show the minister that apart from telling us that strikes and demonstrations lead to loss of time and are diversionary, he needs to prescribe a procedure of how to deal with them. Students need to be engaged, their issues need to be listened to and democracy must prevail. 

It is unfortunate that over the years, this association has been weakened and it is almost non existent. I would like to know from the minister what plans they have to revive this association that provides interaction, discussion and peaceful resolution of conflicts with students from the whole country like we used to have during those days. We never had such exchanges. Even if strikes are to be there, they can be peaceful strikes and demonstrations. Don’t you think that this - I can call it deliberate because I have not heard of any policy targeting the revival of these associations. For example, it used to have deliberate deductions from school fees - was it Shs 500 from every student in every school but this is no more. 

Other activities of the association have since been crippled and I wonder whether they still have an office in the ministry? In my view, the stifling of these platforms is responsible for these violent strikes and I think that the ministry ought to know that engaging and discussing should not be reserved for those at higher levels but even with students through their elected leaders. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.53
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the minister for the statement. I thought that the gist of the statement was to have the way forward and to guide us and the country at large as to when and what steps are being made to expedite the reopening of the university. I can see that there are steps being made but there are three measures that are at play right now. We have the council meeting’s report on page 3; we have the Kamuntu committee report and we have the White Paper, which will be debated by Cabinet together with the Committee on Social Services. 

This is taking us round the problems of the university. May we be informed by the minister as to what time frame he has in mind, with all these reports, to come up with conclusions regarding Kyambogo University? When does he anticipate the White Paper to be out of Cabinet? When shall there be the interfacing between the committee and the ministry? When shall the Kamuntu report be implemented? I know there are various aspects concerned but the gist of this is your statement on page 1 –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am giving information. The students of Kyambogo University petitioned Parliament and that was when we were on the short recess. Just today, we have been interfacing with Kyambogo University Council, the administration and the Ministry of Education and Sports and tomorrow we have another meeting. We are of the view that they should have measures that will enable the opening of the university in the near future. We have just been meeting with the Ministry of Education, although the minister was attending another committee. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, the chairman of the committee, for the information but how near is near? Is it tomorrow, next week, next financial year because there are already efforts to come up with a budget for 2008/09! Could we really get it from government when the university will possibly be opened, because the petition of the students is to the effect that they are being sent home, they are unsure of their tenure at the university? We can see many items on the board like recruitment, but should the university wait for the streamlining before it can be reopened or it can be done on an ad hoc basis? And I really would like to put it to –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. I just want to provide additional information in addition to what my chairman of the social services committee has just told us that this morning we had a meeting with the Ministry of Education, the council, management and the students, but the striking lecturers were not represented. So, we had the issues and we have again organised a meeting tomorrow and this time we shall have KYUASA, the academic association representatives and we hope when we meet with them we should be able to agree on the timeframe, because there are immediate issues which should be addressed; the midterm and long-term. So, hopefully after this engagement with the parliamentary committee, we should be able to forge a way forward and all of us are working towards the immediate opening of the university.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I salute the efforts of the committee. But as you may see, there are other various stakeholders in the university’s running. Probably we needed to know, for instance, at what stage the White Paper has reached. But that not withstanding, the reason I am standing up is that Kyambogo University has both Ugandan students, foreign students from other countries, parents who have paid their money for these university students to be at school and they are all at pains. How shall we receive redress for those people who stay without studying is escalating the cost of the university students? Can the minister tell us, for instance, that there are no staff, that the issues that were leading to the strike are not touched, so that we can put this matter to rest? Can we be given the specific time that we are working within a specified period of time? 

We may not have the date, Mr Speaker, but we can put our people to rest that within this period of time, we are coming up. But to say that they are working on this - I know, for instance, that the post of vice-chancellor was advertised. It received no responses and it was re-advertised. The process seems to be endless and apparently this applies to even other areas of concern. So, can we be put on board so that people who are concerned can be put to rest, and they can know that within this period of time or in the next financial year, all the demands, all the issues at hand will be handled so that the university can reopen? The reopening of the university is the issue and we need strong and concrete measures in place to ensure that we move towards that direction. I thank you.

3.00 
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was waiting for them to tell me whether the light has changed red. (Laughter) You know, these microphones are not friendly to me, a blind person. 

I would like to thank the minister for the report. As an ex-student of Kyambogo University, I feel that it has taken too long to solve the problem of the staff of Kyambogo University. These problems started right from the time when the three institutions were merged into a university. The staff had been striking again and again and I think if the minister was serious, by now he would have solved this problem. 

You can see it yourself; it has gone to the extent of students striking because they have paid their tuition fee expensively. They are losing time and definitely, they are not going to benefit this semester and that is why they have become wild. I strongly feel that Kyambogo University is a marginalised university, because for issues to do with Kyambogo University, you do not care; you do not take actions very first. Why have you made it a university? It should enjoy the same privileges like Makerere University, like Gulu University, like Mbarara University -(Interruption) 

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, it is difficult for me at the front bench to listen to hon. Baba Diri say that it was wrong for the Minister of Education to have taken an action on 8th March and today is 9th April; that actually, she wanted the minister to be squeezed – to squeeze water from a rock and act contrary or allow the university to go on when there was chaos. Is she in order to suggest that the minister should have taken no action at all so that the university should have been left running when actually there was a lot of work to be done and there is still a lot of work to be done? Is she really in order to push for this line of argument? 

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, a different assessment of a situation cannot warrant a point of order because that is a personal assessment. (Applause)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to inform the minister that I was studying in Kyambogo University from 2003 to 2006 and these problems were there and they have never been solved. They did not start only in March. That is the information I would like to provide to the minister. 

This issue of saying that the university will be opened as soon as possible in the short-run, we are in a crisis now. The students are at home, you are still talking about as soon as possible. Can you come up with a programme to tell us exactly when the university is starting? Are you going to pay back the tuition fee for the students? So, I would like really action to be taken as soon as possible to normalise the university. 

I am very aware that the staff of Kyambogo University is a very committed staff. They never miss lectures and they are devoted. But now they are being discouraged because of lack of cooperation from the side of the minister and government. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Please, permit me to interrupt. On this side there are two ladies. They are Sisters of Bannabikira members, Daughters of Mary. They are due to celebrate 100 years of their existence and they work in three countries of East Africa: they are in Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania with a membership of over 660 sisters. You are welcome to Parliament! (Applause) 

3.05
PROF. WILLY ANAKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for presenting this statement, and I would like to address myself to fundamental issues concerning Kyambogo University.

Kyambogo University came into being as a result of uniting three different institutions: UPK, ITEK and UNISE. And I think the Ministry of Education and Sports knew at that time that these three institutions are different from a university, and I think at that time the Ministry of Education and Sports should have actually sat down and worked out a proper university instrument for establishing Kyambogo University, without just amalgamating the three institutions. 

I want to say this because of the statement regarding validation and recruitment of staff. What are you validating? A university has been there for five years and you are validating the staff? Are you validating their academic qualifications, their status or their salaries? And you are talking of recruitment! I thought recruitment should have been done when the university was established. Salary structures should have been put in place when the university was established. 

Mr Speaker, I think unless the Ministry of Education and Sports addresses the fundamental issues concerning the establishment of Kyambogo University, these problems will continue. The council in place is trying its best maybe to streamline what should have been done five years ago. 

Lastly, I would like to sympathise with the students, with the parents of the students for the time being wasted because of the fundamental oversight of the Ministry of Education when the university was established. You cannot put the three institutions together and consider that you are establishing a university on the basis of that without first of all laying a foundation for the university, and I would like to say that unless the Ministry of Education and Sports comes in and establishes that fundamental base for Kyambogo University, things will continue to be the same, unresolved. Thank you very much. 

3.09
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. I would like to say from the outset that it is true all ministries have got their own challenges, but it looks like the Ministry of Education is being managed under crisis. Today it is Kyambogo, tomorrow it will be Makerere University, the other day it will be Nakawa Business School. You see, all this is because there is a problem within the ministry. 

I will take it up from Prof. Anokbonggo. When you look at the recommendations made by the Kamuntu committee, it is talking of drafting a master plan and a strategic university plan covering short, medium and long-term. My interpretation of this is that this university does not have any strategic plan as of now. How do you establish a university without a strategic plan even in the short-term? I can’t understand it. 

I think they established this university without proper assessment and the problems are emanating from the establishment of this university without planning. When the administration is weak, the staff are there illegally so they must be validated. There is need to improve funding of the university, including academic programmes. Really, everything in this university is wrong. Whatever could go wrong went wrong with this university and it is not only that. When you see what is happening in Nakawa today - a business school wakes up one morning and says it is a university; it sues its parent university and they are busy fighting over that. There are courses being offered today in Nakawa without the approval of Makerere University and students have been there; for example, the executive MBA course, students have been there for a year. They have paid fees, they have wasted time but the course has not yet been approved. 

Mr Minister, I think you need to go back to the drawing board and address the issues of public universities because there are strikes everywhere. Tomorrow there will be a strike in Makerere by the students, the other day by lecturers, so will it be in Kyambogo and Nakawa. For how long shall the education sector continue like this? It looks like we expanded too much without planning. We have got so many students; the programmes have not been approved or even well thought out and we are in a crisis. And once you have a crisis in the education sector, it will affect the products being put on the market. You will find half-baked engineers, lawyers, and teachers and eventually, it will have an effect on the economy. So, honourable minister, the earlier you address this issue, the better for your sector and for the whole economy. 

But looking at the recommendations really, we do not have a university in Kyambogo because everything is wrong. You need to go -[Mr Bakkabulindi: “Information”.] Yes, I will take it.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable member for giving way. As the Chairman of the Social Services Committee has stated, since morning for almost three hours, my ministry, the council, and the guild representative of Kyambogo have been facing the committee. Most of these issues that you are raising are the issues we started with today, and we are meeting again tomorrow. 

We are looking at how possible and how soon we can re-open that university. We looked at so many factors; for instance, it is not a matter of saying that you take the key and open the university, neither is it a matter of announcing that students come back, when the lecturers’ morale or when the lecturers’ presence is not going to be effected. 

We even looked at this Act, which was passed by Parliament, the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2003 and we also saw where the problem was. We looked at the court judgement whereby the lecturers won the case, and we also looked at where the problem was so we say now: what is the way forward? The committee has invited the striking lecturers so that we can now forge a way forward and see how we can address it. So, I would request the honourable members that if the committee had not started this work, maybe it would be prudent to listen to a lot of points that are going to be forwarded.  

Now that the committee has started its work and I am sure at the end of this statement what the Speaker would have done is to send it to the committee.  But, now that the committee has already started why do we not save time and we handle it accordingly? I thank you.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, my colleague. I would like to give you two pieces of information. The first one is, when you follow the minister’s statement there is cause for regret even an apology to parents; I am a parent there is no apology from government. 

Secondly, when we are told to remain calm we do not know how long this means but what is obvious is that the government is very keen at responding to emotions. They are now responding to emotions and not successfully. As we said from Kyambogo to Makerere, to Mbarara University when we finish up all these institutions then we go back to markets, to Nakasero, to Kiseka. But, the next very serious pending strike is about the prices of commodities. The consumers are about to walk on the streets again.  So, are you serious about this kind of strikes when will we put the last nail on the strikes in this country?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Well, I think hon. Gutomoi has made his point –(Laughter)  But, I would like to respond to what the minister has said, you see, Parliament cannot manage this university - it is your duty as a ministry. What Parliament is trying to do is your job and it has got interested in the matter because somehow there is a problem there, which the ministry has failed to sort out that is why they petition this House. We are saying, if you had done your job in the ministry maybe that petition would not have come up in the first place. It is a blessing in disguise that it has exposed you that really you are not doing your job.  When you look at the recommendations of the Kamuntu Committee it clearly shows you the problem in the sector.  

For us we are interested in universities as centres of higher learning producing excellent products.  You cannot produce those sort of products with this sort of problems, how will the Social Service Committee, for example, programme or improve the academic programmes of the university? So, this is supposed to be your job and you are not doing it.  

Anyway, lastly -

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I think that as Prof. Anokbonggo said, was the main problem combining schools of different categories into one university? A school which is awarding grade III teachers, it has senior lecturers; a school awarding diplomas has senior lecturers and a university has senior lecturers. Now when you combine these three categories don’t you see it is a problem? Who caused this problem? Is it us as Parliament when we passed the law? Is it easy to solve? Isn’t it therefore necessary to validate - because I was a senior lecturer in a school awarding certificates. I think these are some of the problems really because the strike arose because of difference of salary and you have to solve that. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, for the guidance. Mr Speaker, ordinarily there is one issue that sparks off a strike but there are other latent issues and once a strike breaks out, like it did, all these issues come up and exactly this is what has happened. Whereas at that time it was the issue about staff and validation, we are now seeing that even the university administration is weak. We are now seeing that even the academic programmes need improvement; we are also seeing now that they do not have even a short term strategy of master plan. So, they must go back to the drawing board.  

All in all, the point I am trying to put forward or to labour is for the ministry really to go back and look at the whole sector tertiary institutions. We do not need a crisis between Makerere and Nakawa anymore, we do not need a strike in Kyambogo anymore neither do we need a MUASA strike anymore in Makerere because it is affecting the quality of students we are producing as a country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.20
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In my understanding every one of us here wants the university to operate. Is there anybody who says the university should not operate? There is nobody. 

No. 2, if you look at the components of the university the people there, every sector has a complaint; the student had a complaint, they went on strike; the staff had a complaint and even the administration, because the administration is not complete. So the complaints of the students, of the staff, of the administration where is it directed too; to the government? In my understanding, the problem of Kyambogo University can be solved only and only if government takes the effort to put more efforts first of all by taking the whole staff and administration to sort their problem, and validation to continue as the university runs under the care of a special committee of administration set up maybe by this House. This means we cannot do it without spending more money; sometimes when solving a problem you are likely to spend more than what you would have spend if you budgeted properly under normal circumstances.

These circumstances are not normal; they call for more funds, they call for a committee that must help the students to run the university in the meantime as the validation takes place.  Even if the lecturers who are to be hired on “pay as you work” basis are from the striking ones they should be paid for the work they do in the meantime as the validation takes place.  

We need the validation exercise to be done so that we know who is who and who deserves what.  But, we cannot also say as we do the validation exercise the university should not run. Now the question is, who should run the university as the validation exercise goes on;  if we do not want to put another special committee – special funds.  

Otherwise, I thank all of you who have paid interest in the university but we need a special committee and a special fund to start the university to run as you continue the other process of investigations. I thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: But we have exhausted it. Although it is an important subject, I appreciate.

3.24
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. First of all I would like to say that the issue of Kyambogo University is of national concern and I want to declare my interests that as a parent, the problem, which I have identified, and I am sure the hon. Minister of State for Higher Education is aware of, is that of management. There has been a problem of management at this university for quite sometime.

Secondly, there has been a problem of staffing, as one of the Members, has said. If you look at page 2 of the minister’s statement and compare it with the Kamuntu Committee report, you realise that these problems really have been there almost since the inception of this university. I remember while I was still a lecturer at Makerere University, we had a meeting with all lecturers from public universities and realised, as hon. Katuntu said, that these problems cut across almost all public universities.

Anyway, whereas I appreciate the efforts by the ministry to try to solve these problems, I would like to urge the minister to speed up the process. I am saying this because we have been with these problems for quite some time now. So through you, Mr Speaker, I am requesting this House to pronounce itself with a resolution that compels the minister to re-open the university as soon as possible. As other activities get carried on, in the meant time, the university should be re-opened –(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: In the minister’s report it is indicated that the university shall be re-opened as soon as possible. I do not think it is prudent for this House to pronounce itself on an undefined period and say, “as soon as possible”. What is “as soon as possible”? (Laughter)

MR KALIBA: I do not know whether that was information or a question. But what I was trying to propose is that we should have, if possible, the minister give us the timeframe because parents and the students out there are concerned and are eagerly waiting for what will happen next. In fact my son who is a finalist was asking, “Daddy, what are you doing? How can a university be closed for such a long time? When Makerere University is closed, the President calls a meeting and problems are solved. What is happening to Kyambogo University?” The matter is as serious as that. I would like to request the honourable minister to give us the timeframe as to when this university is likely to re-open to give hope to both the parents and students of Kyambogo University. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.29
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the minister for the paper; it was overdue.

Kyambogo University is the hub for teacher training institutions. At the time it was closed students from teacher’s training colleges were registering for their exams. So, many colleges have suffered because they could not have their students register when the university was closed. I would like to request the Ministry of Education to start acting properly; to take on an activity only when they are ready for it. 

I recall that the merger of these institutions was done about two or more years ago. I wonder why, up to this time, the salary structure has never been thought of. Before merging these institutions, the ministry should have done its work to look at the staff who were going to be deployed. This was important because these people were at different levels and so could not earn the same amount of money. How come these people are going on strike because of salaries? What has the Ministry of Education been doing?

Mr Speaker, I want to request the Minister of Education to look at all these universities and plan for their funding. Why do you tell us that you want to improve the funding of Kyambogo University now? Honestly, don’t we know that these people are doing a lot of work for the government and the country at large? Why can’t we plan? Each year we do a budget, where do we put these institutions? We need not look at them individually as if they are just beginning today.

I also want to say that it is not only students who are suffering back in their villages. I am saying this because I remember I called on a home where five students go to Kyambogo University and they said: “MP, what are doing?” Then I said, “Am I the Minister of Education?” But of course I knew that I am part of the government. Later on I just told them that we were considering those things. I want to request that the Minister of Education does its work properly and in time so that students do not go on losing here and there after paying their tuition. I thank you.

3.32
MR HUSEIN GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of strikes in this country is indeed alarming. I want to know from the minister the measures that government is putting in place to avert more strikes. I am asking this because as I talk now there is a looming strike at Makerere University by lecturers over the decision of government that lecturers’ salaries be decreased. Lecturers have held meetings secretly to the effect that they may not set the end of semester exams in the forthcoming exam period.

The issue of these strikes affects, as my colleague hon. Katuntu said, products in the market and that is why many employers are not comfortable with most of the graduates at this time; they ask for verifications. Mr Speaker, I think that time has come for us to stand on our feet and face reality. Since time immemorial in this government, there have been many issues that have gone untouched.  You find that someone heading a ministry does not have the necessary qualifications to head that ministry. You find a doctor heading the Ministry of Defense. He does not even know what they call in military terms, “48 hours”.  

Mr Speaker, in this country we have a problem of presidential advisors. You find a presidential advisor on Moslem affairs who does not even know how to research the Koran. You may find that a presidential advisor is appointed on the basis of losing an election and is, therefore, being consoled. At the end of the day, we are losing as a country. That is why instead of our presidential advisors advising the President, they end up being advised by the President. So when we have problems like strikes today - as you know Kyambogo University came about as a result of a merger of three different institutions - if this is the rate at which our people have been advising the President, and the policy makers are now working, we are headed for doom.

I want to go on record for asking this Parliament to seek for the resignation of all the ministers in the Education Ministry. Mr Speaker, the Minister of Education must resign as a matter of fact because the way things are, tomorrow Makerere might be closed or MUBS might be closed and we shall only be left with the private universities. Thank you.

3.35
MR MUHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no strike in any single university that suddenly comes up. All the strikes we have had in all sectors, come up when the administration gave some feelers that there is a looming strike. A day is going to come tomorrow or the other day when the strike is finally staged in Makerere. But now it is underway. The ministry is seemingly adamant in refusing to address these problems.  

The strike in Kyambogo University did not occur overnight. Of course we appreciate the observation by the Office of the IGG that the lecturers were not appropriately paid, but we have not also considered many other aspects, like the cost of living in this country, that are compelling these lecturers, not only in Kyambogo but elsewhere, to stage strikes time and again. I want to put these questions to the minister:

It is unfortunate that the time that the Kamuntu Committee of 2007 was conducted was not put in here. We have the year but supposing the committee made its recommendations in the middle of the year or earlier and since then, what has the ministry done to improve the administration? Because this could be one of the weaknesses! That is, the administration seems to be oblivious of the looming problems; the strikes in the university. There is no strategic plan whatsoever, medium, short-term or even long-term plan, to run the university. If this government can bail out individuals like Basajjabalaba, how about the university? Recently, I would say we unjustifiably bailed out Phenix Logistics with billions of shillings. How about this university that affects the running of this economy? 

What does the ministry have as an immediate strategy? Hon. Fungaroo made a recommendation here, which probably some of you laughed at. It is possible for the ministry to have action plans.  We managed to give Phenix Shs 5 billion. What if we have the money and we are saying that, “This is the structure as established in the University Act and we are going to recruit administration and staff”, and this Parliament passes that money? If we can bail out individual companies, how about the institutions of this country?  

So, I just want to say that there are many things that are being done in the Ministry of Education and I just want to end by giving an example. In Entebbe Municipality we had a Teachers’ Training College that was later transformed into a comprehensive secondary school, which sits on nine acres of land. Last week the Permanent Secretary wrote to the minister, allocating 10 acres to the Zambian University; the land that is not even sufficient for the school. The school is sitting on nine acres and the ministry is allocating ten.  These are the problems we are talking about. These problems are known to us, but as we observed in the Kamuntu Committee report of 2007, the weak administration gives a deaf ear and does not take action. Thank you.

3.40
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A very famous professor said that those who talk about the universities should fulfill two conditions, namely, that they must love them well and they must understand them well.

Hon. Members, we have been urging the Minister of Education to ensure that the University of Kyambogo is open in a given timeframe. But first of all you must understand that he does not have that power. The minister does not have that power! Unless you change the rules of the game; it is the council. 

The second point I would like to make is that unless the problems are properly sorted out, what would be the point of opening a university and the academic staff reject the terms given to them? The minister has told you that there was loss of property and that the neighbours also suffered. In fact, we nearly had loss of life because the students were redundant, and in my view, also indisciplined.

There was a visitation committee by Prof. McGregor. He visited public universities as well as some private ones and dealt with issues of quality, the relevance of the subjects taught and the autonomy of the university. Sometimes university councils have increased charges and there have been strikes. Sometimes also the government has said, “Please, do not increase,” but we do not have the power. At the same time, the government has not been able to give the universities the money they deserve and yet the academic staff who get a first degree, a second degree and a doctorate and who must also publish, require higher remuneration than what you are giving them.

Hon. Members -(Interruption)

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you, Prime Minister, for giving way. One of the reasons that are given for the strike in Kyambogo, if you read this report on page 1, is that the academic staff were protesting against a slash in their salaries. A slash! So, if we were really concerned and we knew, as the Rt Hon. Speaker said - this is where they merged three different institutions, can’t the government, as previous speakers have said, tolerate this instead of slashing? We are following the recommendation of the Auditor-General and the Ministry of Finance guidance. If we know we have created a problem and we are continuing to slash - because the cause of the problem is slashing - there could be administrative problems, as the Kamuntu report gives recommendations, but can’t the government really take time because we know where the problem started from? Can’t we do it in phases other than all of a sudden putting a slump on the people’s salaries? Thank you very much.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whenever we have Bills on the Floor of this Parliament, they are usually followed and accompanied by the Certificates of Financial Implications as per the Budget Act. Does the Rt Hon. Prime Minister wish to inform this House that the Certificate of Financial Implications that accompanied the passing of the University and Tertiary Institutions Act in reference to Kyambogo was misrepresented? If not so, by the time we created the Kyambogo University, we must have looked at all the financial implications. Is it merely showing that there is a financial implications’ certificate without putting this money in the budget to cater for such? I thank you. 

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for his presentation, although I am certainly disappointed that after one month of closure, the ministers give us - if I had set the font size to 12, this information would be half a page moreover of information which I could have picked up from the newspapers. There is nothing that shows insight from the ministry. 

But the information I want to give is that adding to what my colleague has given that the problem of the lecturers is slashing their salaries and slashing of salaries will be resisted, you should have anticipated that. Slashing of salaries is always resisted everywhere and that is why in many organisations, they have something they call person-to-holder. You can restructure but keep things person-to-holder for when certain people leave office. 

And finally, Mr Speaker, I do not see a plan to engage the lecturers in their issues of protesting the slashing of their salaries. I see a plan to approve a new structure. What if they do not accept the new structure? Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is the information I wanted to give.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all I do not think that it is proper to reduce anybody’s salaries. In fact, the Attorney-General is not here but my recollection is that according to Article 158 of the Constitution, you cannot do it. Let me see what it says. It says, “Where any salary or allowance of the holder of any office is charged on the Consolidated Fund, it shall not be altered to his or her disadvantage, after he or she has been appointed to that office.” You see what I mean?

THE SPEAKER: I thought, Prime Minister, that that is dealing with any payment, which is directly charged on the Consolidated Fund.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Ok. That is why I said I wanted to be guided by the Attorney-General but our Speaker is extremely knowledgeable -(Laughter). Still if you follow the spirit of Article 158, you realise that if you reduce my salary, I lose morale. You will realise it. You lose morale. And the reason that this Article and similar provisions are there in the Constitution, is to ensure that people do not lose their morale. People may have even acquired a house and are paying a loan and then you reduce their salary! So, it would be improper. That is why I am saying that this matter is complex. We cannot rush it.

And of course hon. Sekikuubo was wrong. The Certificate of Financial Implications is to start a university. But a university expands; it is not static. However, the point I was making is that these matters are complex. What I would suggest is that the minister should urge the council to expedite the resolution of the problem. In fact he can bring a Cabinet Paper, especially if money is required, and then we find a durable solution. But I do realise that this is an urgent matter and I suggest that we follow the law and we do not force him to direct council to reopen the university, because we do not have that power. 

AN HON. MEMBER: Information.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I have completed but I am willing to hear –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have really gone beyond time. This Parliament believes in prayers and that is why when we start our business we start with prayers. Therefore, I ask you to pray for the negotiations that are going on so that the hearts of all parties involved are softened and we reach an amicable solution and the university can open. 

The Minister of Finance has a statement, which I have allowed him to make.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I want to explain the status of the Budget Framework Paper; the issue which was raised yesterday on the Floor. 

The procurement process for the printing of the National Budget Framework Paper for fiscal year 2008/09 and the medium-term was initiated on Monday 21 January 2008. Consequently, the procurement and disposal unit of the ministry sent out requests for bids and the contract was awarded to Time Based in accordance with procurement laws and regulations.

On Monday, 31 March 2008, there was a Cabinet meeting to discuss the National Budget Framework Paper. Following the Cabinet meeting and the subsequent approval of the framework paper, the ministry submitted the document to the printers on Tuesday, 01 April 2008 on the understanding that the firm would have published enough copies for Parliament and other stakeholders within three days. However, by yesterday, Tuesday, 08 April as at 8.00 a.m. the firm had delivered only eight copies, six of which were forwarded to the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Budget Committee. Prior to that the ministry had improvised and submitted photocopies of the framework paper in order to avoid disrupting the operations of Parliament. 

Following the firm’s failure to deliver the documents on time and also the inability to deliver the documents within the course of this week, the contract was subsequently cancelled and awarded to the New Vision who have promised to deliver the document by Friday, 11 April 2008. It is until then that we shall be able to submit copies of the framework paper to Parliament.

I highly apologise for the inconvenience caused to the institution of Parliament and my ministry is taking the necessary measures to ensure that this situation does not occur in future. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday hon. Migereko did make an undertaking to explain the circumstances under which the source of the Nile was –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, precisely this is the statement I was calling up to be made next.

MR KASIGWA: Most obliged.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I think it is very irregular of hon. Otafiire, because it is hon. Otafiire – Oh, he is he around? (Laughter) Okay. He was directed to handle this matter and I understand he has come and his file is here but surely if you know you are on the agenda, you should be around. 

Let me now take charge, as usual, because we discussed this matter in the Cabinet and hon. Otafiire would like to get more time because he has to consult many ministries. It is not as simple as it sounds. So, he wanted more time. Of course it would have been up to him to indicate that he needs more time because I do not like anybody to stand here and say, “I want more time”. I would suggest that we give him two weeks in which to answer this question. If he is unable, he can always come here and explain. So on behalf of government, I want to apologise for the absence of hon. Otafiire. (Mr Otafiire thereupon entered the chamber.) Oh! (Laughter)

3.58
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, we take cognizance of the question posed by the hon. Kasigwa, MP for Jinja Municipality. The question concerns many stakeholders; it is multifaceted and multi-sectoral. We have taken it in stride and seriousness and we are consulting all the stakeholders for us to be able to come up with a reasonable answer. That is, it involves the Ministry of Local Government, the Ministry of Trade, the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of Water and the Ministry of Lands. So, we are going to have a multi-sectoral meeting and then come up with an answer to satisfy hon. Kasigwa’s request. We shall do it in a reasonably short time -(Interjection)- yes, but if you can answer the question: “how long is forever?” then I will give you what “reasonable time” can be “reasonable”. (Laughter) I do not want to lie to Parliament, but it is going to be very reasonable time, probably within two weeks. Thank you.

MR KASIGWA: I do appreciate hon. Otafiire’s response. Mr Speaker, when talking about the source of the Nile, you are talking about Uganda’s heritage and I think we should be serious about this. We should be serious and be specific. If it is two weeks, let it be two weeks and I would be willing to wait for two weeks for the explanation, not “probably”.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We expect the statement within two weeks.

MR KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, I have said I do not want to lie to Parliament. If God Almighty –(Laughter)– could take six days to create the world, how do you expect me - because it is a complex matter – I have told you, I have said, “Probably within two weeks”. I cannot be specific. I do not want to lie to Parliament. Maybe you can lie, but I do not want to. (Laughter)

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 38/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.00
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): "(i) Would the minister inform the House about the procedure of Government negotiating, receiving and utilisation of grants?

(ii) At what point is the public made aware of grants extended to Uganda? 

(iii) What mechanisms are in place to ensure that grants extended to Uganda are not abused by both donors and the recipient?” 

4.01
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, part III of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, Section 20(1) clearly bestows upon the Minister responsible for Finance the function of negotiating and contracting loans and grants. The procedure involves the following steps:

(a)	Identification of the need by the sector: the sector working group identifies the need and submits a request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(b)	The Development Committee (DC) of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development discusses the request, checks to see if the proposal is in line with the sector’s priorities and if it can fit in the budget requirements within the medium-term expenditure framework for the sector. In its approval process, the DC will also try to identify the source of financing.

(c)	A request is then sent to the identified financer (development partner). The request clearly spells out the proposal, the funding, plus instructional arrangements for implementation with a request that the partner considers it for funding.

(d)	This is followed  by the development partner and government (the sector and MFPED) going into preparation and appraising stages of the programme in order to firm up the programme costs  and carry out  the financial and cost benefit analysis, plus sustainability issues.   This involves holding of stakeholders’ workshops and meetings so that stakeholders are abreast with the proposed arrangements (the various parties to the arrangement, be it local or central government; institutions of government or private sector, et cetera) are given an opportunity to bring forth issues concerning the proposed intervention and its possible impact on the communities to be affected and to benefit.

(e)	The grant agreement is then negotiated. In accordance with the law, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will sign the grant agreement on behalf of government.
(f)	After signature, implementation of the agreement enters into force. During this part of the process, the sector ministry or beneficiary takes the lead to put the programme into reality. The responsible accounting officer is fully responsible for institutional and operational matters while the Office of the Accountant-General requests for disbursement based on requests from the accounting officer which should correspond with the progress of the work and the certified certificates of work.

(g)	The Auditor-General’s Office will be in charge of programme audit as prescribed under the law.

“At what point is the public made aware of grants extended to Uganda?” Mr Speaker, during the preparation and appraisal of any programme, the stakeholders and the public (and especially those in the programme area) are consulted widely. This is usually done through sensitisation workshops. The district leadership and Members of Parliament are normally consulted through such fora. The sensitisation workshops are the points of first entry of the public into the process. However, there is a need for a continuous process of sensitisation in order to manage unrealistic public expectations, which usually demand quick results. This is done by ensuring that the population is given the right information on programme objectives and progress.

Secondly, at the time of signature, the press is usually invited to witness the signature and ask questions for purposes of informing the public.

Thirdly, after the grant has become effective, there is usually a programme launch workshop in the beneficiaries’ area, to which the peoples’ representatives are invited.

“What mechanisms are in place to ensure that grants extended to Uganda are not abused by both donors and the recipient?” Mr Speaker, the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the accompanying regulations commonly known as the Treasury Accounting Instructions give the accounting officers at both the central and local government level, the responsibility to be fully accountable to government and Parliament, for the proper utilisation of all public funds entrusted to them.

Disbursement of these funds from the donors also follows the law. The Office of the Accountant–General cannot ask the disbursement of monies from the donors without a certificate from the accounting officer. Nor will any donor release money to a government accountant or to any beneficiary without a certificate request from the Accountant-General.

It would also be unwise and illegal for any accounting officer to issue a certificate to the Accountant-General when his technical staff on the ground have not certified that the work has been done to the tune of the certificate.

Thirdly, the Office of the Auditor-General is there to audit all the public programmes and will definitely identify any loopholes and make a report to Parliament. Mr Speaker, I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, you have a supplementary?

4.08
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I have a few supplementary questions. One: if what you have explained is true and this mechanism is in place, what happened to the GAVI funds?

Two, do we really have a democratic mechanism of interrogating and scrutinising all the grants and their associated subtle  conditionalities usually attached to grants to see whether it is in the national interest of Ugandans to acquire or accept those grants? 

Three, when is the Minister of Finance and Cabinet considering tabling a Bill to Parliament to ensure that before grants are negotiated, and acquired, Parliament is fully informed about the amount to be –

THE SPEAKER: Is that a supplementary or you are suggesting new measures? 

MR KIBANZANGA: Definitely I am asking the minister whether it would be – 

THE SPEAKER: A supplementary must arise from the answers given.

MR KIBANZANGA: I thought these questions are from the answer that the minister gave me. Let me go to the third and I leave you alone, sir.

Given the shocking revelation by the GAVI scandal, can the Minister of Finance assure this House that what we are told during the budget speech is in the full amount of grants this country is to receive? I thank you very much.

4.12
CAPT. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Finance for answering hon. Kibanzanga’s questions. On page 1, on identification of the need by the sector through sector working groups and so forth, my problem is that if the relevant sectors identify that they require so much money and then funds are sourced from a number of multi-lateral or bi-lateral organisations, and that the money is needed and that the financial experts have assessed this development committee in the Ministry of Finance, how come then that there are so many non-performing loans on which Government is paying heavy penalties? 

At one time I read in papers the minister himself complaining that there are so many non-performing loans stretching from 1996 -(Interjections)- hon. Chief Whip, I know what I am talking about. There are loans I have read about and if I ever knew of this question, I would come here with information to prove my statement. 

There are many loans we passed in the Sixth Parliament that are non-performing to date: non-performing means that they are performing to less than 50 percent. If the relevant economic sectors have identified the need and this development committee in the Ministry of Finance accepts the need and also uses their professionalism to say that there is need for agriculture to borrow so much money for this sector and the other – incidentally it is majorly the loans and grants for UPE which are performing. And a few other areas and the majority are 20 or 30 percent performing. Most of them are non-performing and the minister knows we are paying penalties. If these needs have been identified, why are the loans disbursements poor? Thank you.  

4.15
MRS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have seen what the minister has answered and it is very good. You know when it is on the paper, it is really very good. We have seen programmes which have come in this country whereby when the Ministry of Finance sees that that programme is performing well at the grass root level, they feel it is not a good programme. 

I will give examples of the Nutrition and the Community HIV/AIDS Initiative projects. Parliament requested the ministry to get more funding and they said, no, and eventually they signed other agreements and that money is not seen on the ground. Why is it that grants and loans which are seen to be going towards the people are not liked in the Ministry of Finance? They would prefer loans and grants which are centrally located which involve training, workshops, capacity building, travelling everywhere, going to the USA and they do not reach our communities. I would like the minister also to tell us that.

4.17
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the comprehensive response he has given. But I have a supplementary question to ask in relation to question three, that is, towards safeguarding the interest of the beneficiary country when grants are given. 

In this particular case, I want to take the minister to grants which are meant to fund projects which are bi-laterally negotiated. There are instances where the donor makes an agreement with the Government of Uganda to say, “Yes, we are going to put in place such an amount of money for a specific project and as government, you are expected to raise government counterpart funding, which is supposed to be utilised by the ministry officials to deliver the service”; and in which case the issue of adherence to treasury accounting instructions applies. But you may find that the specific grant has a separate account to which not even the accounting officer is a signatory; it is the expatriates from the donor country that run that account. In this case, therefore, Uganda as a recipient country has no control over how this money is going to be utilized. In which case the issue of treasury account instructions, which applies to how an accounting officer runs an account does not apply. 

I can give you examples: there have been projects in this country funded by bilateral arrangements between the Federal Republic of German and the donor funds were exclusively for the benefit and use of the expatriate staff. In this case the accounting officer did not even know where the funds were being banked let alone how they are withdrawn, how they are utilised and were not even subject to Auditor-General’s auditing. How then, in such a case, will the interest of Uganda as a beneficially grant receiver be represented – how do you safeguard our interest in that arrangement? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thought I was closing this. Let us get the answer and move to other business.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The issue of GAVI funds, in my opinion indicates that there are cases when attempts to steal funds occur. What is important is that problems are detected and something is done about it as is being done in the case of the GAFI fund.

In every country, there are certainly instances of attempted theft and fraud as you know, but what is important is to have in place mechanisms to detect would-be thieves and punishing them appropriately. Do we have a democratic mechanism to scrutinise the grants to see if they are in national interest? Yes, the grants are negotiated. Of course grants must be differentiated from loans. Grants are being given by the donor without a condition of repayment; so when you are negotiating a grant, you have to take this into account; you are not as hard as when you are negotiating a loan for which you have responsibility to repay. 

But certainly, when we are negotiating grants, we try to refuse conditionalities, which we consider to be against national interest. 

I have come under considerable criticism and pressure for refusing to sign grants and people try to appeal to the hon. Prime Minister that I am slow in signing the grants and that I should sign immediately – they might even go higher saying, “Why is this man not signing grants?” I stand my ground and in many cases I have said, no. So, in many cases I detect that the grant is intended to serve some other interest and is not entirely in the national interest. And in many cases we have had very protracted negotiations even when they are grants because we believe that the conditionalities in those grants are not in our interest.

As I said, there is considerable pressure; they try to use various types of tactics to bully us into signing, but I am happy to assure you that I am able to stand my ground.

When will the ministry table a Bill concerning grants? Well, there is a law in place which I have referred to in the Accountability Act, which state how to handle grants. If you feel that it needs to be complimented or improved, then we can look at it and see how it can be improved; I will as look at it and see whether it can be strengthened.

On the issue of non-performing loans stretching back to 1996, it is true that there are some loans and grants, which have taken long time to disburse.  Mr Speaker, grants, as I mentioned earlier, although they are free, often have conditionalities and these conditionalities may take time to be satisfied. And as result we have some grants which have taken a long time to be implemented because the conditionalities were unduly harsh. 

I think in future I will be very careful not to accept such grants because they delay. For example if it is a grant to repair a road and it has a conditionality which involves legislation, that means that until that legislation is passed that grant will not be disbursed. In the meantime, the road concerned is getting worse and is waiting. And by the time the legislation comes through, the cost of repairing the road has gone up and the state of the road has become worse. So the costs involved rise in many ways; so we will resist such conditionalities because they impose a high cost on us. It is better to get a loan, which is quick disbursing than to wait for a loan which delays the repair of a road and in end the costs go high and the costs to the users are increased. And I have to admit that there have been these problems.

There are other problems involved like counterpart funding. There are some cases in which we were not able to come up with a counterpart funding and this again would cause delay. 

There are other issues of absorption, which imply the ability to fulfil the various conditions and requirement – conditions of effectiveness which cause delays - which I think I do not have time to go into. But I would like to appeal to honourable members to recognise that while important improvements are being made in our ability to finance our budget through our revenues, until such time when we are fully independent, it means that some of these disagreeable conditionalities will continue to cause us some delays. But I want to assure Members that this dependence is growing less and less.

MR OKECHO: Thank you Mr Speaker, and the Minister of Finance. I rise to just give information to the minister and I think to the whole House that the current trend in grants and loans acquisition the world over is that Parliament is becoming increasingly involved in the whole process in order to ensure that the approval process here is made easy and it is really not in such along drawn exercise. I have discussed this matter with IMF, the World Bank and various other countries that have been participating in this and it appears that it is something that we should find a way of adopting if it is possible.

DR SURUMA: I thank the honourable member for the information. Of course the reason for Parliament getting involved in the loan process is to ensure that any burden on the taxpayer is approved by the people’s representatives. However, I believe that in the case of a grant the situation is different. But if it is the wisdom of the House, the grant should also be approved – I think this can be looked into and discussed. 

The issue of grants controlled by expatriates – sorry! First, the issue of loans that reach the grassroots and are helpful to them; however, this is not being preferred by the Ministry of Finance. I am very sorry to hear this. But I think one of the reasons for example why the NAADS programme was stopped was that there was a view that it was going too much into workshops and training, and not enough was going into inputs which are needed by the farmers. And where such a problem was identified, corrective action has been taken. So, if there are other programmes, where you think there is a problem, kindly draw our attention to them and we will attempt to find a remedy.

Finally, concerning the grants controlled by expatriate staff, there is indeed a problem with some countries, the way that they give their aid, or their grants is rather complicated. They do give us an accounting of how they have used the money but they do control the disbursement process after we have approved that funding and these are large countries and the choice we have is to stop and say we do not want you to bring your money, take it back, or to say, we accept it, on your conditions.

They say that their countries’ legislation requires that they do it that way. And so we have had some difficulties actually on how to deal with such matters. I do not think it is appropriate for me to mention countries, but there are fairly large countries giving substantial amounts of money and the issue of how to handle – we must understand, this is their money and issues whether we agree that the programmes they are proposing to work on are in the national interest or not, and this is a very important issue (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister. Now that you have as the Minister for Finance come up to admit that actually these are very difficult circumstances, and then you have gone further to say, “Well, this is their money, but to me still I consider that this money of theirs is not without strings attached”; these are the same countries that will expect Uganda to be by their side at the UN when they are voting on a very controversial issue. These are the same countries that will expect Uganda as a country to side with them even when it comes to other bilateral negotiations.

But I think I will be happy to hear from you, Mr Minister, if as a country we die with our pride of saying yes, we are poor, but this business of saying that a beggar has no choice should not apply, because these are large sums of money, which come in the names of Uganda as a recipient country and at the end of the day this same donors bring Tom, Dick and Harry on the same projects as expatriate staff and when you go to even ask for their qualifications, they are not even anywhere worth joining the civil service of Uganda. 

These are the same countries that will come up and say, “Yes, we want our expatriate staff to drive the most expensive vehicles from their countries, be it a discovery 1-10, be it a Range Rover, be it a Mercedes Benz, that is the type of equipment that they will come with”, and slowly but surely the whole money will have gone back to their own country and yet we as a country that should have received a grant, we have nothing at the end of the day. The project barely runs on the government counterpart funds from the taxpayers of this government! So, should such a thing be worthwhile to entertain?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you honourable member for giving way. To add on what my colleague is saying, I just want to use one example. I will also not name a country -

THE SPEAKER: But honestly, according to the procedures, there should be no questions of clarification. You ask a supplementary, that is all. This is not a debate, he is answering a question, but you can make your clarification. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not know why my clarifications are being resisted. There is one case where one of the countries is funding up to the tune of 80 percent of the AIDS programme and like you were saying, I think they cannot conform to some of the conditions Uganda has given, they manage the budget, and they do not put the money through our budget process here. 

And the evaluations have shown that close to 70 percent of what they put in goes back to that country, but this is a situation where the World Bank had wanted to give us money in a multi-country AIDS programme for HIV as a grant but the Ministry of Finance refused, but opted to get money from a country, which has conditions that are difficult. So was that a rational decision on your part, to refuse money from World Bank which was a grant and then opt for money from a country where most of the money goes back to that original country?

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not sure I know the country, which you did not name, but what I do know is that a great bulk of the money for AIDS is coming from an important country and this is a large amount of money, which is paying for most of the ARVs on top of the Global Fund’s money, and I am not aware of a grant from the World Bank that we have turned down. What I do know is that the amount of money we are getting from some of these countries is extremely large, and we definitely are very grateful for this money which is enabling many of our people to benefit from this programme of getting ARVs and I want to commend that country for that programme.

But I will be happy to receive information if we turned down any grant from the World Bank, because I am not aware of it. Now –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. Before I came to Parliament I used to work in the HIV/AIDS programmes. So I am privy to some of this information that Uganda was supported by the World Bank to run a map project – the multi-country AIDS project for five years and that several countries were supported from 2000 to 2005. After that World Bank decided to turn the money for most countries into loans, but Uganda having been one of the few countries that had performed well, we were allowed to access this money as a grant. 

The World Bank team came here, there were consultations with the Uganda Aids Commission and all the partners in the HIV/AIDS programmes agreed that we access this money. However, I remember that the Ministry of Finance, for reasons of micro-economic stability, refused this grant. Probably you do not know as the current minister, but I can give you most of the write ups that are available. Thank you.

DR SURUMA: Yeah! You are right because I wasn’t there at that time, but I have disagreed with the important issues about the effects of these funds on micro-economic stability. This is one of the first issues I debated in Washington. I remember I told these countries that I did not agree with them because if the funds were being used to buy drugs from outside or to bring in equipment, they actually do not have a micro-economic impact on our currency. The issue does not arise and I have made that very clear to these agencies, including the World Bank.

On the issue of waste in these agencies, I would like to say that I think that if a country says that it is giving us $ 50million in grants and they decide that $ 10million will go to pay their aids agency, it means we have a net inflow of $ 40million that is a gain to us. We cannot really complain. I am saying this because we recognised that every country has its own interests at heart. When it gives us grants, we are not really getting everything for free; there is some interest somewhere for that country. 

So, I think the question should be: is there some net gain out of this for us? We cannot say, “The head of this agency is driving an expensive car; how is he helping the poor?” The fact is that some money will be coming in because this expatriate probably has a Ugandan driver and some other Ugandans working in his office and so forth. So, there is some benefit. If it is a grant, I think we have to sometimes say, “Well, we can live with that.” I want to say to hon. Members that indeed this is the situation. I think we are looking forward to the time when we will not need these grants. I thank you.

MR MENHYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This morning I came across a document, which was developed by the minister of finance. Its title is, “Development Corporation Uganda.” The minister of finance signed its preface. So my concern is on page 3 –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, we are done with that question.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE BUSINESS TECHNICAL, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING BILL, 2008

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training Bill, 2008 abbreviated as BTVET, be read for a second time.

The policy behind the Bill is to give effect to reforms aiming at making BTVET more relevant to the skills requirement of employment; to provide access to a larger number of learners; to improve the quality of BTVET needs and make vocational training affordable.

The major principle of the Bill is the introduction of a module training, which is flexible to trainees’ needs and the introduction of assessment and certification based on a continuous and defined national qualifications framework.

The diploma awards by the BTVET should enable the students the opportunity to join universities with no hindrance. The Bill also puts in place a mechanism for recognising certificates and diplomas awarded by registered private BTVET institutions.

Mr Speaker, currently BTVET programmes focus mainly on certification to a certain extent self-employment. The programmes are of a long duration and affordable by the poor and do not adequately equip individuals to become productive and self-reliant. The Bill also seeks to put in place, BTVET framework that prepares individuals for a world of work and meeting global challenges.

The objectives of the Bill are:

1.	To define the scope and levels of BTVET programmes and the roles of the different stakeholders in the provision of BTVET;
2.	Separate training and delivery of BTVET from quality assurance functions;
3.	To establish an institutional framework from the promotion and coordination of BTVET;
4.	Specify the providers of BTVET;
5.	To provide for mechanism and establishment of organs responsible for the regulation of qualifications;
6.	To provide the mandate and functions of the Directorate of Industrial training; 
7.	To make consequential amendments to provisions of the existing laws that relates to BTVET Policy and programme. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

4.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr James Kubeketerya): Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Social Services on the Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training Bill, 2008 referred to as BTVET.

Introduction

The BTVET Bill, 2008 was tabled in Parliament on 06 February 2008 and the Committee on Social Services considered the Bill in accordance with rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Methodology

The committee held a workshop on this Bill in which several stakeholders made submissions. The submissions that were received by the committee were from the following the stakeholders: the Ministry of Education and Sports, National Council for Higher Education, the Uganda Nurses and Midwives’ Council, the Uganda Joint Christian Council and principals of BTVET institutions. 

Background to the Bill

Mr Speaker, the policy behind the Bill is to give effect to reforms aiming at making BTVET more relevant to the skills requirements of employment; to provide access to a larger number of learners; to improve the quality of BTVET needs and to make vocational training affordable.

The major principle of the Bill is the introduction of the module training, which is flexible to trainee’s needs and the introduction of assessment and certification based on a continuous and a defined national qualifications framework.

The diploma awards by BTVET should afford the students the opportunity to join universities with no hindrance.

The Bill also puts in place the mechanism for recognising certificates and diplomas awarded by the registered private BTVET institutions.

Mr Speaker, currently the BTVET programmes focus mainly on certification, and to a certain extent self employment. The programmes are of a long duration, but affordable by the poor and the inadequately equipped individuals to become productive and self-reliant.

The Bill seeks to put in place a BTVET framework that prepares individuals for the world of work and in meeting global challenges. 

The object of the Bill like the minister has put are as follows:

•	To define the scope and levels of BTVET programmes and the roles of the different stakeholders in the provision of BTVET;
•	Separate training and delivery of BTVET from quality assurance functions;
•	To establish an institutional framework from the promotion and coordination of BTVET;
•	Specify the providers of BTVET;
•	To provide for mechanism and establishment of organs responsible for the regulation of qualifications.
•	To provide the mandate and functions of the Directorate of Industrial training; 
•	To make consequential amendments to provisions of the existing laws that relates to BTVET Policy and programme.

Observations

Transfer of training institutions

The Bill gives legal effect to the restructuring of ministries that took place in 1998. This included the transfer of the directorate of industrial training from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to the Ministry of Education and Sports. The Bill repeals the Industrial Training Act and provides new mandates and functions of the directorate of industrial training.

The establishment of the Uganda Vocational Qualifications Framework (UVQF)

The committee noted and appreciated that the Bill establishes the Uganda Vocational Qualification Framework, and the purposes of the UVQF is to:

•	Define occupational standards in the world of work;
•	Define assessment standards; and
•	Define vocational qualifications of learners who meet the set standards.  

This will partly address the unemployment problem in the country.

Effect on existing technical examinations

At present, the mandate of setting and conducting technical examinations lies with UNEB. With the establishment of the Uganda Vocational Qualifications Framework provided in this Bill, the assessment and conduct of vocational examinations shall be under the mandate of the directorate of industrial training.

Funding of BTVET

The BTVET sector in the Ministry of Education and Sports has failed to attract donor assistance and funding because it lacks a legal framework. With the passing of this Bill, the council can interest donors into funding the BTVET programmes.

Effect on existing legislation

Mr Speaker, the enactment of this Act will call for the repeal of the Industrial Training Act, Cap 130, and will also call for the repealing of some sections of the following laws:
•	The Allied Health Professions Act 1996, section 5;
•	The Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council Act 1996, section 3; and
•	The UNEB Act 1983, section 17(8) and 9(4).

Access to technical and vocational education

The committee noted that strengthening of BTVET will increase access to post-primary training and education. The focus of BTVET is on skills training at non-university levels. BTVET institutions will give quality skills, which are relevant to the labour market and address market needs. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that subject to the proposed amendments, the Bill is passed into law by this august House. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I want to thank you, chairperson and the committee for the report. The debate is open.

4.52
MS AMUGE OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the committee for having brought this Bill. However, I have some comments to make. 

Where the committee states that the ministry has found it difficult to interest donors to support vocational training education, I want to disagree on that and make some justification. 

From 1991 to 1993, the World Bank gave a lot of money to this country through a programme called PAMSO. This programme was supposed to improve vocational training institutions because the government had tried to tell donors that there were some sectors, which could still be explored, that were mostly in the service industry. I would like to say that the money was just mishandled. So, it is not true that the donors have not helped us. 

As we speak, the German Government has given a lot of grants under a programme called KFW, and they have supported many vocational training institutions especially the private ones in this country. They are still giving that support in terms of training of trainers, giving the equipment and even giving us infrastructure. I, therefore, disagree with (b). I think it must be corrected.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you my colleague for giving way. The committee realised that we have many small vocational training institutions, which are private, but the people who graduate from there are only trained for two or three months like apprenticeship training, yet they put a lot of money in those small training institutions and yet eventually that person who comes out of that institution does not qualify to get a job elsewhere. That is why we came up with this Bill. I have such institutions in Bundibugyo. Thank you.

MS AMUGE: I thank you for the information but I would also like to say that although the government funds the Directorate of Industrial Training, it has not helped the small vocational schools that we have. Probably that should also be looked at.

I completely agree with the module system of training. I believe that many countries which have managed to use the technical skills of these vocational trained students have used the module training so that even if someone is just given one module, they are able to use it before they can improve other skills. 

However, I have a problem with the transfer of training institutions. I think it is long overdue. We talked about the nurses’ training institutions here and today it has come back in another form. I think we should take that up seriously.

The other problem has also been the standardisation of the training programmes in the vocational training schools in this country. There are many people awarding certificates of their own and there is nobody to vet these certificates. We are now saying that we want to allow this kind of trainees to access the university degrees but I pray that the standardisation be taken quite seriously. 

I do agree with this Bill in principle, but I think that there are certain things that we should look further into. We are told that we still have gaps and we are talking of UPE. This would help the USE students who will be coming out. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.58
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the Bill but I have a few observations. 

The first observation is on page 3. I am very happy that the Directorate of Industrial Training under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is being moved to the Ministry of Education and Sports under the Bill. However, I am particularly concerned about the rehabilitation centres under the same ministry. We have a rehabilitation centre for example, called Ruti, in Mbarara which had a lot of facilities for training disabled people but it is lying idle. So, I want the minister to clarify whether such institutions are moving along in this Bill so that we put them to effective use. 

The second issue I am raising is arising from recommendation (f) of the committee that as we focus on BTVET, we should look at non-university levels. Currently we have disharmony in equivalence. For example if one has completed a diploma at any of these institutions, to be admitted for a degree at Makerere, he or she is required to take four years. Meanwhile at Kyambogo University if you have done a diploma in engineering, you take three years. Therefore, these disparities have not been making it easy for students to move on and get appropriate training after the technical training. In most cases, students trained in these technical institutions have much more competence than students trained in the universities especially in the technical field. Therefore, I would like the minister to clarify especially the issue of equivalence of education and how many years you take to complete university degree when you have gone through these institutions.

The last point I have is that currently the problem we have in Uganda is relating the education system to our employment structures. This has not taken root. Previously you would find that if a certain officer, the head of department was a degree holder, perhaps the assistant was a diploma holder.  But currently there is confusion; we do not have guidelines in terms of employment. You find that for some small job, they want a graduate and for a bigger job they want a diploma holder. Therefore, if we want to streamline BTVET training, we must also go further and look at the way we deploy our graduates both from the universities and from these institutions so that if an agricultural officer at the district level is a graduate, the one at the sub-county should be a diploma holder or a certificate holder. But now at the sub-county there is a graduate and maybe they are even about to go to the parish and yet we have very few graduates. This undermines the training in these technical courses. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.01
MR COSMAS BUSIMA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the Bill but I have a few areas, which are grey to me and I would like to seek some clarification on them. 

First of all, these people are what we would call the workhorse of the country. These are the engines and they are the ones who make things move. So, if we can harmonise their training, we will then definitely expect to have good output. I expected the Bill not only to consider them as individuals for the world of work but also as people who can go up in education. What is written is that the diploma awards by BTVET should afford the students the opportunity to join universities with no hindrances. Whereas that is very good, I thought the Bill would come out and say that these people will go on and obtain higher standards of education in their vocations, such that a plumber will go ahead to specialise in his plumbing work up to the university level, just as is done in some countries like Germany; rather than him joining Makerere and he gets confused with a lot of theories.

I would have expected also a motor mechanic to pursue further education along that line for enhancement of his profession and to improve his services rather than gaining a lot of theory.

Another area where I am a bit grey is the issue that the Bill also puts in place a mechanism for recognising certificates –(Interruption)

MS HYUHA: I would like the Member to clarify. Does he want to imply that in the university, those who get degrees get degrees in theory? Those who have got degrees in medicine, is that theory? Those who have got degrees in law, in engineering, education; is that theory? In any case, my understanding of this - because the report is clear on page 4 that access to technical and vocational education will increase access to post-primary training and education. And of course if you wish to pursue your degree either in plumbing or whatever the case, this is the implication. Because previously we have been having this straight line and it was a fear to parents that if one went for business, technical, or vocational education that would be an end in itself. So, this Bill in actual sense is opening up a way that even those who take this opportunity can still get to degree and even PhD level. This is how I understand this Bill. So, can the Member clarify and make the record correct that those who get a degree, either from a university, is not in theory and they cannot be confused?

THE SPEAKER: I think what he was saying is that if you get a university graduate engineer and you get somebody from a technical school and you give them an assignment, I think he meant that the one from a technical school will effectively carry out that assignment immediately. I think this is what he was saying. Of course the engineer will get the experience later but I think he was saying that if both of them are released on the same day, somebody from a technical school will execute the work better. I think that is what he was saying.

MR BUSIMA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. Another area where I wanted a bit of clarification, I was reading that the Bill also puts in place a mechanism for recognising certificates and diplomas awarded by registered private institutions. I am not comfortable with that. I am wondering whether these people will be sitting the same exam or Busima Technical School will issue its own diplomas. I think we need a bit of clarification on that. Otherwise, the Bill is good and I support it.

5.07
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I must say that the Bill has been timely and I support the Bill but there are some areas, which I am not very comfortable with. 

To begin with, under methodology, I think that the committee did not involve all the stakeholders. For example if you look at the people whom they consulted in their workshops, the Ministry of Education and Sports, National Council for Higher Education, Uganda Nurses and Midwives’ Council, Uganda Joint Christian Council and others. I did not see anywhere where the National Youth Council was consulted because you find that most of the beneficiaries of what these institutions are going to do are under the National Youth Council. And I did not see anywhere where the Uganda National Students Association was consulted or Uganda Muslim Supreme Council. So, I think they missed some input, which would have enriched the Bill. 

To start with the issue where hon. Hyuha was seeking clarification from my colleague, hon. Busima, that it would be open for those students who would have completed university level to go and get further training. I do not think that it should be that way. Because you find that the challenge we have in developing countries like Uganda is unemployment. The kind of education we are getting right now in our institutions is not very relevant to the apparent challenges. You will find that for example, somebody can come out of a university when he is just a job seeker. He cannot become creative or innovative. He or she cannot start his or her own employment. So, I would think that it would be better for us to see how the ministry can link up these vocational institutions with the secondary school syllabuses, with the university syllabuses, such that a person comes out of university when he or she has got that other knowledge that can help him. Such that in case he or she has done a Bachelor of Linguistics and has not gotten any job, he or she can become creative out of the training or course units that he or she took.

Secondly, you can take an example of these other countries in the second world, like Malaysia; when you look at their syllabuses you will find that somebody starting from senior one can have some course units that are relevant to his future career or profession. So, it helps in those countries in a way that those people come out of school when they do not lack employment; they do not come out seeking for employment. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at the statistics of our graduates in the universities we have in Uganda, every year about 78,000 students are graduating. The training they are getting for white collar jobs – the available white collar jobs in government are 48,000. So if we do not come and see how we can solve this problem, we are going to get into problems. 

I must nonetheless thank the government for its programme of industrialisation but among the conditions we are supposed to have in place before we reach that stage of industrialisation, we must prepare our people for that level of industrialisation. And one way of doing this is to prepare the labour for these industries. I did not see how the unlearned youths or young people are going to access this kind of education. For example the young people on the streets; the young people who never got an opportunity of going to school.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Actually, hon. Kibedi and I are on the same track. We are saying that both the formal and informal sectors are going to get involved in vocational training and that is why we talked of the informal sector. And if you have looked at the amendments, there is where we are saying that even the informal sector must be represented on the council. So, it is not the other way round that those from the university are supposed to come back and benefit from this. We are beginning from the informal sector; that after those modular training, somebody can rise and climb the ladder. 

MR KIBEDI: So what I need the Chairman to clarify further – I am not worried about that; that one is not bothering me. The issue is, as my colleague hon. Busima said, his concern was experience. I am an architect by profession; you will find that some people who come out of these universities do not have the relevant practical experience. My suggestion is if these kind of vocational course units can be started in –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean the university graduates should have industrial training?

MR KIBEDI: What I am trying to say is that these universities’ practicals or industrial training should be from the very beginning, from the first year up to the last year, actually everyday. I can give an example of how Kyambogo Polytechnic used to do it before. This is a technical part of it but for the betterment of this Bill, I think it is very important information. For example, in building construction, when somebody is taught how to come up with a foundation of a building, before you go to another level, you are taken to the field to do what you have learned in the theories practically; this is not realised in some universities. So, my point is that we should recommend that these universities should take it as a serious matter right from day one someone who is pursuing practical education needs to practice whatever he learns theoretically. 

My second idea is that it should not only be at university level but even at secondary school level, for example, by the time when I was in my O’ Level, we used to take about 12 subjects. If we can do it that out of 12, six or five subjects are vocational; it will help our people to become relevant to the current challenges of un-employment. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, thank you. Hon. Baba Diri, wait I will call you.

5.15
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, National): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the passing of this Bill and also to share some more information with this House. [Hon. Members: “She is a Member of the committee.”]

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, I understand you are a Member of the committee.

MS NALULE: Yes, Mr Speaker I was just sharing some information. 

THE SPEAKER: If you are a Member of the committee normally you just listen to others.

MS NALULE: Mr Speaker, can you give me the opportunity today? I just wanted to share some information that the World Bank, the African Capacity Building Institute and the Uganda Investment Authority are today concluding a workshop whereby they are calling for public private partnership. And by this they are actually urging government to promote and establish working partnerships with small and medium scale enterprises. 

They recognise that most of our people actually lack the skills to go into this partnership. And all of us know that our people are in the informal sector and they lack these skills, for example, if Government is contracting a road constructor, this partnership calls for the constructor to work with a local firm. But the workshop is saying that with lack of skills, the small and medium scale enterprises cannot partner with the big firms. So, they were calling for the Ministry of Education to design a curriculum which can respond to this need. So, the point I want to make is that if this Bill is passed, I think it will support the Ministry of Education to design a curriculum which is going to respond to this need. And I think it will also go a long way to promote the establishment and implementation of the government programme of Prosperity for All.  I am also happy that the Bill is considering the concerns of my constituency, that is, Persons with Disabilities. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

5.18
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report but I have a bit of worries. We are making the law but how will the law improve on the supervision? Because generally the views in technical institutions, and I have had the privilege of visiting some of them with two minister in my constituency, you really find that there is no presence of supervision of Central Government over those technical institutions. We went to a certain place and even a shelter, even this thing to plane the timber was not there, how will this law improve on that aspect? 

Then two, how about the funding? Because if we put in place a law but if we do not address the issue of funding - I happen to have trained in a national teachers’ college in 1983/85 and National Teachers’ College Kyambogo then before it became a university was much better than the Kyambogo University we have now. How are we going to address the funding? 

Lastly, it has been the practice, I think it is a law that before you become a Member of Parliament, or to qualify to be nominated LC V Chairman, you must have an A’ Level qualification. If you do not have A’ Level given by UNEB, you go for the equivalent and you pay Shs 800,000 to the National Council of Higher Education. How are these new qualifications here going to be equated with UNEB? Those are the few things I wanted. Thank you, Mr Speaker and I will be glad if I am explained to.

5.20
MR BRIAN ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My point is about observation 5 (d), which the previous speaker has hinted on but I want to emphasise. This Bill is extremely good and I support it but as we talk, especially those of us who come from rural districts, our students do not favourably compete with many of the students especially from the Central region here and perhaps the Eastern region. And you find that many of them have completed Senior 4 and have not proceeded, I mean have not gone any further than Senior 4; they have not been admitted to HSC, they have not entered any institution for getting working skills, they are just there. 

I have attended some of these interviews for institutions; I was overwhelmed last October when I attended some of the interviews for medical courses. The students, Mr Speaker were just too many and very few were selected, you know we have very few institutions for such, and the rest went back home and they are either digging or grazing or just doing nothing. 

My point on 5(d) is about what the committee said that funding of BTVET, the sector in the Ministry of Education and Sports has failed to attract donor assistance and funding because it lacks a legal framework. In case donors are not going to fund these trainings, does it mean our students should never be trained at all? I have heard the government saying we have more funding and we are collecting a lot of revenue and a lot is going into education, especially, UPE and USE. But where are we going to put these people if we are not going to provide vocational training? I am saying Ministry of Education and Sports and Finance must find ways of getting funds for vocational training for both formal and informal education or else we will still have a very big problem in this country. You know very much that unemployment is a big problem; many of our youth are joining securicor organisations; if you advertise jobs for securicor, many will come including graduates. If you know what is happening in this country, many are leaving to go and become securicor men in the Middle East and I was surprised to find graduates going for this kind of work. Thank you.

5.24
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the Bill and the report of the Committee of Social Service. This BTVET is a very important section of our education. We are all aware that not everybody can go to university but everybody must be given skills to survive and one way of providing these skills is through this vocational business and technical education.

Quite often, people used to marginalise this section. First of all, they consider it to be for failures because the first students go to secondary schools and then the residue goes to vocational training. As a result, people developed negative attitude towards this vocational institutions. It therefore means we need to do massive sensitisation of how important this sector is because the engineer of Makerere University will not be able to do the physical work. We need these skilled artisans to implement and work in our factories. So, government needs to provide massive sensitisation so that people accept this training. I can give an example. There is a private institution for vocational training and the students are not going there and instead they go to repeat senior four until they go for higher education.

Number two, I would like to raise the issue of the girl child. If you take statistics, you will find that most of these students, who go for vocational training, especially carpentry, metal work and so on, are men. I do not know in this Bill what provision you have made to ensure that girls also take up this vocation. They can also be electrical engineers; they can be plumbers; they can be carpenters and so on. We need to have a deliberate strategy to include the girl students into this vocational education. 

If we have to promote these students from certificate to university, I think it is very important to diversify the curriculum so that they are given English education and they also sit English exams, Mathematics so that when they are promoted, they will be on equal footing with those students who will join higher education from senior four or six.

Lastly, these vocational institutions are very important. Some years back, government came up with a provision of providing polytechnics at least in every sub-county. I do not know what has happened to this programme. I am raising this issue because Koboko District was curved from Arua and we do not have any single government institution nor business, nor vocational training; nor technical. I would like to know when the ministry will establish one or two vocational institutions in Koboko District because we have to look for training elsewhere. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.28
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the Bill and I thank the chairman for this report. We have been informed that the focus of this BTVET is on skills training at non-university level. This is a very important thing. In the technical line, this is where we have been failing. As an engineer, I need about ten or more of this level to make me effective. Without them, I cannot be effective. I have on many occasions been underutilised doing the work of these people. People must understand that as an engineer, I am not supposed to start laying bricks; that is not my work. I am above that. These are the people -(Interruption) 

MS LAGADA: I would like to seek clarification from the Member on the Floor. Is he by any chance implying that Ugandans who are going to go through this BTVET programme and qualify are less brain workers? The way he is presenting it that he is not supposed to do that work, is he implying that the people who will get these qualifications are less human beings? The way he is talking, I would not be very encouraged to send my child through this programme. I seek clarification.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much. But you know we are trained at different levels. You are saying that if you teach at primary level, you are useless because others are teaching at university. They are different levels. As an engineer, I am not supposed to start laying bricks. You will be underutilising me. I give instructions and I am above that. That is why I am very happy that the ministry has come up with this and I was very annoyed –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mafabi was saying that as an engineer, you may not be able to lay the bricks.

MR BYANDALA: No, Mr Speaker. When I am training as an engineer, I do industrial training and I did it extensively, not only in Uganda but even outside Uganda. But I am saying that you would be under utilizing me as an engineer to make me lay bricks.

So, I am very happy that the ministry is emphasizing this very important sector. And more importantly, they are making it flexible; our poor people can take this course at their own pace. So it will be possible for many of our people to get onto this programme. 

They have also thought ahead and seen that you can start very low and eventually became a university graduate in a field of your choice. I thank the ministry because they are concentrating on regulations and qualifications. I have got a son who graduated two years ago and when I went to look for a job for him, I was talking to friends and they asked me, “To which university did he go to? Makerere, Nkozi?” In some places now when you say that I am from such and such a university, they refuse you because of qualifications; lucky enough mine was from the UK so they did not do that. (Laughter)

I am also happy to see that they have proposed –

THE SPEAKER: So you are proposing that we should take our children to the UK?

MR BYANDALA: No, Mr Speaker, I was only answering the man I was looking for a job from. He was asking me, “Is he from this university or the other?” So I was lucky because he knew the university he was coming from.

I am also happy that this industrial training, a council is being established with –

THE SPEAKER: What was that university where he went?

MR BYANDALA: Structolite University, Scotland. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, this industrial training council and the industrial training fund are very important. In my career I was always going through pain. I used to get so many students wanting industrial training but I never had the budget for it. Their technical colleges and institutions never provided industrial training funds so I would say, “I am ready to take you on provided you do not ask for any money from me.” So you can imagine, somebody comes to you but you provide no transport or lunch! But with this industrial fund, I think the ministry is looking ahead and it is very good. 

As I conclude, I strongly support this Bill. The sooner it comes on board the better. Thank you very much.

5.35
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the Bill and the report from the committee. For a very long time I have always stood on this Floor, even before I joined the Front Bench, to talk about BTVET and sports in the sector of education and funding. I am very excited that we are now addressing the legal framework which has been lacking for some time in order for the department of BTVET to get adequate funding.

As a bit of a brief background, we had ministries restructured and the education and sports ministry received all sorts of departments; we had schools from the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries transferred to Education, we had the medical and nursing schools transferred to Education and the directorate of industrial training of Gender transferred to Education. 

And what honourable members should clearly know in this report is that although there has been some funding, it has not been adequate. I know the Woman MP for Lira raised this that there is funding, but it is mismanaged. I would like to associate myself closely with that statement. What I am aware of is that from the background, since we had restructuring in 1986, we had all these departments and the funding had been a challenge. (Mr Wadri rose_)– I know he was a member on my committee; he wants to support me. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Thank you, very much Mr Speaker and Madam Minister for giving way. I am not here to support you but to set the record right. The restructuring in government that made all those changes you are talking about was not done in 1986; it was 1996. I was part and parcel of that restructuring process. I want the record clear so that those who come after us read it correctly.

MRS HYUHA: Well, 1996 is when it started but in effect 1986 - but you have the idea that you are supporting; you know you have been working closely with me in social services and especially when you were still a commissioner before you become a Member of Parliament.

So, at long last the challenge we have had of getting funds from donors who may have been using this as a challenge can now be addressed. So it makes me happy and I strongly support this one.

Mr Speaker, there have been a lot of arguments on this Floor. We are trying to compare two different sections: BTVET is producing hands-on graduates; there is no way you can compare them with institutions, which are producing cognitive productive graduates. Hon. Byandala was clearly stating – you very well know that we have professionals in the university who also take industrial training. There is no way you can compare them: BTVET produces nurses, they get certificates and diplomas at various levels. How can you compare it with a medical student who is taking five years and after that he goes to do another one year of internship? How can you compare a teacher who is in a vocational institute with me a graduate teacher who does teaching practice for three years before I qualify? So, let us not compare these two. These universities are producing cognitive graduates; they are different from the hands-on graduates. 

This Bill is addressing – the background of this was that only failures would be taken to join vocation training. The Bill is now saying, “No, even you who take this line, the hands-on training, you can still upgrade from certificate to diploma and, therefore, once you get a diploma your chances are open to join the university”. This is what the Bill is stating. The two cannot be the same. We cannot compare hands-on training at certificate level, which is non-vocational, and the vocational ones. It has also business, and technical training. A graduate, a medical doctor will need nurses besides him in order for him to operate. An engineer will certainly need technicians around him in order for him to perform, so the two are quite different.

As I conclude, certainly I know as Members have stated and as the report states, that one of our challenges has been employment and of course when people never had the opportunity to continue with this cognitive line, they can now have an opportunity with their chances open to read higher and higher. 

On page 4, I would have loved the committee to clearly indicate to us probably it is in the amendment, what is this (e), which they are stating as the effect of existing legislation? Why don’t you tell us why you intend to amend the UNEB Act? What is the effect? Because you are just stating it; why do you think that when we adopt it and eventually this BTVET law comes into place then certainly we will need to amend this section of the UNEB Act? Are they taking over the role of UNEB? 

What is it? Are they going to be setting separate examinations? Why don’t you - for a very long time we have had a lot of arguments from the Nurses’ Council - indicate that it is among the group you have met? Have you now reconciled in this law that now the nurses are in agreement and that with the coming of the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, and with the coming of this BTVET law, they now agree that their role is now surpassed by this legislation? Probably this information would have helped us that now you have come out to harmonise the two and, therefore, when it comes to amendment, we know why we are amending. I stand to support this law, it is long overdue and certainly I beg the Members to support the law. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.43
MS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjonjo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this Bill. It is very good for our country and it has been long overdue. I thank the committee for throwing some light on different items and I also thank the Minister of Education. I especially thank the NRM Government for being visionary, because in the past regimes I can remember vocational training or BTVET was marginalised but now it is being brought to the front.

This Bill, if we pass it, will go a long way in equipping our people with skills, especially the youth, and it will also solve the problem of school drop-outs in many districts like Kyenjonjo.

I would also like to talk about the women. If my could be considered, this BTVET would also have affirmative action and there would be even some more points like Makerere and other university where the girls get more points in order to support the girl child. Maybe they would have 1.5 or 2 points above the boys or male candidates.

I would also request that the scope of BTVET be widened like in other countries, so many things, even hair dressing, agriculture, music, even drama, are skills, which could be added to all the other skills currently being availed. 

I would also like to commend the private providers of vocational, business and technical education because many times nobody recognises the efforts they are taking and yet most of the training is done by private institutions.

In that way, I beg to differ from one of the speakers who said that we standardise, maybe it is only the Ministry of Education which should give certificates or exams. I know there is UNEB, but UNEB can give the certificates to standardise as well as the institutions’ certificates so that the institutions – the efforts of the institutions are not lost when all the certificates are issued by UNEB or the ministry. Because at least that would not be too tight on the private providers; and yet Uganda has liberalised education. Even at university, I believe many of the universities are issuing their own degrees and diploma certificates.

Mr Speaker as I conclude, I would like to put forward the concern for rural areas, which has been mentioned by some other speakers. Like Kyenjojo, we lack vocational training schools. Therefore, this vocational training should be taken to people who need it at the grassroots, instead of being concentrated in the urban centres and in cities like Kampala. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.52
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I would right away disagree with the committee especially on (d) that is funding of the BTVET. 

Reason: you cannot talk of facilitation and funding because there is lack of a legal framework. In (e) you talk about the effects of the existing legislation. We have laws like the Uganda Nurses and Midwives’ Council Act, the UNEB Act and the Health Professionals Act, in place.

We are also aware that there have been national colleges of business studies in existence, where are they now? There was Masaka Technical Institute, where is it now? I am also told that there is one in Katakwi. So, I would like to say that government has championed the ineffectiveness of these institutions. NCBS Nakawa used to supervise all the UCCs; it used to set examinations, supervise and even mark them. Where is it now?

The government has actually moved in much more into universities. For example, NCBS was turned into MUBS yet they should have thought of elevating one of the UCCs to the level of NCBS Nakawa before it was turned into a university.

I know that Masaka Technical College was given back to the Kabaka, which was very good, but to emphasize the fact that government has championed inefficiencies in these institutions, I want report that all the gadgets were removed and taken away after the institution had been given back to the Kabaka. Why couldn’t government have the heart to think that the university would at one time have a department of that sort?

Let me say something about funding by donors, in respect of which the report says that donors have not been attracted to this sector. Can we be informed of any donor support that failed to come in as a result of lack of a legal framework?

The other one, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS AMUGE OTENGO: Mr Speaker, I want to give information to the Member who is asking about the donor funding. Sometime in the year 2000 there was an Indian in this country who was running a milk plant in Mbarara. I got to know him when I was the RDC there. This Indian heard of some grant, which would come from the Indian Government to countries in kind. He wanted to access that grant to build a very big vocational institute in Uganda, which would then have satellite colleges attached to it.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I made a lot of effort to help this man; I spent a lot of my time going to the Ministry of Education and talked to the minister who was in charge and who is seated in this House listening to these very deliberations -(Laughter)- the minister also went to Mbarara, inspected the man’s project and came and gave a good report, I am very sure. We did everything possible to ensure that the grant comes to Uganda to support vocational education. However, I would like to report that the then Minister of Education did everything possible to ensure that grant never came. So, I wonder what we exactly mean when we talk about donor support! Thank you.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you very much, hon. Member and I think you can see that you are supporting me. Before government goes to the public to make pledges, it should first look into its pockets. I am saying this because, as you are aware, government sometime back promised to have a vocational institute in every sub-county, but how many years down the road, has this been in the box?

Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– it is not because of lack of laws as the minister is saying. The laws have been there. Do you want to say that those that exist have been there without a legal framework? You have been operating without a legal framework? I can’t expect a yes to this question. I beg to –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Mr Speaker, the holder of the Floor is giving the House a very constructive contribution. Is it in order for the Members of the Front Bench on the government side to disrupt the good flow of information from the honourable member holding the Floor? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: We should listen to the Member’s contribution.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, actually I was winding up by urging government that if this law comes into place, we should put our feet down for us to move into this sector, which is so important. The honourable engineer was talking of engineers having a line of juniors down, but even I as an accountant; I must have a lot accounts assistants below me. Thank you very much.

5.58
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make one or two comments. First of all I would like to associate myself with those who are in support of this very important Bill. It should have come yesterday. 

I recall vividly, among my first statements that I made in this House was a statement about this Bill that has come today; it is almost two years ago since but still, better late than never. I know that one principle of legislation is that if you cannot enforce, do not legislate. This comes in at the heels of paragraph (d) on page 4. I did not like the sentence, which says, “The BTVET sector in the Ministry of Education and Sports has failed to attract donor assistance and funding because it lacked legal framework.” The impression I got when I read this one was that maybe my government, which I love so much, depends so much on donor assistance and rations, that I felt very uncomfortable. This is priority No.1 if we are to industrialise. I would have loved to see, vividly, our BTVET programmes being funded fully like UPE and USE. I would be very comfortable and then I would know that we are moving forward somewhere. 

I certainly do not agree with one of my colleagues who was trying to downplay the role of BTVET graduates. These are the key result areas. In most of these developed countries, it is the other way round. They fund more BTVET programmes than these university programmes. I have had an opportunity to look at South Africa. In South Africa, hon. Members, if you want to go to O’ or A’ Level, it is upon you and your parents; you must sponsor yourself. If you want to go to university, you must sponsor yourself. But if you choose to go for BTVET programmes, you are sponsored almost 100 percent. I would like to see that kind of arrangement here in Uganda and then I would know that we are doing something about employment in the future, about industrialisation, about skills improvement - (Interjection) 

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, my colleague. I basically want to confirm and to give more information about what you are saying. My first training after secondary school was along this line. I was in Busitema National College and I am happy to see my principal then, here in front of everybody. I was there first for two years and when I came to Kampala for industrial training, even my chief engineer did not know what I knew at that time. He would come and ask me to tell them what to do. And I am just sorry that I have not been part of the total check up of this Bill. I may not be aware of what is there because I had a problem; but I only wish that what we had in Busitema then is what has been brought and is part of what is brought up this Bill. 

I was in Busitema, one of the colleges that were started by assistance from external funders, the Russians. They funded us from A to Z. One time as they were leaving, my former principal here can bear me witness, there were some few things that they wanted to deny us and we had to close the show. When government brought them, we became what we are and from that day to date, not a single member of my class is suffering in this country -(Laughter)- including myself -(Laughter). The reason is that the Russian style was such that 65 percent was practice and I can assure you that there are very few Members here, whether engineers, or what, whom I got in this town who knew the electricity I had in my head -(Laughter)- and up to now I can assure you that I have done a lot of work here and everybody knows what I have done. (Laughter) 

So, I basically want to give this information that what the honourable member is saying is correct. Many of our colleagues who start from above and who are purportedly supposed to supervise basically do not even supervise because in the first place they do not know what they are supervising -(Interjections)- that is the truth! Take it from me. Take it or leave it. The Russians dissected electricity for me into 12 course units. In Makerere it is only three -(Interjections)- yes they are only three course units for electricity. Every aspect of electricity is known to you and you must pass it to be able to qualify to go to the second year.

So, I am giving this information to the honourable member and to the august House, that this is the cornerstone. All these houses you see collapsing are collapsing because those who are working -(Interjections)- and I request that this money be given and be taken more so as UPE. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: There should be a difference in functions. You think the commander should be the tank driver? (Laughter)

MR OCHIENG: I give my friend who gave me the Floor the chance to complete his point.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, my colleague, hon. Ochieng, for that very good information. I am sure every one of us has benefited a lot from it. That is the beauty of it all. I think it is high time we came out very strongly and clearly about what we want to see in our country as legislators. We should prioritise BTVET as one of the priorities if we are to make any headway towards our vision of industrialisation. 

We could also think about a hybrid system. I come from a very rural constituency. In this very rural constituency, we have only one private technical school so to say. But next to this technical school, we have a secondary school. You should see the difference. The graduates from this very sleepy, slippery - I do not know how to call it - but very weak secondary school, are not in any way comparable to these graduates in these other private, vocational schools. Graduates from the private, vocational school easily get employment. I know quite a number of them; they are now the biggest contractors in the district. 

On the other hand, oh my God, can’t we think of a hybrid? Senior secondary schools, during those olden days, schools like Mbarara High School, used to have vocational training programmes like woodwork, metalwork, and that kind of stuff. Can’t we have those reinstated today in our modern senior secondary schools? Is it so difficult that we can’t at least reintroduce those ones? Again it all boils down to prioritisation and funding. 

As a student, long time ago, we were being taught about trees that grow in England. Surely, of what benefit was that to me? Trees that grow in England -(Laughter)- you all must have gone through it in one way or another. I think it is high time we said enough is enough and we turn around. We have talked about the curriculum and the colonial mentality. When are we going to change? It is high time hon. Minister of Education, through you, Mr Speaker, that we came out very revolutionarily in as far as the curriculum in our schools is concerned. I would love to see that one. But that notwithstanding, I stand here to strongly support this Bill and I hope some of those observations will be taken very seriously by the honourable minister. 

I will be passing a document soon about how we should be prioritising especially using the Millennium Development Goals; and that one should be one of them, actually it is one of them. As we go towards this budgeting process, we should be aware of what is expected of us internationally and even locally. This time round let us be very critical; let us look at issues like BTVET and ensure that it is fully funded. Let the donors come at the last minute when we possibly cannot - but priority should be through us, our own funding not through donors. I thank you so much. 

6.11
MS REBECCA NALWANGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity given to me. I am one person who has stood up to support the passing of this Bill just because it is a Bill, which is not going to conflict with our Ugandans. It is a Bill which will not cause government even to go for further consultations like some other Bills would require. I am very sure it is a Bill, which is relevant to Ugandans and a Bill, which is going to support many of our government programmes like the fight against poverty.

I would love to make my observations after also thanking the committee and the minister for bringing up this Bill and for the comments.

One observation I am seeing is on page 3, part (c), which states: “Effect of existing technical examinations: At present the mandate of settling and conducting technical examinations lies with UNEB. With the establishment of UVQF provided in this Bill, the assessment and conduct of vocational examinations shall be under the mandate of the Directorate of Industrial Training.” My concern here is, I think UNEB is the overall in this mandate. Now, where will UVQF fall? Is it going to do its independent work or is it going to be under UNEB? 

And maybe as we are looking at this Bill, it is a Bill I say is long overdue, as my other colleagues have been saying so, and it is a Bill which would have been passed yesterday because of its relevance. But as we are passing this Bill, I would just like to urge Government that we should look at all the resources and all the required materials to make this law, if it is indeed turned into a law so that at least it helps our fellow Ugandans. 

I would also urge government that we should also look at the existing institutions, which already have infrastructure but are not being utilised to its full capacity or it is not utilised to the maximum. I just want to cite an example of an institution, which is in my district; this is Bukalasa Agricultural College. When you look at the infrastructure there, I feel that it can accommodate many more Ugandans than what it is accommodating right now. So, my concern is that we should also look at such infrastructure, which is already in place so that we make Ugandans benefit. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, do you have any comments? Because these were observations, no clarification was sought from you. Do you have any comments chairman or minister? If you do not then I will put the question. 

6.15
MINISTER OF STATE TOF HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the members for supporting the Bill. We are heartened as a ministry to see that we have such support. 

There were a few areas, which were mentioned but which I think some of the Members answered. The major area is about how one can proceed to move to a degree if one has a diploma. I would like to say that we have the National Council for Higher Education, which is responsible for accrediting programmes in the university and looking at the courses. So, this institution is in a position to recommend what should be the qualification one would need to go to a university. 

And since public universities are supervised by the same institution, I think the element of having Makerere will need four years and then Kyambogo five years and yet the supervising is the same; this will have to be looked into. Because we would like to make it a smooth sailing for someone who has got a First Class, let us say in a diploma in Engineering and wants to apply to go to Kyambogo or Makerere, to have almost the same yardstick for that person to proceed to the next level. 

The other area which was [Mr Ssekikubo: “Can I give information?”] I thought I was just answering what members had already put before the ministry.

THE SPEAKER: He is just responding to what has been raised.

MR OPIO GABRIEL: The other area, which quickly I would like to respond to, was the doubt which members expressed that the donors may not have been pushing for us to have a Bill. Yes, we have had KFW and GTZ giving it as a condition for us to have the law but that does not mean that we as a ministry did not have that objective of making this law. 

Secondly, I would like to state that it is true that the Ministry of Education and government in the past have been allocating lower levels of resources to the technical areas and that is why we are now saying that the percentage of allocation in technical areas is higher. It was about 2.5, now we are approaching five percent and we are moving hopefully to seven percent. So, that is a recognition by government that we need to put more resources in BTVET not that we are only making the law for donors to bring the money. Yes, we need to tap the funds from donors but we must be the leaders. Even these donors, when they come and look at your budget and they see a very low percentage, they will say that the government is not putting this as a priority so we may give you only this. So, we would like to make sure that we move.

The last one was a very fundamental question. What happened to comprehensive secondary education? Actually some secondary school in Eastern Uganda, Manjasi, had comprehensive education. Mengo is still having it but people’s culture at the time in the 1960s was that they did not want to go for these areas. I remember at that time Manjasi students went on strike because the nature of their work required them to wear shorts. The neighbouring school, Tororo College, used to wear trousers. So they were looking at how they would woo the girls at Tororo Girls. So that made these people go on strike because they were wearing overalls and people were saying, “How can you wear overalls in secondary school?” The attitude was wrong. We must change the attitude to make sure that we have comprehensive education in our syllabus but it is very expensive. In order to have it you must spend more.

The other question was: “Are we involving informal as well as formal?” If you look at objective No.4, it is providing for both informal and formal so that if you do not know how to speak English but you know how to repair a vehicle, you have module on which you will work on and if you are examined by an engineer in that area and you pass, you are going to have a certificate in that area. So that informal bit is part of this Bill. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled the Business Technical Vocational Education and Training Bill, 2008, be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much for the contribution. You have helped the ministry to improve this subject. With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 April 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)




