Thursday, 8 April 2004

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I welcome you, honourable members. I want to introduce to you the group of Abalamogi, who are in the strangers’ gallery. (Applause). They are from Gadumire sub-county in Bulamogi County of Kamuli District. The visit has been co-ordinated by hon. Gagawala Wambuzi, who is not here apparently - (Laughter). You are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda.  

Honourable members, this is the last meeting before Easter. I want to take this opportunity to appeal to you that when we leave for Easter festivities, we resolve that we are going to resurrect love in us so that we love each other, we tolerate each other, and love our country. When we come back, we should deliberate on national issues in a sober manner and get prepared for other important tasks that are ahead of us. I wish you a nice Easter.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to wish all of you a happy Easter; but I have two procedural problems. The first one is that in the year 2001 you appointed a committee on Election Violence. We debated its report, we were about to finalise it. I do not know when we are going to adopt it.  

Two, I put in a question for oral answer last year in October; I do not know if it is going to be answered. It was a very urgent question in my opinion because it touches on Parliament, on the operation of OPPD and the Commission. Mr Speaker, I want your guidance on these two.

THE SPEAKER: We shall search in our records and find out about your question. About OPPD, I have seen your letter, which you have copied to many, but I regret to say the language that was used should have been toned down.  

On the issue of violence, if there was a debate, apparently I was not the one who presided over it. But if you did not pronounce yourselves on it, I will make sure that when we come back after Easter we do so.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2004” be read the first time. The Bill is duly accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications.

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations. (Laughter) Well, the Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to handle and then report appropriately.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE AMNESTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Miyingo Kezimbira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, 2003” be read for the first time. The Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to scrutinise and then make an appropriate report.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I had wanted to intervene before the Minister read the Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, but since he has already read it, I believe you could let me say something. We are legislators, and we all know that the government is at liberty to introduce a Bill whenever it wants. But I think whenever Bills come to this House, Government should take trouble to give a background to some of these Bills; for example, for a long time we have been talking about amnesty. The people I represent in Lubaga South, would have liked to know the background –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are directing your submissions at a Bill, which has been given a first reading and now it has become the property of this House. It has been committed to an appropriate committee to handle, and every Member of this Parliament is free to go to the appropriate committee and make his submission. Why do you not reserve your comments? You may reject it; you may improve it. So, I think I would advise that you go to the committee – I think it is the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee - and address the committee on these issues instead of doing it now because it may not help really.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, while I agree with your ruling, it is also appropriate for us to know the role of Parliament in accordance with our Rules of Procedure. I beg to be advised, can this House not reject the Bill –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Exactly.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Even at the plenary level?

THE SPEAKER: The House must have it before it can reject it. You do not reject something, which has not come to you, which has not knocked on your door. So, in Committee you can advise the committee to reject and then market your views, then we shall be able to take the necessary action.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.37
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise under rule 35 of our Rules of Procedure, which is on page 47 of the book, to make the following statement. 

On 24 February 2004, a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) atrocities in Uganda was tabled in Parliament by Hon. Dora Byamukama -(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to our Rules of Procedure a ministerial statement attracts debate. He is supposed to have given us copies of the statement so that we can be able to debate it properly. Is it procedurally correct for the Minister to go on without giving us copies of this statement?

THE SPEAKER: I did not know that you did not have copies.

PROF. KAGONYERA: But, Mr Speaker, if I can read the rule.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Rule 35(1) states as follows: “A Minister may make a statement at the appropriate time on the sequence of business prescribed by rule 18 (Order of Business) with the prior permission of the Speaker whether for the purpose of explaining Government policy or action upon any matter.” 

Rule 35(2): “All statements made by Ministers shall be debated.”  That is all the rules say.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you want to hear the reaction of Government on the motion, or you want to postpone it until you get copies of it? Is it in your interests that we postpone it?

PROF. KAGONYERA: First of all, Mr speaker, what I am going to say is in text form and it will be available to members. 

Secondly -(Interjections)- can I be allowed to complete what I am saying?

THE SPEAKER: Please, allow him to complete what he wants to say.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Yes, what is the big deal, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Please!

PROF. KAGONYERA: Copies of this statement are coming to this House and the reason these - members are free to work or not to work - the reason these copies are a bit late is that some of the contents of this statement were arrived upon only yesterday afternoon. Therefore, in the course - and we thought members would be interested in knowing - (Interjection)- if they are not, I thank you, Sir.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, you had properly guided the House and asked the members what we should do. I am sure this question was based on a precedent in this House, and we wish to maintain order and the credibility of us as a House. Should we not proceed the way you were guiding this House?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, when we left our offices the machine making them had – (Laughter)- just a minute, please – the machine had a little problem, which we rectified and we had made 80 copies -(Interjections)- please, have some regard. I wish to assure you, I am a professional person. Within a short period, those copies will be right here. 

The other time, honourable members, you did ask us whether we had responded to the motion of Parliament and I did urge hon. Kagonyera, who was in charge of an inter-ministerial meeting, to have this matter tabled. So we have done all these actions in good faith and we expect you to reciprocate. We thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we passed a resolution some time ago, and our interest is to see how far the Executive has gone with the resolution. The statement is to explain what has happened. Should we now say we do not want to hear it because we do not have copies of it? The Prime Minister has said the copies will be distributed later. The Minister is supposed to read the statement. Why don’t you listen to it? If after reading the statement you think you cannot make a contribution until you have got a copy, then we postpone the debate. I think that is a solution. Please, can you proceed with your statement?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the honourable members for allowing that this statement be read, and as the Prime Minister has said, definitely the copies are coming. I have never been in the habit of telling lies; never.  

Mr Speaker, on 24 February 2004 a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) atrocities in Uganda was tabled in Parliament by hon. Dora Byamukama, Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. It was debated and subsequently adopted by this House.  

Since the adoption of the resolution, Cabinet has met and considered it and the following is Cabinet’s response:  

1. Cabinet fully supports the condemnation, in the strongest terms, of the barbaric atrocities committed by the terrorists. We are equally grateful to the Government of Sudan for all forms of assistance and collaboration it is extending to Uganda to fight the terrorists. It is in this regard that the Uganda Government will endeavour to promote bilateral relationship with Sudan, especially our understanding with Sudan Government that permits us to undertake military operations against Kony and his rebels in Southern Sudan.

2. The above arrangement is part of the broad framework to step up and sustain security for people in the war-affected areas of Northern and Eastern Uganda.  

I wish to add, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that His Excellency the President personally camped in Soroti to oversee the LRA rebels flushed out of the Teso sub-region. Peace has now generally returned to the Teso region and large numbers of internally displaced persons have now returned home. If I can be allowed, Sir, let me also recognize the contributions made by the Members of Parliament from Teso sub-region in making sure that this menace is gotten rid of. I need not mention their names, but some are here in the House and we appreciate.  

The Office of the Prime Minister has supplied the homes of the internal displaced peoples’ households returning home with agricultural tools including hoes, pangas and axes, starting with Kaberamaido District. Katakwi District and Soroti Districts will be served next week.  

His Excellency the President is currently camped in Lira District to equally oversee military operations against the rebels in the Lango sub-region. Whereas there may be occasional incidences of rebel attacks against civilians, the insurgency affecting the Lango sub-region is also fast returning to reasonable peace. There is, therefore, enhanced security for the people in the rebel-affected areas of Northern and Eastern Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, let me add that members of the Lango sub-region have also played a very significant role in mobilizing the people and making sure that everybody participates in establishing peace in that region. (Applause).

It is also Government’s position that with the planned recruitment of more personnel into the Uganda Police Force and provision of more equipment and logistics, the maintenance of law and order will be greatly enhanced in all the districts affected by the insurgency.  

3. On the participation of the local population in the fight against the LRA terrorists, the government wishes to reiterate its appreciation and gratitude to the various leaderships in the Teso, Lango and Acholi sub-regions to rise against terrorism.

I have already said this, Mr Speaker, and perhaps this is for emphasis - the role played by the citizens in supplementing the efforts of the UPDF should not be regarded as supplanting the role of the Army. UPDF’s presence in the rebel-affected region is vivid. Their resolve to fight the rebels and protect the citizens and their property remains the cardinal role of the UPDF. The training and arming of the volunteer fighters under the command and supervision of the UPDF is part of the resolve to ensure permanent presence of peace, tranquility, law and order in Teso, Lango and Acholi sub-regions.  

I wish further to add that His Excellency the President’s consultation with the Members of Parliament from the rebel affected areas as well as the local leadership, has been on-going. It is particularly intended to ensure that the people’s representatives have an input in the strategies and other framework that are put forward to guide the operations against the insurgency. Cabinet is supportive of regular meetings whenever opportunities exists between His Excellency the President and hon. Members of Parliament to discuss issues related to the insurgency with the view to gaining consensus on the way forward.  

4. In the motion for a resolution of Parliament on the LRA atrocities in Uganda that was adopted by Parliament, there was a position that the “areas ravaged by war should be declared humanitarian disaster areas” as a way to access security and relief assistance, promote awareness about the suffering caused by the LRA and attract more funds and other forms of assistance from the international community. 

Government considered the above position and its justification. It is, however, His Excellency the President and Cabinet’s position or view that declaration of an area as a humanitarian disaster would not necessarily enhance foreign assistance. We have had discussions with donor representatives in this country on this subject. They are indeed of a similar view.  

Government, however, agrees that despite the persistent and continued Government’s efforts to address the situation in the North, the coordination, administration and management of the humanitarian situation needs special and high profile attention. It is in recognition of this challenging task that Cabinet has agreed to set up a Special Presidential Committee under the Chairmanship of His Excellency the Vice-President. Membership of this high profile committee is as follows:

• The hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees

• The hon. Minister of Defence

• The hon. Minister for General Duties, Office of the Prime Minister

• The hon. Minister of Internal Affairs

• The hon. Minister of Health

• The hon. Minister of Education and Sports

• The hon. Minister of Water, Lands and Environment

• The hon. Minister of Local Government

• The hon. Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

• The hon. Minister of Works, Housing and Communications

• The hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

• The hon. Minister of State for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation

• The hon. Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs

• The hon. Minister of State for Luwero Triangle

The mandate of the committee will include the following – by the way, let me add that (this must have been by omission) this committee will involve other stakeholders like the local leadership in the affected areas, and Members of Parliament. The ones I have stated here are the people from the Executive arm of Government.  

The mandate of the committee will include the following:

• Planning, implementing and coordinating initiatives geared at addressing the situation in the disturbed Acholi, Lango and Teso sub-regions;

• Mobilizing resources for executing the planned activities;

• Liaising closely with the security organs to ensure provision of security to the affected population;

• Drawing up short and medium-term plans to ease congestion in camps and provide social amenities;

• Reallocating financial resources other than poverty action funds between sectors guided by the priorities in each affected district or sub-region.

The committee will start its work immediately and I appeal to the hon. Members of Parliament, especially those from the LRA affected districts, to give it all the support necessary.

Mr Speaker, as I come towards the conclusion of my statement, I wish to focus on the position taken and adoption to appoint a day of national mourning to remember those killed by the LRA rebels.  

It is the view of Government that in light of other massacres such as the Kichwamba incident, the Kanungu, Luwero Triangle massacres, et cetera, which are not attributable to Kony and his rebels, Government will find an appropriate day for national mourning in honour of all the innocent citizens who have met their death at the hands of Kony and other terrorists. It is, however, important to point out that the government remains extremely concerned about the loss of any innocent citizen whose life is taken by unlawful characters. His Excellency the President’s personal presence on the 27 March 2004 at the funeral of the internally displaced persons killed at Barlonyo in Lira District is manifestation of the utmost concern Government attaches to any form of killings or massacres in the country.

Mr Speaker, while emergency interventions have all along been undertaken by Government to provide security and humanitarian assistance to the people in the rebel affected areas, the major determination is to end the war both militarily and through dialogue so that the people, especially the internal displaced people, may go home and lead a normal life. We are confident that this wish will be achieved. 

It is in view of the above expectation that Government has already prepared a recovery and development plan for Northern Uganda that outlines the activities to be carried out in the short, medium and long term. Discussions are on going with the development partners on this plan.  

Mr Speaker, Government hopes that peace will soon return to the insurgency affected areas. We, therefore, appeal to the hon. Members of Parliament to fully join us in the effort to pacify the Acholi, Lango and Teso sub-regions.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you and hon. Members of this Parliament for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much, honourable minister.

2.59
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am happy that the honourable minister is putting to this House a position following a resolution that was passed in this House when that motion was moved. I do, however, take reservation on the argument for not declaring the northern parts of this country a humanitarian disaster area.  

Mr Speaker, the argument for instance that there is peace in the Teso region and, therefore, there is no humanitarian disaster, I find it a bit uncomfortable because while there is peace, the region needs interventions, which have apparently elluded us for a long time.  

I was in my constituency, which was previously hit by LRA, and the people have gone back there but the need for food is still as glaring as it was before. I was in Tuburu sub-country and they had taken three or four months without receiving any food. I was later on informed - just two weeks ago - that food went there for the first time. The people are still starving, the medical services are still lacking and they are still in those camps without water. So, I have a problem with this argument that because peace has been – and besides even in those areas where there is not much peace, I think we are confronted with a situation which will take this country 20 or 30 years from now to recover from. I am convinced some of these issues we will not get over them.  

The argument, Mr Speaker, here is not about goodwill. We recognize that there is goodwill on the part of Government to end this crisis but the problem here is that we do not have the resources. We are overwhelmed by the needs in those places, and I think that should be the position, which Government should be looking at. Where are the resources coming from if 15,000 people have to draw water from a single water source? It is not about goodwill. The talking we are doing here goes to cover the goodwill, and each one of us has goodwill at this particular moment. We are all condemning the LRA, but these people are not going to eat the words that this Parliament is speaking; they are not going to eat the words that come from Cabinet.

They want food, they want water, and they want medical services on the ground. Maybe the honourable minister could help me understand how different this Presidential team, looking at this situation in Cabinet, is going to be? Because I thought these are the same ministries we have been taking to task. We have been asking the Ministry of Health, “What are you doing? Minister in charge of Water, what are you doing?” You know, everybody saw how they were just coining some words that – what is the magic in saying that there is a Presidential something? These people have all had the mandate for the last many years to address the situation and they find difficulty not because they do not have another name but because the resources are lacking. So, would the honourable minister help me to understand the magic in this new name? Will this change the situation? I thank you.

3.30
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Central Division): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was not an enthusiastic supporter of this motion to declare Northern Uganda a disaster area, but after listening to the response from Cabinet, I have two observations to make. 

One, I am deeply worried. In this country we will never have peace because people never want to accept loss. Even when it means democratic loss, people always want to win. We sat here in this august House, all ministers were here, and we debated for more than a day and at the end the resolution was adopted. Some of us were not empathetic with the resolution, we said, “Yes, if there is general will, people say the majority have decided that they want a resolution. We must respect it and give all the necessary support we can.” But our brothers and sisters, our colleagues in the Cabinet decided to completely defy what we agreed on as the entire House. 

I am worried this is setting a danger to see that –(Applause)- Kony does not want to accept defeat, even when the will of the majority says, “please, give up”. Now our friends are also saying they do not want to give up or to compromise even when the majority are saying they want a, b, c, d. Dear friends, colleagues in Cabinet, why could we not at least come up with a compromising composition instead of almost throwing into the dustbin what was a good idea? This is the general position. I feel the attitude we must promote should be that of reconciliation and compromise.

Last and very specifically, my colleague has already mentioned or asked many questions about this animal called “Special Presidential Commission”. May I ask, what are the financial implications of establishing this commission? What is the budget of this commission? Where is the money going to come from to fund this commission? Thank you.

3.07
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): First of all, I would like to congratulate the Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister, for coming up with this response of Government. And maybe the Rt hon. Prime Minister should take it upon himself to use his office to ensure that we get responses to other resolutions of Parliament that we have not had Government response on.  

Mr Speaker, I think this response also marks a watershed, a watershed where Government is now responding to Parliament with one voice after careful consideration in Cabinet. I was taken aback when after Parliament passed this resolution in the presence of members of Cabinet and some of them went to the press the next day denouncing what was democratically passed on the Floor of this House. I think the method they have approached now is not an acceptable manner of operation in all Commonwealth democracies -(Interjection)- well, I do not want to use that, but it is not the acceptable manner of handling Parliamentary affairs in the Commonwealth democracies.

I would also like to get clarification about the setting up of a very large committee, which almost covers every member of Cabinet. If indeed there is no humanitarian disaster in the North, what is the necessity for this big committee? What is it? It defeats my understanding. There is no disaster and you are now diverting the attention of the whole Cabinet to attend to a situation where there is no disaster? Amazing really; amazing, and it is more amazing that even His Excellency the Vice-President has agreed to chair that committee. It is amazing when there is no disaster and yet you find time to attend to non-issues.  

Mr Speaker, it is high time that Government started taking Parliament very seriously indeed because Parliament was not engaging in idle talk in passing the resolution on declaring Northern Uganda a disaster area. I was touched by the overwhelming support given to Parliament by the donor community, yes, and the minister tells Parliament that the passing of a resolution will not necessarily lead to flow of funds? That is not correct. The minister is being very economical with the truth about the matter. 

Indeed, the day after the resolution was passed, US $4 million was mobilized and made available to Government and still you say there will be no extra flow of funds to this effort? We should be more serious than that. One thing I am glad we all anticipate -(Interruption) 

PROF. KAGONYERA: I thank the honourable member for giving way. If I can give one instance of our consultations, immediately after here I took my phone and rung the Head of the European Union Delegation to Uganda, Mr Sigurd Illing. I talked to him, I asked him about this. He said, “No, it is not so necessarily.” So, the provision I have in here – may be you Members of Parliament you have your own members of the donor community you deal with. But we have those we deal with and an honourable member here is saying that –(Interruption)- I think if a member cannot respect another member; he himself does not deserve any respect at all. I thank you, Sir.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I just stand to seek some clarification from the honourable minister. When he rung the European Ambassador, did you ring him in your capacity as hon. Kagonyera, or did you ring him on behalf of Government? We want to find out about that dialogue. How was it?

2.42
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Honourable members, I wish to assist the minister and confirm that what he has said is true. In fact in my case, I also did have extensive discussions with one High Commissioner – in my case I have not quoted them because I did not ask for permission on whether I should quote them. They also confirmed that declaring a disaster area would not necessarily mean additional irrigation of those areas. They also added that they are already there. “We are already there, we are already assisting you. Making this declaration would not necessarily mean further assistance.” 

However, I must add that the atrocities were now globalised and people became very sympathetic.  

Finally, let me also say in clarification that unfortunately we do not appear to have an Article under which you can declare a disaster. But we do have Article 110; there you declare a state of emergency, and to declare a state of emergency –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, in this House this is not the first resolution passed by Parliament to declare a part of Uganda a disaster area. We have done so several times. Could the Rt Hon. Prime Minister tell the House which Article this Parliament was using in order to declare those areas disaster areas?

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, as my colleague has ably put it, I would like the hon. Prime Minister to clarify whether in 1994 when the government declared some parts in the Western region - because of famine and drought and the cows were dying - disaster areas, how does it differ from the people who are dying now in the North? It is disastrous.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I am extremely grateful for those questions but I take this opportunity to say that copies are being distributed. So we have honoured our pledge, we do not supply air.  

First of all, when you mention 1994, we are operating a constitution of 1995. 

No. 2, if we took actions in the past not following a framework which was not the best, we can always improve our framework. So, do not say, “In the year 2000 we did this”. There are mistakes, which have been made in the past and we correct our mistakes. Let me -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, following what the Prime Minister is raising that there was no framework at that time; does the Prime Minister mean that the solution we declared here was illegal?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Is the hon. Prime Minister aware that when we met the President one of the Members of Parliament told the President that they accepted Western Uganda to be declared a disaster area because of the President’s affiliation with cows? It was raised to the President. So, are you not trying to impute motive in this House that the regional placement of any area would matter in deciding whether it would be declared a disaster area or not?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I will answer those issues, allow other people to speak and then my colleague will answer too. But I thought I made it clear that we are operating under the 1995 Constitution, so I do not understand what the problem is. 

I also want to add that by declaring a disaster, our experience does not indicate that foreign assistance will be increased. It did not increase in the past. So, we also learn from –(Interruption)- well, that is your statement but you must verify your statement and since I am in charge of Government and I have facts, I shall require you to indicate.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the Prime Minister who is in charge of Government that there is no foreign assistance yet because of the attitude this Government has taken.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I want to inform you that Uganda is held in high esteem. Our attitude is one of cooperation. From time to time we have some disagreements and these disagreements are aired openly, but we are working amicably with our financial partners.  

Lastly, someone asked whether when disaster was declared it was illegal, I did not mention that it was null. I simply said that you could improve the framework. You can have a poor framework, another one, which is average, and a better framework. We have our new Constitution, which is a basis for handling our problems now, and we must carry out actions under certain Articles. Thank you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad that my colleagues have enriched my debate and I am glad that Government has not contradicted what I said that actually following our resolution, we were able to receive US $4 million. I think Parliament should pat itself on the back for that. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, I want to confirm that in 1994 I was the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Agriculture and indeed a disaster was declared. The import of declaring that area a disaster was that the Ministry of Agriculture was able to access funds under a special fund to be able to deal with that disaster. And indeed the import of our resolution was to tickle the conscious of Government to mobilize resources within and without, to direct those resources to Northern Uganda, and to address the humanitarian suffering that is being experienced there. Children are dying daily; women who spend a whole day trying to get a drop of water for food preparation, mature women cannot bathe even when in their periods. We should be ashamed of ourselves to come here and say that is not a disaster and yet in the Draft Policy of Government, which is in the Office of the Prime Minister, such conditions as we have described in Northern Uganda are classified as conditions that fulfil a disaster condition. I am waiting for you to bring that policy here and then you will answer to the Ugandans on why now you cannot accept conditions in Northern Uganda as a disaster and yet they are contained in your draft policy statement.  

Mr Speaker, I am glad they are talking about reconstruction of Northern Uganda. We would be happy to be privy to the programme for the post conflict Uganda. We would be happy to receive from Government, particularly from that high-powered Cabinet sub-committee, a programme for handling humanitarian assistance to Uganda. We are now still saddled with the programme of Luwero Triangle partly because the relief and reconstruction of the Luwero Triangle effort was mismanaged. And indeed donors were very reluctant to put money into the reconstruction of Luwero. That is why the reconstruction of Northern Uganda should be handled more carefully than what happened in Luwero. If a war situation, which lasted for five years has taken more than 18 years to address, how about Northern Uganda, which has suffered for the last 18 years? This is a matter, which should not be trivialized or else history will judge us very harshly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.23
MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office responsible for general duties for making this attempt to respond to a parliamentary resolution, which we agreed on and passed. I am finding it difficult to accept this report in the event that Government has carefully blocked the acceptance of this parliamentary resolution, and Government has chosen to interpret it differently and handle it differently. But it is still all the same managing a disaster situation in that part of this country.  

I have two or three concerns, Mr Speaker. A few days ago the President changed his role. He is now a retired General. At that time, when he was camping in the North in Lango, he was a Lieutenant General, active and founder of the NRA/UPDF. I do not know with this new role whether he will still be an effective commander overseeing the operation in this affected area. I will need that explanation because a Commander-in-Chief definitely plays a different role from that of a full commander and active officer in the military.  

I want to also express some fear when Government asserts that by the President’s presence in Teso, peace returned there. Now that he has moved to Lango, peace is moving to Lango, and eventually he will go to Gulu, Kitgum that is Acholi sub-region, and peace will eventually move there too. Mr Speaker, we had an opportunity when the President invited us to meet him far away in Baralegi, and I saw the state in which the President is living. It is not very pleasant. It is very lonely and it is very difficult for somebody to easily visit him there and access him –(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member. I do not know whether I have heard clearly, but I have been following the honourable member saying that the President was in Soroti and peace came; he is now in Lira taking peace there and he will move to Gulu and take peace there too. If that is what he said, does he mean that the President of this country is the author and carrier of peace, and that wherever he goes there is peace? Is it true that he must be in the Army in order to bring peace? 

I want this clarified because if the President is Commander-in-Chief of the Army, that means he is commanding a whole army, which must be able to protect our security with or without the President around. Is he keeping the key to peace with him alone so that peace cannot go everywhere? And was he holding onto this key so that people may suffer first and then they have to realise that he is the bringer of peace? I cannot understand.

MR ODIT: I really want to thank my honourable colleague for snatching the point I was developing. I was actually targeting to raise this particular issue that the President moves from one place to another taking peace. And what I discovered is that the President moves with a special brigade. Soon he will leave Lango sub-region and move elsewhere with this brigade, and we do not know really whether the peace he is leaving behind will be permanent. This is my worry. 

His loneliness was clear when he could not see a very senior commander near him, and it is only Members of Parliament who had a fair afternoon with him. So, this worry still stands and I think Cabinet should have taken a day off to reach the area where the President is camping in order to assess the situation on the ground.

Mr Speaker, having seen the composition of this commission, it is a huge one, very expensive and some of them have never even taken trouble as ministers themselves to visit those places. They do not know where these places are and I really wonder whether they will be effective in managing these new challenges. More especially, I am worried because even No. 2 in this country, His Excellency the Vice-President, has never been there. So, we do not know whether the whole Cabinet team, which constitutes this commission, will relocate to these affected areas in order to manage resources from there.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we have just been looking at the supplementary budget. The report will come. Government has a serious shortfall of resources, which should be keeping us up to the end of this financial year. Among the activities to be undertaken by this commission is reallocation of resources. We have tried our best as committees of Parliament to see how we can reallocate the little that is appearing before us in form of supplementary and we have been defeated. How on earth will this huge and expensive commission raise the resources in order to manage the situation which requires a lot more than what we are imagining? These areas of concern -(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, those of us who sit behind here sometimes feel that the members on the frontbench feel that we have no brains to think and, therefore, they come with issues which they cannot justify; come with issues which they cannot defend. They try to defend them but they are indefensible. So, we feel very sorry for Government at this stage.

Mr Speaker, when we passed this resolution, we passed it with all members of Cabinet here and in good spirit. None of them even stood in front to say “no”. In fact, even my colleague who was sitting next to me, I was sitting there, I heard him saying, “Aye”. What is it that you people now fear in Cabinet? Even my colleague, hon. Kagonyera, I heard him saying, “Aye” –(Laughter)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, hon. Chebrot is an old friend, and we even served together in the same Government. He knows me in and out. Is he in order to stand before this august House and mislead members into believing that I expressed in any form or manner that I agreed with the resolution, when in fact I did not at all?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think it fair for me to rule on this because I know I have already said the resolution was passed by the entire House. I cannot go back to this.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Every day I see you getting wiser and wiser –(Laughter)- and this gives hope to this country.  

The second point is the issue of the budget for the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. As of now the minister has only a budget of Shs 191 million. It cannot even for example address the issue of disaster in the North. It was in the light of this that we said, “Since it has no budget for the people of the North who are suffering so much, let us pass this proposal” and we passed that resolution in light of that problem. Now they have come back to say, “No, we do not need this area to be called a disaster” and I would like to beg the House that because they are trying to shoot us in the foot, we move a motion to reject this report. That is the only way we can assert our authority as Members of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, under rule 40 I beg to move that the report submitted by the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister be rejected –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what are you moving against? The report is about action, which they are taking to implement whatever they can implement. I think it is not time to reject it. Let us continue with the debate.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I just want to inform the House and honourable members that before this House considered this resolution, the hon. Minister in Charge of Disaster Preparedness had been to this Floor of the House, lamenting. He had been to Cabinet and did not seem to have a solution. He chose to come to this House to lament together with Members of Parliament and after the Speaker of this House - first of all I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for having taken a personal interest in the suffering of the people in Northern Uganda. After the Speaker took personal interest and he provided facilitation for members of this House to have a personal understanding and perception of the suffering of the people of Northern Uganda, even some of us who had reservations came back very changed and we chose to give the people of Northern Uganda hope. 

It was after Cabinet failed that the minister came here. The Speaker organised trips for us to go and we chose to express our solidarity together with the people of Northern Uganda and to say that something must be done. Mr Speaker, in one of these meetings with the donors to Northern Uganda, the donors specifically told us, a group of over 10 Members of Parliament who were in the first shift, that actually their organisations at home some of which had already withdrawn their expatriate staff from Northern Uganda, could not move to facilitate until Government acknowledges that there is a problem and they want assistance which is not forthcoming.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, when you read today’s papers - maybe hon. Kagonyera could help us to understand - and you read a copy of the letter written by our fallen colleague, he could not go to attend a Cabinet meeting in Soroti because his old Benz could not travel there. Where are you now going to get the money to reallocate? The only thing remaining is for us to make an alarm to the international community that, “There is a problem. Run to our rescue”. That is the information I wanted to give. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, there was a proposal on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Which one?

MR AWORI: By hon. Chebrot trying to move a motion but you said – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule?  

MR AWORI: Rule 40, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a statement to tell us what steps are being taken. Let us just debate the statement. If there are motions to come subsequently, they will come but let us debate the substance of this matter.

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, I would like to know because –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I thought the person who was holding the Floor was hon. Odit. I think you just came in to give a clarification then from clarification you went further. It is not fair.

MR ODIT: I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the ruling, and your guidance. But as you recall, I expressed serious difficulty on whether or not I should accept this report and my colleagues are indeed with me. I want to state two last points. The situation is getting worse, particularly in the areas of education for the children and the areas of food for those who are displaced. I will, therefore, urge this commission not to appear by name but to move fast enough.  

Each time we have a serious attack within the country by the LRA, Government is quick to accuse Sudan, which is indeed true and right. In this statement by the minister it is stated: “We are equally grateful to the Sudan Government for all forms of assistance and collaboration it is extending to Uganda to fight terrorists.” I do not know whether Sudan also reciprocates by reporting this kind of position to their Parliament. We would want to really be clarified on affirmative effort, which is being taken by Government to indicate to us that this kind of step is being taken by Sudan.  

What I did myself last month, I took an initiative to invite the Archbishop of Sudan, the whole Province of Sudan and we moved with him to Lango to pray for peace. We used my constituency, which is the base for all churches. He really saw and he was convinced that the situation is very bad. He actually promised to take up the matter very seriously with two other parties. He is to talk to the President of Sudan himself and, also talk to Col Garang. 

But we would want feedback on such kind of efforts. These are the opportunities that we would urge Government to explore so that if we are making such kind of statements, we have researched statements, not diplomatic, not rhetoric, which definitely serve no purpose. So, these are the clarifications that I want from the government side. Now that they have carefully dodged accepting our parliamentary resolution, what do we as Members of Parliament take from this ministerial statement? I thank you.

3.47
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Can I have clarification from the Chair? I am sorry about this, but I am having a very serious problem understanding this particular statement. Mr Speaker, you have ruled quite clearly that we did pass a resolution in this House. But it does seem to me that the purpose of this statement is to negate that resolution. Let me try to amplify. On the first page, second paragraph, the honourable minister says: “Since the adoption of the resolution, Cabinet has met and considered it and the following is the Cabinet’s response” in other words, Cabinet is meeting not to try to implement the resolution, but in order to respond to the resolution. 

I think by parliamentary practice, this is wrong procedure, which has been taken by Cabinet. That was a resolution of the House of which members of the Cabinet are part and parcel.  

Then on page 3, the second paragraph from the top says: “The above position and its justification were considered by Government. It is, however, His Excellency the President and Cabinet’s position that declaration of an area a humanitarian disaster would not necessarily enhance foreign assistance. We have had discussions with donor representatives in this country on this subject. They are indeed of the same view.” Whether they did or not is not important. What is important is that they are trying to undo what Parliament has already done.  

In view of this, Mr Speaker, is there any purpose in continuing debate on this matter, which is a direct challenge to a position, which has already been taken by Parliament without having a counter motion to undo the resolution? Is it possible for Cabinet to have an indirect way of challenging a position already taken by Parliament? Are we not going to open doors for abuse of the processes of this House? I want a clarification on this matter before I move a motion.

THE SPEAKER: If it is a clarification on the purpose of the statement, let the person who wrote it tell us its purpose instead of me answering it.

3.50
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Parliament passed a resolution –(Interruption)- if I can be allowed to continue. You ask for a clarification and you interject? Yeah, absolutely – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have the Floor, honourable minister.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Sir, we sat here and quietly listened to hon. Ben Wacha. He wants a clarification and members do not want it. There are a total of nine items in this resolution. The only ones that Government did disagree with are eight and nine. So, these are the ones and I remember during the debate, very little opportunity was provided for the frontbench to -(Interjections)

HON. MEMBERS: Order, order.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please listen and then you react. I will react to that.

PROF. KAGONYERA: So, Sir, we found it absolutely necessary to let Parliament also know what our views on this resolution are. Yesterday, we held a long Cabinet meeting and deliberated on these issues. By the way, honourable members, it is not correct to say that the position of Government is that there are no terrible conditions in the North. We recognise they are there. The only thing we questioned was the value of merely declaring a disaster area. That is all we are talking about here. Nothing else. 

We are not saying that there is peace and tranquility  -(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Point of clarification.

PROF. KAGONYERA: I am clarifying, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not give him a chance to finish what he wants to say then you can continue?

PROF. KAGONYERA: So, Sir, I really would like to appeal to members of this House to appreciate the fact that we agree with a lot of what is in the resolution -(Interruptions)- it is up to the House. That is why you brought it here for debate and the purpose of the debate is the agreeing, disagreeing, clarifying and we came here to put to this House our views on the resolution that was passed, that was advisory to the government. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, my understanding now is this: he has brought this statement to tell us the steps that have been taken to implement part of the resolution. He is expressing that they are unable to deal with parts of the resolution declaring a disaster area, but the others they are accepting and they are taking steps to implement them. That is his statement.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The proceedings of this House are public and are recorded in the Hansard. For the benefit of future Hansard readers and those who may want to see what goes on in the House, the honourable minister has just made a statement, which imputes bad motive on the part of the Chair. You have always chaired this House according to the Rules of Procedure and you see those people who must be seen when they seek an opportunity. (Applause) 

The rules also provide for the opportunity to challenge the Speaker’s ruling in case any member of this House is dissatisfied with the question you have put or the manner in which it has been resolved. The honourable minister has just said that the frontbench was not given enough opportunity to respond. Is that procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me answer that one. That one is not correct -(Applause) - because if you get the Hansard of that day, hon. Kagonyera is among the first members that stood to support the motion.  (Laughter and Applause). This is the fact. The other member of the frontbench who came in to say something about this, but maybe it was late then - was hon. Omwony Ojok. 

The other step that was left was to move an amendment after the debate had ended, and according to our rules that was not proper. So, the question of not giving opportunity to the frontbench or the other does not arise. (Applause). It is a fact. The Hansard is the evidence. Let us go on with the debate. I had decided that from hon. Odit I was going to – (Interruption)

3.58
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Motion.

THE SPEAKER: Motion under what rule?

MR WACHA: Motion under rule 42, seeking for adjournment of this debate.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I see rule 42 is about amendments to motion.

MR WACHA: Rule 40(1)(c) for adjournment of this debate. Mr Speaker, my motion reads as follows: 

“This House, being dissatisfied with the statement by the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, in respect to actions taken on resolution of the House passed on the 24 February 2004;

Rejects the same statement and requests the Prime Minister to report action taken by Government towards the fulfillment of the said resolution and to report to this House within two weeks from the date hereof.” I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, you were informed by the minister that Government is finding difficulty in implementing certain parts of this resolution. You were also informed that Government has taken some action in fulfilment of the requirement of the resolution. It is the view of this House, taking into consideration the debate which has been going on, that the House sees the action taken by the Government – 

(1) As a way of undermining the resolution of the House; 

(2) That the action is much too small; and 

(3) That Government is not moving fast enough to fulfil the resolution. (Applause)

Because of the above, I move that this particular report be rejected, so that a much wider report on actions taken by Government is presented to this House so that the matter of the resolution is brought to a final conclusion. I move, Sir.

4.01
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I wish to oppose the motion because first of all, we have formed a special presidential committee -(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, a motion is on the Floor and the Prime Minister has stood up to – is he seconding the motion now? Is he in order to try to second the motion when the motion is on the Floor?

THE SPEAKER: Seconding what? Who is seconding it? Let us hear the other side and then pronounce ourselves on it.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have just formed a special presidential committee. This committee has to meet and work out details. If I come here within two weeks, you will just move the same motion. So, I do not see any purpose. I want to inform this House that these are serious matters and our people are dying. Colleagues, I would request you to take these matters very seriously. Therefore, we need time to work out the details indicated here, and when we have done so, it will be worthwhile because there is always a timeframe required for implementation –(Mr Wacha rose_)- No, I do not want clarification because I want to ensure that you focus on the issues I am raising. These are very few points I am making. 

We have got a new modality whereby these people will have to get resources, and those resources will be obtained from for example, certain actions, which cannot take place because of insurgency. And this committee is not going to consume any money –(Interjection)- it is not. These people are not going to be paid because some people raised this matter. I am informing you. So, we need more time so that we come here and inform you because these are serious matters. I do not want to come here and mention that we are on the brink of doing this; we are on the brink of getting money -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Rt honourable Prime Minister, as I see it, your position is that you are opposing the –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I am opposing.

THE SPEAKER: You are not opposing the adjournment, but you are suggesting that the time given is not enough for you to come to give a detailed report on the action you are taking. Maybe you want more time -(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Okay, there are two issues. One, that time is unrealistic, as you have rightly said. It is extremely - and I hope that hon. Ben Wacha is listening. The time is very unrealistic. 

Number two, I am also saying that you have not appreciated the work, which has been done and, therefore, I oppose rejection of the report because this report is extremely serious –(Interruption)- you may disagree with it, but to reject it is extremely un-motivating. If you kick us in the teeth you are going to de-motivate us.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my understanding of the motion is that we adjourn the debate because the statement is inadequate. We need a more detailed statement. You go back and work on this statement and you give more details. My understanding of your position is that the two weeks suggested in the motion are not enough time for you to come out with the details. So, as far as I see, maybe you should ask for more time to come and give a more detailed action plan. Well, that is my understanding.

MR WACHA: Let me give the Prime Minister some information. Mr Prime Minister, this motion is not in bad faith. If anything, it is one of the best things I have done for Government today. Mr Speaker, when we met His Excellency the President, the issue of declaring the Northern region a humanitarian disaster area came up and we argued about it until he came to understand what Parliament was thinking about. Parliament was not, I repeat, not saying that Government was doing nothing in the North. 

Parliament was saying, “Look! If this area is declared a humanitarian disaster area, then there is possibility of diversion of certain funds, special grants being given to the North” and the President understood it. Then he said, “Please, go and tell Parliament I need two months only to handle this matter.” Those two months will coincide with my two weeks. That is what I am talking about. Do not think I am trying to demean Government; no, but please, also stop your ministers from telling lies. So, this motion is very well reasoned.

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable members, as I see –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, it is important that the special committee we have put into place meets and it will require at least three months -(Interruptions)- yes. I want to inform you that I am a very specialised person in public administration, you can give your timeframes and we shall see what happens.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues, one position that I would like to put to you is that we do understand as Government that there is definitely dire need to respond to the problems obtaining on the ground, particularly addressing the humanitarian issues on the ground.  

We would like to get an opportunity at an appropriate time to give Parliament a progress report even after Parliament has passed the motion. Mr Speaker, I want to put it on record for example that in the health sector we have already taken positive steps. We have now put on the ground a community based health support system -(Applause)- and as I talk now, there is progress to that effect where a big bag, which contains antibiotics and other drugs -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, give him time just to make his clearance. 

DR CHEBROT: Actually, this is very important information for the minister himself -(Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA: Allow me to proceed.  

THE SPEAKER: Please. 

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues, we have also put on the ground the “Roll Back Malaria Strategy”, which is now being accelerated in the North and Eastern parts of the country to address Malaria, which is killing people during the rainy season –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: As I see now the issue about adjourning the debate is clear. The issue now is, “When do you come back to give us a detailed plan?” We give you time, you go back and then after some time, you come back, you say, “Well, following your resolution these are the steps we are taking”.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I agree with you and I would like to agree with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister/Leader of Government Business, to the effect that we make a progress report in three months so that we come up with a more scientific and agreeable position. We should look at the indices, showing how much response has been put on the ground in terms of addressing malaria, infant mortality and morbidity and so on and so forth. These are all factors that you cannot come up with in two weeks. It will be unrealistic.  

MR DOMBO: I want to thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I, first of all, want to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for his concurrence with what the House is saying, most especially about the nature of the report that we must be receiving. For instance, what the Minister of State for Health is saying right now could have been very good information if it had been contained in the statement from the Prime Minister, but it is lacking. Right now the issue of contention is whether two weeks is the time that is necessary or the three months that the Prime Minister has requested for. I would have loved that in the event that the two weeks are not enough, then the Prime Minister will come to the Floor of this House and reports, and I know the House will concur. But to give three months in a situation where people are dying, Mr Speaker that would reflect un-seriousness of this House. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, we do not have to read the rules. This is a factual situation; it is a question of time. Can we adjust time really? (Mr Awori and Mr Mwandha rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, both of you cannot be on the Floor.  

MR MWANDHA: There is a motion on the Floor.

MR AWORI: Motion that you put the question.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, the motion is that I put the question.  

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: I will now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion moved by hon. Ben Wacha that we adjourn the debate and the statement and that Government comes back in two weeks’ time to give us another detailed statement on what is being done.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in view of this and that the Easter season is starting tomorrow, I think it is appropriate time to conclude today’s business. You know Monday is a public holiday and people may live far away from Kampala. I suggest that I adjourn the House to Wednesday and if we do, then I would borrow part of your Friday to transact business. I think this is better for you. So, the House is adjourned until Wednesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 April 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

