Wednesday, 3 April 2002

Parliament met at 2:30p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to welcome you all back from the Easter recess, and to wish you very fruitful activities during the rest of this session.  

During the course of the recess, we learnt of the death of the Queen Mother, at the age of 101 years.  We are associated with the Queen Mother and the Queen of England through the Commonwealth. So, we would like to pay tribute to the Queen Mother who has lived for 101 years. 

She grew up during the wartime, and she has actually been through two world wars: the First World War, and then the Second World War when she was already an adult.  

She married the Duke of York in 1923 and had two children, the present Queen Elizabeth, and the late Princess Margaret who died recently. 

Queen Elizabeth endeared herself to the population by remaining in London throughout the Second World War, including during the bombing of Buckingham Palace. She also carried out a lot of philanthropic activities by visiting victims of war throughout the war. 

Her husband died early, and in 1952, her eldest daughter, Elizabeth, ascended to the throne. She has been one of the biggest supporters of her daughter’s reign, carrying out a lot of ambassadorial activities, both at home and overseas.  

Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, will be buried next Tuesday.  I would like to request the House to observe a minute of silence in honour of a very courageous and resilient lady.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

MR JOHN ERESU: Madam Speaker, when Parliament resumed from the Christmas recess, and when the primary school examination results were released, so many schools had their results cancelled. 

I raised the matter in the House, and the Speaker accorded me the opportunity to put it in writing for a question for oral answer by the Minister. I submitted my question to the Clerk’s office, and I got a reply that the answer to my question should have been provided by the 19th of last month.  

Up to now, I have not been included anywhere on the Order Paper. May I know whether my question for oral answer by the Minister in charge of Education is no longer valid?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Eresu, let me direct that your question be put on the order paper next week on Tuesday.  The Minister of Education is put on notice, and the Minister in Charge of Parliamentary Affairs is advised to do the needful.  

MR AGGREY AWORI: Madam Speaker, I note with great concern that this afternoon we do not have the Vice President and the Prime Minister here. Who is the Leader of Government Business this afternoon, because we have some serious questions to put to him or her? 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I want to make it clear that in the absence of the Prime Minister, the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs represents the Prime Minister in the House to guide Government business in the House. The Minister of Parliamentary Affairs – (Laughter) - ably represents the Government.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can understand when my honourable colleague on the Front Bench says the Government is ably represented in the House this afternoon. That being the case, we have a very urgent matter of national security. Could he advise this House whether we are validly involved in Sudan in terms of warfare? 

I am a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and also regularly attend proceedings of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs. His Excellency the President, Commander in Chief of the UPDF briefed us in the State House, that our operations in Sudan will last from March 18th to April 2nd. Today is 3rd, I am just wondering whether we are validly, legally, involved in Sudan at this moment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, under the law, when you are calculating time, you do not take into account public holidays. So, as far as I am concerned, the days have not yet expired. 

MOTION FOR RESOLUTIONS OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO DECLARE CERTAIN AREAS AS WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AREAS IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 18(1) OF THE UGANDA WILDLIFE STATUTE 1996

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Jovino Akaki Ayumu): Madam Speaker, last Wednesday the House did consider the resolution for Kibale National Park, and members were about to pronounce themselves on it, but a member of the House raised a few issues requiring further consultations with the sessional committee and the minister responsible for the resolution.  I now want to report that we have consulted and harmonised our position in the following areas:
 Those who have got some crops to harvest from the national park - because they were there for some time - will be allowed to go back and harvest their crops. 

1. The meeting was also informed that the unclear boundary has not been resolved, and that during its opening, the committee, together with the local community, will be fully involved.  

2. We further agreed that in the case of Kibale, the issue is broader than the national park and cannot, therefore, be handled by a resolution, which is now before Parliament. We, therefore, appeal to the ministerial committee handling the issue of land, commonly referred to now as “the Kisamba Mugerwa Committee”, to handle the question of land shortage in these areas.  

All in all, it was found out that Uganda Wild Life Authority management seems to have problems with the community around the national park, and the meeting resolved that there was need to work in harmony. By the time we left, the position had been fully harmonised. 

I therefore, beg to move that the statutory instrument and resolution on Kibale National Park, which I had already read to the House, be now passed. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Chairperson have something to say?

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Zachary Olum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I fully concur with the Minister. We had a very exhaustive meeting this morning, and we have agreed that those steps be taken. We agreed that the people in Kibale National Park should be fully involved in identifying the boundaries, and in determining when to implement some of the management strategies. 

We were very concerned about some of the reported high-handedness of the game warders, and we have asked the Ministry and UWA to work together with the local community so that there is complete harmony. So, I fully concur with the Minister’s step. Thank you.

MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister, the chairperson and the whole committee for giving audience to the Members of Parliament from this area, and to the delegation from Kasese, which was here. 

I am not differing very much from what has been reported on the Floor. I just want to say that the proposed boundary is, for the first time, making it clear to the people who had encroached on the park that this is now the boundary. 

The 482 families - although the committee report is talking about 247 - were invited to settle there by the management of Ibuga Prison. Little did they know that there was a dispute between Kibale National Park and Hima UPDF Production Unit and Ibuga prisons over the boundary! So they settled in a piece of land which, by the new boundary, now remains part of the national park, making it appear as if the 482 families are going to be displaced. 

We, including the Land Committee chairperson of the area affected, discussed this matter widely. He is going back to explain to the people. It has been clarified to us and we agreed that this new boundary is going to leave aside four square miles to the people who are being displaced, and we are very happy about that.
 
Our meeting this morning also affirmed to the committee that - which the chairperson has not brought to the House - the whole population of Kasese is squatting. They have been displaced by two big national parks: Rwenzori National Park on the upper side, and Queen Elizabeth National Park on the lower side, and now on the rear, by Kibale National Park. Ibuga Prison Farm, Mubuku Prison Farm, Nyabirongo Prison Farm, Rukoki Prison Farm, government industries - KCCL, Hima have also displaced them, and Kilembe mines. 

So, each time any of these institutions is opening up their boundaries, like Kibale is doing now, people find themselves huddled up from one place to another like cattle. This has injured the feelings of the people of Kasese. 

Much as they appreciate that national parks and government institutions and industries bring in revenue for all of us, we are saying it must not be done at the expense of one section of the community, hence the establishment of the Kisamba Mugerwa Task Force on land disputes in Kasese. Unfortunately, no money has been budgeted. The Prime Minister’s office will agree with me that they do not have more than Shs1.9 million to resettle people displaced by these institutions.  

So, the community of Kasese, in the meeting, appealed to the Minister and the committee - which appeal they have not put on the Floor, and that is why I am standing up to put it on record. I can see they are amazed; I hope they will support me. 

There is need, if we are to settle this apparent conflict for good, for this House, under the Minister of Internal Affairs, to degazette some of these government institutions, especially the prisons that have redundant land, so that the displaced people can re-occupy it and produce crops. After all, Kasese district is known for the production of cotton. 

When Government is signing agreements with AGOA and the people do not have anywhere to produce cotton, then it becomes apparent that creating of new boundaries of a park gives people negative feelings. But if we continue to implement the programme, especially if the Prime Minister’s office is very serious about resettling the community that has been displaced, then I appeal very strongly on behalf of the people so that during the next financial year, we do them two services. One; to equip this taskforce so that they can do their work; and two, to enable the Ministry of Internal Affairs to degazette, through this Parliament, some of the Government institutions where land is redundant.  

If that is done, the people of Kasese will be able to live in harmony with the institutions that we are trying to create now. Thank you very much.

MR KULE MURANGA (Busongora North, Kasese):Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I am the MP for Busongora North, where the problem lies.  

I concur with the honourable minister and the previous speaker, hon. Loyce Bwambale, but I have to add that since Kasese district has been taken by Government - all these institutions we have mentioned, including three parks and whatever - it would be prudent if these people who are landless were given priority in most of these industries and parks, so that they get employment and then they get what to do. Otherwise, how do they earn a living?  

Sometimes it is very surprising that even when our people try to get employment from these institutions, they are the ones who are considered last, and this is more disheartening. In the first place, you are deprived of your land, and then you are also deprived of the chances of employment! So, where do you go? This is very bad, I think. There should be a deliberate policy of assisting people who have been deprived of such land.

Secondly, I remember when Rwenzori Mountain Park was established, we participated, and we agreed that a certain percentage, I think 15 or 20 percent, was supposed to help people neighbouring the national park. But maybe because of insurgency, which has been rampant in the area for some time, there have been less of the proceeds coming to the people. But I would like to request the honourable minister and the ministry to let there be a deliberate policy of assisting these people who have suffered with some of this money as it comes.  

Madam Deputy Speaker, when we objected, it was not that we do not like development like parks, or maybe we are opposed to preserving national heritage, but our people also take precedence. We cannot have so many people being displaced and then we keep quiet! 

We believe that today’s resolution will bear in mind that the areas which are being taken up by parks, by farms and whatever, at one time used to host people. I hope our honourable minister and honourable Members of Parliament will consider this so that the report from the taskforce, which was set up in NRC, should be expedited, and we find alternative areas where people can be settled. And if necessary, degazette some of the forest reserves that are just there redundant. We have Mubuku Forest Reserve and so many other reserves. If possible, they should not add any more of these reserved areas except the ones, which are already there. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance.

MR GABOI KIBAALE WAMBI (Budadiri East, Sironko): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the motion on the Floor.  

Already, one member here has just made a comment saying, “I think it is a motion for the landless MPs”. Indeed, we may sound as if we are landless, but the issues of land, as of now, are compared to acquisition of land for animals. I think the issue is becoming not only for those landless MPs, but it is also affecting those even who have land.

The people in question are now in Kibaale District. In Kibaale District, the people have plenty of land and now the so called landless Bagisu, Bakiga and company limited are the ones now destabilising that area, according to what we read in the papers. 

My problem is that we may sound landless, as I have already said, but the Government has a duty to protect all citizens, landless or with land –(Interjections) Which Government, hon. Awori? This Government; the Movement Government which I believe in -(Interruption). Madam Speaker, can you protect me from the wrath of the hon. ex-aspiring presidential candidate Aggrey Awori? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected from hon. Aggrey Awori’s unwelcome attention.

MR KIBAALE: Our problem is that Government should come up with a deliberate policy on resettlement of people - let them be from disasters, let them be from the issue of landlessness, as it is now - so that in future we do not create situations that may end up in matters of insecurity.  

Last Thursday we agreed that the people of Mt. Elgon should not be evicted from where they are until Government has resettled them. Already, the officials of Uganda Wildlife Authority have taken out their arsenals and they are busy beating up people left, right, centre, and people have again been displaced. They are on the streets in Mbale, on the streets in Budadiri and they are on the hills, hanging without shelter! 

If we had a deliberate policy of resettling people, the people of Mt Elgon, the people of Rwenzori, the people of Kibaale and the ones we have been mentioning would have found an opportunity to go elsewhere. But since Government has no particular policy, people have to find a way of how they can be accommodated within the boundaries of Uganda! And if this happens - that they have probably shifted one or two animals from the boundaries where they were living - it should not be a crime. 

Because it appears to us, honourable members, that if you are found in the park without permission, you are supposed to be arrested or you are supposed to be shot at because they think you may be a poacher or an encroacher.  

So, for the sake of peace in this country, let the animals not take first priority on the land!  The people of Mt. Elgon, those are the people of Budadiri, Bulambuli, Manjiya and those from parts of Kapchorwa, as I speak, if they got an opportunity of going elsewhere where they can settle, they would be willing to move very quickly.  As of now, such displacements are the ones that bring isolated insecurity. These people –(Mr Eresu rose_)

MR ERESU: Thank you my brother for giving way. My brother from the slopes of Mt. Elgon says that the people are hanging on the slopes of Mt. Elgon without any shelter.  And he mentioned that Government must come up with a clear policy on resettlement of people who are being displaced from some land.  The clarification I am seeking is that, is he suggesting that before this motion is passed, Government should first come up with a clear policy on resettlement of people so that when we pass this motion, we shall have passed it knowing where those people being displaced will be going?

MR KIBAALE: What I am saying is this; we have the Prime Minister here, he may have to state the position of Government on this issue of resettlement.  I know the Prime Minister is ably represented by one of the senior ministers in that office; he could state something about Government policy on resettlement of people who are displaced either by disaster or by Government trying to resettle or trying to convert the use of that place to another venture. The Prime Minister is here by the position of the honourable Senior Minister, Prof. Kagonyera Mondo, but he has deliberately said it does not concern him by not responding.  

Currently, the people of Mt. Elgon, as well as the people of Mt. Rwenzori and Kibaale, could be enticed to go into wrong activities because, if their own Government is pushing them into a corner, what else can they do?  They would seek alternatives of security from other sources, and this is not what the people of Uganda would like to have.  They would like a peaceful co-existence of national parks with communities living around the borders.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying, I still keep my reservations to support this motion unless the minister comes out clearly –(Mr Wakikona rose_)

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you Madam Deputy Speaker, and hon. Kibaale for giving way. I would like to inform the member holding the floor that the displacement of people from national parks or forest reserves is making the situation worse.  Because as I speak, people who were displaced as a result of a landslide in Manjiya, Bulambuli and other parts of Mt. Elgon numbering about 10,000, are up to now not resettled. Further displacement of these people from reserves is going to make the situation worse! We are told there is no money to resettle those landslide victims. Thank you.

MR KIBAALE: I think that information is welcome. As far as I know, the people I represent are now desperate; they are talking of a clear policy!  That is the demand they have sent me to put before the House - a clear policy on resettlement.  Otherwise, tomorrow Government will be in position to run up and down and say, what is happening in Mt. Elgon, what is happening in Rwenzori, what is happening in Kibaale, because if the people have nowhere to go, sometimes they may be forced to seek alternatives.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Jovino Akaki): I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable members, for raising points of clarification on the subject under discussion.  

Hon. Bwambale raised the issue of the numbers as reflected in the resolution, and I do agree that there is disparity in numbers, but this is as a result of the period between the study which was done in 1999 and today which is 2002. But the measure we are taking caters for the whole group, as I did mention during the discussion.

It is also true that we did touch on the question of prisons: the number of prisons and Government institutions. But as we did point out during discussions, it goes beyond the mandate of this resolution to recommend degazettement of prisons.  So, while we do sympathize with the honourable member, we referred this issue to the Kisamba Mugerwa Committee, and also agreed that we are going to take it up and really pass the message that the committee recommends that there is need for the exercise to be speeded up.  

I want to re-assure my sister, hon. Bwambale, that we definitely have to report on this. Between the time we met and now, it was not possible to have reported and come back to you, but we are going to take it up and do as we agreed. 

Now, hon. Kule Muranga has given a very good recommendation that there is need to consider these people, in his own words, “deliberate policy to employ people of Kibaale in industries”.  Definitely, I think this is a recommendation nobody can dispute. We would like to have people employed, but again it is not a subject of this resolution really!  But we do sympathize and we are of the view that the industries around there - when people come and they have the qualification and they stand the competition - will be considered alongside others. 

I do not agree though that forests are redundant. Those forests, all of us are aware, have a role to play. They are useful! They may look like not being used but I think they are useful as they are.  

Hon. Wambi talked at length about Mt. Elgon.  Last Wednesday we passed a resolution on Mt. Elgon after consulting with hon. Wambi and his team.  Now, to be recommending that we stay other recommendations until Government comes out with a policy, I think is walking an extra mile. I wish to urge this House to actually pass this resolution because one of the aims of this resolution is really to handle the question of the settlement of the people within the parks, and that has been catered for in the resolutions.  

I do not agree that there has been any new eviction in Mt. Elgon. I do not agree! What could be happening is that as was passed here on the floor of this House, new entrants must be stopped. We are not allowing any new people to go there but we are also not evicting any person before Members of this Committee go to handle the problem.

Again, the question of a resettlement policy is a little bit broader than this resolution can answer; but I really do take your concern.  It is genuine and I do appreciate it! 

Madam Speaker, I still contend that we have resolved a lot of problems that seemed to have been there, and I therefore, recommend that the resolution be passed.  I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me now put the question. The question is that Parliament authorizes the proposal to alter the boundaries of Kibale National Park.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL LOANS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. Honourable members, in our statute books we have The Local Loans Act, (Cap. 154). This law authorizes the raising of money through bonds and stocks from the open market, authorized by or under an act of Parliament.  

What has been happening is that this law has a provision that states categorically under section (7): “Where any stock or bond is to be issued, it can only be done so by a written instrument of transfer.”

Under the present technology, many financial transactions can be carried out without necessarily conforming to the provision of being a written instrument of transfer. You can now make transactions by IT and so on. Therefore, the purpose of the amendment today is to seek this august House to authorize or to pass an amendment to The Local Loans Act, section 7(1), to enable the raising of stocks and bonds to be issued by means, including means that are not in a written form. This is to accommodate the existing technology.  

Madam Deputy Speaker, by way of memorandum, that is what I have to ask this House to do.  I thank you.  

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Haji Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Madam Deputy Speaker and honourable members, The Local Loans (Amendments) Bill, 2001 was committed to the Finance Committee as required by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. The Committee now wishes to report to the House.  

Our method of work, Madam Deputy Speaker and honourable members, was that we met with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and discussed the bill. 

The Committee also examined The Local Loans Act, especially chapter 154 sections 7(1), 8, and 21(g), which are being amended by the bill. 

The object of the bill is to permit the issue of stocks or bonds in an electronic form. 

The Committee observed that the current trend of technology warrants the use of electronics, and the use of written instrument has, therefore, been overtaken by technological development so it should be complimented or supplemented by the modern electronic form.  

Madam Deputy Speaker and honourable members, we were informed that there are no financial implications of the bill. It is just to describe what should be done in addition to what is being done. No costs will be incurred as a result of its implementation.  

The bill seeks to incorporate the new developments in technology and to enable application of the modern tools of trade by Ugandans.  

The Committee, therefore, recommends that the House adopts the report with the suggested amendments. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you!  Hon. Members, you have heard from the minister.  You have also heard from the Committee. The chairperson of the Committee says the bill has complied with the Budget Act, and there are no financial implications.  The matter is now open for debate.

MR WAKIKONA DAVID (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This is another dry bean, which has been brought to us! It is true technology has changed; this is the era of computers and there is no way we can do without them. I therefore, propose that the question should be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the debate has been very short. There is a proposal that the question be put without any further debate.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I am reiterating the putting of the question on the motion on the Floor of the House. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Local Loans (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read the second time. The principles are as already laid out before this House. 

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL LOANS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2: 

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Haji Kaddunabbi): Madam Deputy Chairperson, in clause (2), we propose to insert “by a written instrument or any other form” immediately after the word “transferable” in line 2 of the new sub-section. And also, to delete the words “in a manner” in the third line of the new sub-section. 

The justification is to avoid unnecessary restrictions that might be imposed by the Treasury by keeping the written instrument.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isanga Musumba): Madam Speaker, I have no objection to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

The Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isanga Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled “The Local Loans (Amendment) Bill, 2001” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL LOANS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isanga Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Local Loans (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE LOCAL LOANS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2001

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we are due to amend the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. Our committee has been quite busy for a long period and has come out with a number of amendments. I request the chairperson of the Rules Committee to make his presentation today and the whole of tomorrow will be devoted to the debate on the text of the rules. 

I also request you to look for your copies of the old rules tonight so that you are able to compare and contrast them and debate intelligently tomorrow. I now ask the chairperson to make his representation so that you sleep on it. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Ben Wacha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am ready to present, but I do not know whether Members have all the documents that I might want them to have. There are about five different documents that they should have, to make the exercise meaningful.  

There is a document entitled “Interim Rules of Procedure of the 7th Parliament”, which was given out at the beginning of this Parliament. That is the mother document. If you do not have it, then it is going to be very difficult to proceed.  

Secondly, there is an explanatory document, which I have seen with a number of people dated, 9 July 2001. I think Members have that one. Then there is another one; it is a slightly thick document entitled “Amended Rules” starting with rule No.5 – “Elections or/and functions of Deputy Speaker”. I think Members also have that one.  

There is another explanatory document dated 20 March and signed by the Clerk to the Committee. I do not know whether everybody has it. If that is the case, then I can proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Wacha, I looked at the duplicity of documents; that is why I said that you could only make the presentation and delay the debate. But if Members actually do not have all these documents, it should not be possible to debate the Rules of Procedure.  So I propose that you arm yourselves with these documents today, either from the Clerk or through your pigeonholes, if they have been distributed, and tomorrow at 2.00p.m. the report is presented and then we have a full debate. I will try and finish so that on Friday you can go for graduation. I would not like to keep you here on Friday morning.  So we now defer the presentation, consideration and debate on the Rules of Procedure to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow so that you can prepare yourselves.  

In the meantime, I would like to inform Members that our Select Committee on Election Violence will be receiving testimony from Members of Parliament tomorrow, 4 April. The whole day is reserved for Members of Parliament. Those who would like to offer their testimony should register at the Reception. 

With that, we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until 2.00 O’clock tomorrow afternoon. 

(The House rose at 3.29 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 April 2002 at 2.00p.m.)

