Tuesday 3rd April, 2001

Parliament met at 2.30p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

COL. FRED TOLIT (Army Representative):  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I thank you for availing me this opportunity to give my reaction to hon. Okello Okello’s personal explanation to Parliament, in which he raised several issues about me.  The issues raised were; one that he queried my capacity and mandate to talk on issues concerning my people the Acholi.  Two, he wanted me to explain in detail and avail evidence to substantiate my point on what I raised.  Three, he demanded an apology from me.

The issues raised emanated from the March 15th and 16th 2001, personal announcement in Luo on Radio Uganda Red Channel by hon. Okello Okello, Member of Parliament for Chwa County, not Kitgum as he put it. He was also deputy co-ordinator or chief campaign manager for Acholi region for retired Col. Dr. Kiiza Besigye in charge of Pader and Kitgum District in particular.

In this Radio announcement, hon. Okello Okello (a) congratulated the people of Kitgum, Pader and Gulu District for having voted with one heart in their effort to search or to look for a change.  (b) He stated that this indicated that the problem or problems have now united the people of Acholi.  (c) He advised them to remain firm in their resolute. (d) He stated that the Acholi must now not waver until a change is seen in their lives.

Mr. Speaker, first as an Acholi, secondly as a senior UPDF officer, and thirdly as a Member of Parliament representing the UPDF in this House, I had few versions to derive from the content of hon. Okello Okello’s announcement.
What is wise about voting an unpopular and an obviously losing candidate?
What advantage is there in maintaining a losing pattern in Acholi?
Why should we celebrate a loss?
Why should hon. Okello Okello and others conspire to permanently keep the Acholi behind their designed curtain of doom?
When he says that the Acholis should remain firm and not waver until a change is seen, what does he think about the 50,000 or so Acholi who voted for President Museveni and did not satisfy their wish?  Is this not polarising the people of Acholi?  

Hon. Okello Okello exercised his right in persuading the Acholi to vote a then presidential candidate of his choice.  But to say that we should remain there even after the presidential election results are out, it is evil and wrong.  When I analyse the content of hon. Okello Okello’s announcement against the background of 15 years of insecurity in Northern Uganda in general, and Acholi in particular, I find that the healing normative process, first amongst us the Acholi and the rest of Ugandans is far from reach.  Since 1986, the war in Northern Uganda has never had a political cause at all.  It was and has remained banditry by a gang of killers the LRA against the innocent Acholi people and not against the Government.

To announce that people should remain firm and avoid wavering, is Okello Okello not trying to get a political aim to a baseless war?  Is this not a deliberate sabotage to the wishes of the people of Acholi?  Is this not a deliberate hindrance to the effort of the UPDF and the Acholi people in ending the war?

 By our own utterances and the pattern of voting, we have strengthened the hands of the despicable gang of killers who even have the temerity to claim that they are freedom fighters. What message does this pattern of voting send to Kony and his LRA?  Mr. Speaker, the problems war has caused to my people are known.  We have lost lives, we have displacement of persons, there is a general social disorder, and there is loss of property, to name but a few.  In all these Government has not kept quiet and folded hands. 

It is evident that the effort Government has put to end banditry is great. Where we are now, you will recall that from 1986 to 1988 we had the UPDA in Acholi, Government dealt way with that UPDA rebel group in Acholi.  Government went ahead and dealt with Lakwena, Sevirano Lokoya the father of Lakwena, and Government dealt with Kony very decisively.  

There is evidence that the effort Government has put to end insurgency is great.  Some leaders want to cover their faces or eyes with their hands and say Government has done nothing at all in Acholi.  Mr. Speaker, we must draw lessons from Teso and Lango.  Why is it that violence ended in Teso and Lango?  My simple view about this is that, it ended as a result of a good political will of the leaders in Teso and Lango who together with the people unanimously condemned banditry and worked with Government to end it.  

The leaders of the people in Teso and Lango played a big role in bridging Government and their people. It therefore takes serious leaders to honestly discuss with and advise Government amicably on how best to end banditry, which many leaders in my place always refer to as insurgency. The leaders and the people of Acholi should emulate the Teso and Lango example if war in Acholi is to end.

Hon. Okello Okello congratulated the people of Acholi for making a wise decision.   Indeed one of the fundamentals of democracy is to express ones view and be able to accept the collective decision of the majority.  Therefore, to tell the people of Acholi to remain firm in opposition, is teething irritation and recourse to permanent hatred and alienation of the people of Acholi by the rest of Ugandans.  

Some of our politicians should leave the dreamland.  Otherwise, one day, they will wake up and find when the rest have risen high, so much that they will have to run with sweat in order to catch up.  

To make a choice is democratic but in our choice, the underline point is to labour and exercise our mind in all ways that bring peace, stability, unity and progress to the people of Uganda.  The way majority of our people make their choices should have a lesson for us, that we should not labour to make choices, which alienate us politically from the rest of the Ugandans. To rejoice and celebrate that our people voted in a consistent pattern since 1996 is quite unhealthy.  

As leaders, we must ask ourselves that since that time what salutary benefits have come to our people?  Year after year, life becomes miserable, our children continue to remain in camps extra. Is that the status quo that must be maintained? I am in confidence that we must entertain pride, not of age or status but because of what has been achieved.  Will the people of Acholi congratulate us because we succeeded in making them vote against a popular Government in successive electoral process?  We have a role to play to guide the people in order to get a solution to the problem that we have in Acholi. 

As I speak now the people of Acholi are in three groups.  There is one group, which from 1986 up to now has stood firm and rejected the banditry in Acholi and it is working hand in hand with the Government entity.   The second group is the one, which is neutral; they do not know what to do.  They tend to think it is the work of Government alone to end the war.  The third group is the most dangerous group, is the group that supports the banditry of Kony and they benefit from it.  

Unless our leaders in Acholi work hard to bring these three groups together to condemn banditry and work with Government, insurgency in Acholi may not end. I must say that some of us are in the evenings of our lives, Let us not view ourselves at the expense of the people who are at the dawn of their lives.  A person who is in the afternoon of his life has had breakfast, has had lunch, afternoon tea and he is just waiting for the last meal.  The majority of our suffering people are just asking where they are going to have breakfast, to say nothing about lunch.   So they have interest in life than anybody else.  Let us give them a chance.

I was reminded that I have no mandate to talk about the Acholi people.  I would like to remind hon. Okello Okello that his announcement was directed to the Acholi people of which I happen to be by birth.  Mucwini where I come from is part of his Constituency.  I am actually his voter, if he does not know.   Furthermore, I have been a Member of Acholi Parliamentary group for the last four and three quarters year and hon. Okello Okello has never stood up to challenge this.  Now he says, I have no right to speak on behalf of the Acholi people when they have been cutting my 50,000shillings monthly, for being a Member of Acholi Parliamentary group.  It is very unfortunate.

Secondly, as a free citizen and a soldier, I learnt two things, to be efficient and to understand what goes on in the country.  Mr. Speaker, millions and millions of peasants understand all the problems of Uganda but they are not at all politicians.  Being a soldier does not mean that I should be ignorant of what is happening in my family. That I am not their representative in Parliament and does not mean that I should not be concerned with what happens to them.

Thirdly, hon. Okello Okello should know that I represent the UPDF, local Defence Forces and home guards that are fighting alongside UPDF. Apparently these are in several constituencies of Uganda, including Chwa County, which is his own constituency.

Fourthly, hon. Okello Okello should know that his announcement threatens UPDF’s Constitutional role of ensuring peace to Ugandans and their property.  Our people for 15 years have known nothing but deprivation and violence. Is this where some of our elected leaders want them to remain strongly entrenched?  

We should not abandon integrity and moral fortitude to make our people scum to a way of existence, where life has no value. Let the politicians not take the Northern Uganda to be a political party that must remain firm and resolve to oppose government.  It runs the danger of being treated as such. We must have a new spirit, Acholi is part of the people of Uganda, whatever Uganda has they can have it. Whatever Uganda has not got, they must not insist on getting it because then you will not be part of the people of Uganda.

On the issue of veterans, I have evidence of what I was talking about.  For hon. Okello Okello’s information, when I got reports about the negative mobilisation of veterans in Kitgum and Pader district, I had a meeting with them in which they freely revealed a lot of information, which I cannot at this moment table before this House.  I can assure you that nobody can now mislead our peace loving veterans.  If Okello Okello thinks is more close to these veterans, he is mistaken.  Those guys are under my command.

I would like to congratulate those sons and daughters of Acholi who are still joining the rest of Ugandans in trying to create peace and stability in Acholi land and in the rest of Uganda. I admonish you not to get tired, where there is will there is a way.  A way will be found and the summit will be reached.

Furthermore, I was told that I was campaigning in uniform.  When I was in Northern Uganda, I was on official duty.  I was told to go and ensure that there is peace during election and supervise the movement of troops to Karamoja. In the process of doing this, I got a lot of harmful propaganda on the ground.  People were saying that keeping Acholi in protected camps was a Government policy to punish the people.  I had to go to my people and tell them that Government was simply trying to save them from the atrocities and abductions by Kony.  

There was propaganda that Government was not going to pay the ex-servicemen.  I told them this was Government programme; it should not affect their decision in the Presidential Election. Whoever was telling them that Government was not going to pay, should be told that he did not initiate the programme.  And then there were things like the UPDF brought Ebola.  I told the people that UPDF that returns from DRC were both in Buganda and in Acholi; why was it that there was no Ebola in Buganda?

There was propaganda like the Government purposely started the war and did not want it to end.  I told my people that, our own sons who were in the UNLA started the war in Acholi and the war has all along been against the people of Acholi not the Government and the Government was doing everything to end it. If this is what hon. Okello Okello thinks is campaigning for Presidential Elections, then I think this is very unfortunate.

Finally, if taking me to court, as hon. Okello Okello puts it, can bring peace to the people of Acholi; I would indeed cheerfully cherish it in God’s Name.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker; I thank you, hon. Members of this august House.  Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members I have received another request from a hon. Member to make personal explanation statement. I am referring to the hon. Karuhanga. So you adjust or amend your Order Paper accordingly.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

MR. ELLY KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara):  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Colleagues today you may have read an article on the front page of The New Vision saying, “Besigye hires Gore Lawyer  - Petition hearing starts” and in that article it was stated that all parties in the case met yesterday, on page 2, in the Solicitor General’s Chambers, Peter Kabatsi, to agree on preliminary issues.  Dr. Joseph Byamugisha, Museveni’s lead council, his Deputy from Kenya Dr. John Kiminwa, Sam Bitangaro and William Byaruhanga, attended the meeting.   

From Besigye’s side will be Joseph Balikudembe, Mohammed Mbabazi, Yusuf Nsibambi, Peter Walubiri and Elly Karuhanga – (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, through you, I want to inform my colleagues that it is true indeed but I did attend a meeting in the Solicitor General’s office, which meeting was composed of the legal team from two respondents. Namely the team from Yoweri Museveni’s respondent lawyers, the team from the Electoral CommissionlLawyers led by the Solicitor General and a team from Retired Col. Dr. Kiiza Besigye’s as a petitioner, and that the three teams met in the Solicitor General’s office.  

I wish to inform my colleagues that, yes – Dr. Byamugisha led the group with Dr. Kaminwa from Kenya and I was one of the number that was in the group representing the first respondent namely Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.  But I have never acted for or been instructed by Retired Col. Kiiza Besigye.  And this New Vision, which published the same article today, is the same which on The 29th of March 200, rightly informed its readers that my client, His Excellency Y.K. Museveni appointed me as an advisor to his legal team. 

 Therefore, I am not in any way associated with such matters as have been presented by The New Vision.  In our profession, it is absolutely prohibited, unethical and unprofessional for Council to represent two parties in the same case. This would render me a very unprofessional person and it is definitely very defamatory and damaging on my part.  And I would hope that The New Vision would necessarily take corrective measures and correct impression.  

What is more baffling is that in that meeting, which we held in the Solicitor General’s office, where all the three parties were, was a private, a well kept meeting without the Press. Because we were determining which issues the Supreme Court will address themselves to.  It was a very important meeting and we could not have allowed the Press to be there.  What is disturbing is that the Press never called me or Mr. Kabatsi or Dr. Byamugisha or Mr. Balikudembe to get the clarification.  

Mr. Speaker, I am grateful to you for allowing me this opportunity to put both the supporters of President Museveni, at ease and also those of Besigye, because I am sure they will be shocked if they heard that I was representing the Client that I opposed.  Thank you.  

Mr. Speaker, is it possible for me to make a small statement as Chairman of a Committee on Foreign Affairs?

THE SPEAKER:  No.  

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

MR. JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities):  Thank you Mr. Speaker – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Before you proceed hon. Member, is the Minister to whom the questions are directed available?  Namely, The Minister of Gender and Social Development; is there any Minister from that Ministry here?  

MR. PINTO:  Procedure.  May I seek your guidance?

THE SPEAKER:  I am still establishing a fact.  Is there any Minister from that Ministry?  All right hon. Prime Minister; there are three questions which are being directed at the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I am asking a simple question whether the Minister is there or any of the Ministers from that Ministry are here to respond?  

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof.M. Kagonyera):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Until a few minutes ago, the Prime Minister was not aware that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was not going to be represented.  Therefore, I wish on behalf of executive arm of Government to apologise to the House in general, and hon. James Mwandha in particular, that we are unable to respond to his question.  Government views this very seriously and the Prime Minister has promised to take appropriate steps to make sure that in future Ministers must present themselves in the House to reply to questions that have been appropriately put to them.  I once again Mr. Speaker apologise to you and the questionnaire.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, I seek your guidance.  I think we can accept in good faith the apology rendered by the Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office in-charge of General duties.  But as a matter of procedure, this question before it was put on the Order Paper, I know that the Clerk’s Office must have been in touch with the Minister and confirmation received.  Otherwise it would not have been on the Order Paper.  This is how I know the procedure generally that the questions are presented.

 So for the Minister just to absent herself as we have heard until a few minutes ago from the Prime Minister that, he did not know that the Minister had absented herself.  It does not augur well.  Not too long ago Mr. Speaker, when we were debating amending the Electoral Bill, the Minister for Gender stood up here to try to argue a case, in which her protocol had an input in cabinet, which included adult suffrage not electoral college. She should have been able to argue her case had she attended Cabinet because the Bill was brought to us here with the provision of adult suffrage and we merely assented to Government position.

 The Minister of Gender came here and took 15 minutes of our valuable time trying to argue a case for her Ministry which she failed to contribute to in cabinet – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Pinto what procedural point this?  You want to debate an issue; I am not going to grant you that please.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking your guidance how the Minister conducts herself, because we were on the Order Paper, now what is going to happen next?   There are other questions that are waiting because Government is going to take action. Could the Prime Minister, maybe explain to us what kind of action he is going to take?

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister has said he is going to take up this matter.  What else do you want the Speaker to do?  I am not a whip of Ministers.  In fact because of some of these problems, I am almost being reduced to that, but I am not going to succumb to it.  I am here to chair proceedings and those who are supposed to promote their motions, promote Bills and so on, ask questions, answer question, should   be here, and if they are not here, what do I do?  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to you, it is an established fact that Government is a collective action.  It is not the first time that hon. Members pose questions similar to the ones hon. Mwandha has put forward.  Noting that there are more than two Ministers in that Ministry, is explainable, and I am putting this before the Leader of Government Business, is it explainable for any one –(Interruptions).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, the Prime Minister has expressed regrets about this matter and he is going to take appropriate action.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO RATIFY A TREATY UNDER SECTION 3(b)(ii) OF THE RATIFICATION OF TREATIES ACT, 1998.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when debating this motion by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, we reached a stage where hon. Members did make their contributions, up to a point where an hon. Member in this House moved a motion that the question be put, and obviously that could not happen because I knew it was going to be a futile exercise. So I did not attempt to put the question.  

Why did I not put the question?  Because there was no quorum, and I think while we blame each other, or others for not performing their roles, we as Members of Parliament should do our bit. Namely, by presenting ourselves here and making up the necessary quorum so that we can transact business, and if that does not happen, then we are going to go on and on blaming one another without finding a solution.  Now, before I put the question to the hon. Kyemba’s motion, I am going to ascertain whether we have the necessary quorum.

(It was ascertained that there was no quorum)

THE SPEAKER: We have not reached the quorum, so I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes and the bell will be rang.

(The proceedings were suspended for 15 minutes at 3.05 p.m)

(On resumption at 3.25p.m, the Speaker  presiding)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I was reminding you a moment ago that on this particular motion, we had reached a stage where hon. Members had contributed to the motion to the effect that the question be now put, was moved by the hon. Kyemba, and I now proceed just to do that.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: The motion really is calling upon Parliament to ratify the constitutive Act, signed by the Assembly of Heads of State on Government on the 11th of July 2000, in Lome  Togo, and which on our behalf was signed by the First Deputy Prime Minister the hon. Kategaya.  So, we are at the stage of ratification.  I will now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Treaty has now been ratified and you can proceed with what you intend to do with it from there.  

B I L LS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE CHAIRMAN: My recollection is that we went up to Clause 39, which was stood over. Is that correct, Mr. Chairperson?  We shall now proceed with Clause 40.

Clause 40.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Rwabita): Mr. Chairman, Clause 39 up to 42 are about administrative units and therefore, they are in one same amendment.  Now, we read Clause 43, because the others will come under the same amendment of 39.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, we are going Clause by Clause.

MR. RWABITA: Yes, even Clause 40 is under the same amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, we are now going to Clause 40 of the Bill; that is where we are.  Not so?

MR. RWABITA: Yes, Mr. Chairman.  What I am saying, the Clauses between 39 and 42 are all embodied in the new amendment of the administrative units between clause 39 and – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: All right proceed. Clause 40 is very simple.  It says; "Sections 162, 163 of the principal Act are repealed."

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman there are some amendments on that - (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you changed the position?

MR. RWABITA: Yes please we have.  So if you can allow me we can start with 39 up to 42 and we finish.

THE CHAIRMAN: You go Clause by Clause.

MR. RWABITA: Yes. But from Clause 39 you go to Clause 43 - because they are consequential some of them.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay you explain first.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman the amendment of Clauses 39 to 42 are all about administrative units and it is all about the elections of the administrative units in the main BiII, it is between Section 162 to 167, of the Principal Act. So this one is being amended in this Paper.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is being amended?

MR. RWABITA: 39(a), 39(b), 40, 41, 42

THE CHAIRMAN: If you are amending them individually let us go individually.  If you are replacing a bunch of Clauses then say so. So you say replace Clause this with the following.

MR. RWABITA: Yes Mr. Chairman, that is what I am saying.  Can I start with 39?  Clause 39 is about election of village and parish chairpersons. Because many Members thought that it is high time that we had an element of secret ballot.  The committee with the Minister of Local Government and even electoral commission met and discussed this issue thoroughly.  First of all, electing those chairpersons and the execute Committees by secret ballot paper, would be very expensive.  Astronomical figures were indicated.  Therefore, the committee has advised that we elect the village and parish chairpersons only by secret ballot. Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: So how does it read?

MR. RWABITA: 39(a) reads, "The election of the village and parish chairpersons shall be by secret ballot." The modalities of that will be done by Electoral Commission.

THE CHAIRMAN: On Clause 39 you are seeking to insert after section 161 the following section 161(a), that is the one you are amending to say; "The elections of village executive committee - (Interruption).

MR. RWABITA: It is only the chairperson because the executive committee is very expensive.  The idea is - (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Read it please, I want to get the amendment.

MR. RWABITA: The amendments of 39 were put into two sections 39(a) reads; "The election of the village and parish chairpersons shall be by secret ballot."  And Clause 39(b) says, "Members of the executive committee at the village and parish level shall be nominated by the respective chairpersons for approval by their councils."  So the chairperson is by secret ballot, after that he nominates members from the council who will be approved by the council and they can always adjust the chairperson’s nominations.  Mr. Chairman I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: So are you with him?

MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Right.  Clause 39(a), replacing what is there now is as follows: "The election of the village and parish chairpersons shall be by secret ballot." And then 39(b), "Members of the executive committee at the village and parish level shall be nominated by the respective chairpersons for approval by their councils." 

MR.MWANDHA: Thank you very much Mr. Chairman. I would have thought that the reasons given by the chairman for not electing the executive committee by secret ballot could also apply to the chairmen of this village and parish committees. This is because the sheer numbers are such that it may be very difficult really to administer this election.  And considering that these chairmen are changing all the time, I do not know what the chairman has in mind that the Electoral Commission is going to do to implement this particular provision?  Because I would fear that since everybody knows that the ballot have got to be printed and maybe have photographs, the Electoral Commission may find itself in this kind of situation and I think the job would be impossible in terms of organisation and in terms of funding.  Would the chairman explain to the House exactly what he envisages the Electoral Commission to do to implement this particular amendment?  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This amendment has a lot of financial implications and as such we expect it to be moved by Government.  Secondly, even if the Government is to move the Minister has to take it back to Cabinet and present the financial implications of this amendment, so that Finance and Cabinet can decide.  But to move an amendment here by the chairman which has a lot of financial implications, talking of over 50,000 LC in the country and knowing that all these may be replaced either because they have shifted from one place to the other or when they resign.  In Finance we are against this, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Mr. Chairman what was your original position?  First tell us the Government position and then your original position as a committee, because in the report of the committee page 19, if we are talking of Clause 39 you are saying Clause 39 paragraph (a) is deleted.  I do not seem to reconcile this with the original Bill, because the original Bill has only one Clause.

MR. RWABITA:  No it was a mistake (a) was not there.  We have started a new Chapter all together.  Mr. Chairman  - (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  So (a) is typing error?

MR. RWABITA:  Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, have you got it.  In order for us to follow these changes, you need to know the original position of the committee and the Government.  Clause 39 paragraph- they say now there is no paragraph (a), there is no a, clause 39 is deleted.  Now, the original clause 39 was as follows; The principle Act is amended by inserting after section 161 the following new section; 161(a) the elections of the village executive committee and councillors division sub-county and a town council shall be by secret ballot, the whole lot, alright.  It means the whole lot was by secret ballot this is this Bill.  The hon. minister for finance, are you following?

MR. SSENDAULA:  Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: The original position of Government was everything by secret ballot, this what I am reading in this Bill.  Now, the committee in its report page 19 says delete the whole thing, delete that bit; and then it was stood over. Now, the chairman comes and says, let us split, chairpersons secret ballot, the rest are nominated.  Now, I thought hon. minister your original position, as Cabinet was worse than what is being proposed.

PROF. KAGONYERA MONDO:  Mr. Chairman, we do agree with you that the original position of Government was worse than the proposed.  But we have become wiser.  Yes, we have become wiser and therefore, I would like to appeal to the House that they actually agree with the Minister for finance that we go back and look at the financial implications of this. Because, Mr. Chairman, we have passed so many laws in this House that we have failed to implement simply because we are unable to afford them financially; and we do not want this one to be yet another one.  So standing this one over does not harm but I think it would not -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, it was stood over and imagined that when the chairman was insisting that we start with it, one would have assumed that you had a tete –a’-tete over it.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the House that this is a compromising situation because, at first some Members had even said we elect these people through symbols.  We found that was even very confusing and very expensive; and we have had letters from LC1s, especially in Kampala City, telling us that leaving it open is leading to abuse because any fool will stand and by mob psychology, he get the vote as a chairperson and therefore, we have no meaningful chairperson of that village.  

So, they wrote to us and agreed that the chairperson can be elected secretly; and we consulted the Minister and the Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission agreed that if it is only a chairperson that it was feasible although expensive, but it is better than symbols, it is better than electing by secret vote for all the offices.

We think we have done enough consultations, and this is the only way to bring about democracy, so that people are electing their leaders in a secret way. Mr. Chairman, thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, let us do this I do not want us to -(Interruption).

MR. KAGGWA:  Point of clarification.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you giving us the way forward?

MR. KAGGWA: Yes Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Go ahead.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My contribution is by way of clarification. Does it necessarily mean that when it is secret ballot, it has to be a printed ballot paper?  Because there is a situation where we elect people by writing their names on papers. So if that is what the Government wants now, I see no problem with that.  The only problem that people are thinking of ballot of papers, you can elect in secret without a ballot paper by writing a name on a piece of paper and that will be an improvement from lining up.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, let us do this. This Clause was stood over to allow the government and the committee to come with an acceptable position.  They have not done so it will remain stood over.  

Clause 40.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, Clause 40 is consequential to Clause 39 (a) and (b), I think the whole lot up to 42 should be stood over.

THE CHAIRMAN: Stood over?

MR. RWABITA:  Yes, because they are all consequential.

THE CHAIRMAN: Right Clause 40,41,42 stood over.

Clause 43.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, on Clause 43, we do not have any amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 43 do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 44.

MR. RWABITA:  But, Mr. Chairman, we had an amendment-I am sorry to take you back, after Clause 42, the Committee had an amendment after Clause 42.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, I notice there you say after 42 add the following new Section.

MR. RWABITA: Yes, if you can allow me please to do it.  After Clause 42 we have a new Clause, which amends section 170 of the principle Act.  Replacing the expression beginning with the words, “the date of “at the end of third line to the end of the section with expression “the expiry of the term of office of the outgoing executive committee”.  Those who have got the main Bill, you can turn on section 170.

THE CHAIRMAN: Main Bill or principal Act?

MR. RWABITA: Of the principle Act. 170 reads, “an in-coming executive committee shall before taking office, ensure that there is a formal handing over from the outgoing executive committee within one week from the date of elections of a new committee”.  So we are replacing that one, with “from the expiry date of the term of office of the outgoing executive committee”.  That would mean that the executive committee, if it still had time to the end of its term, it should be given time to prepare a proper report rather than after election they go away and there is no proper accountability and handing over; that is the meaning of it.

THE CHAIRMAN: So your section reads in full as what?

MR. RWABITA:  The incoming executive committee shall before taking Office ensure that there is a formal handing over from the outgoing executive committee, within one week from expiry of the term of the Office of the outgoing executive committee to allow the executive committee do proper handing over, that is the meaning.

THE CHAIRMAN: From the date of expiry they must have the date there.

MR. RWABITA: From the date of expiry of the term of Office- 
]
THE CHAIRMAN: From the date of expiry.  They must have the date there.  Hon. Minister, are you all right with that one?  Yes hon. Okumu, do you have a problem with that?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I have difficulty with this amendment particularly when you take into account that we have already passed an amendment to Clause 43, amending the principle Act section 171, and clause 43 page 22 reads, that is 171(a), “Elections of all local Governments and administrative councils shall take place at least 60 days before the expiry of the term of the existing councils but shall not coincide with Presidential or Parliamentary elections.”  The problem I have with this provision, which we passed, is that if you look at –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Which is the one we passed?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: No, we have already passed this because we are now on 43.  So, I am seeking clarification from the Minister and the chairperson as to how this will be reconciled, the timeframe.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are they inconsistent?  Can you not synchronise them?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: The timeframe is too wide because election must take place sixty days before expiry of the term of office and then handing over should be within one week from the time of expiry.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there a problem with that one?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Yes, I see a problem that is why I am seeking clarification.  Thank you.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know what hon. Okumu Ringa wants but there is no conflict here.  This amendment only makes sure that the outgoing committee hands over properly and it is given at least one week after expiry of the term.  We want a proper hand-over Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga):  Mr. Chairman, the last phrase of 171(a) reads: “But shall not coincide with Presidential or Parliamentary elections.” That one really shows that there will be no conflict or contravention.

THE CHAIRMAN: You still want to make a point hon. Mwandha?

MR. MWANDHA: I just want to make a small point on this amendment.  I like the amendment, but it would have been better if the chairman proposed or sort of defined what will be handed over, because this hand-over could be a mere pass over of files; a ceremony in a meeting of the executive committee or whatever.  But I think what he wanted is to make sure that there is proper accountability from one local Government to another one. I think in order to protect the interests of the people, it would have been better to give a little bit of detail on what it means.  Maybe the Minister can stipulate in the regulations what form of hand-over this is going to be.  But otherwise as it is, still it leaves a lot of room for mischief.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but hon. Mwandha, hand-over is a hand-over; whether you hand- over vehicles, you hand- over money, you hand over what, it is a hand-over.  In other words, it is accountability, I have done my part, this is what I have done and what I have not done is this.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I thought we have already pronounced ourselves on 43.  Now I do not know whether the procedure we are following is correct to re-open it, when we have already pronounced ourselves.

THE CHAIRMAN: He took us back, not on that issue, I think on another one.

MR.  KAGGWA: We are on 43 and that is the one hon. Okumu Ringa raised and we had already pronounced ourselves on it.  So I am finding it a problem how the Hansard will read when the procedure of re-committal is there.

THE CHAIRMAN: What hon. Kaggwa is saying is that we had already by your introduction pronounced ourselves on clause – you said from 39 to 42 we should not touch. Now then we said okay, let us start with 43 and I think we pronounced ourselves on that.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I requested that there was a new clause after 42 and this is the one we have been considering.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, what you do, there is a new clause, which you want to introduce.  You introduce it, when we get to 42 and deal with 42, which we have stood over then you can say okay, after this 42, we want this.  All right?  I think that is where we are.  Thank you hon. Kaggwa.

Clause 44.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, Clause 44 is amended and replaced, amending section 172 of the principle Act and it is amended by (a) inserting the following new sub-section after sub-section 1.
I (A): “Any clerk to the council who fails to report to the Electoral Commission within one month from the date the office fell vacant commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding five currency points or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding three months or both.”  The justification is that it has happened that some offices fall vacant and the Electoral Commission is not aware.  So we are requesting the Clerk to be compelled and report the vacancy to the Electoral Commission so that it can be filled as soon as possible.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

DR.P. BYARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, we fully concur with the committee because we have had instances where particularly for purposes of elections involving electoral colleges, we have had to rush to have by-elections to fill some of these vacant offices, after long standing absence of vacancies not being occupied by any officer.  So this, we fully concur with the committee.  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I support this amendment but I am seeking clarification from the Minister, as to whether or not one month would be consistent with the provision of Electoral College, which the election in June will require that Women District Members of Parliament be elected through Electoral Colleges.  I do not know if this process would also help to speed up the village one local councils.  That is the clarification I am seeking from him.

DR. P. BYARUHANGA: I think the concern of hon. Okumu Ringa is in the period, which is being provided for, the 30 days, in which the Clerk is compelled to act.  We felt that this was a reasonable period, because it also involves as well as informing the population about the vacancy, which is available – the process of filling that vacancy.  So, we felt that 30 days was reasonable. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, (b) is redundant because already in section 44 the District Clerk is mentioned; it is amended by replacing the District Clerk with Clerk to the Council.  So, that one is already taken care of.  So, (b) is redundant. It is redundant because when we read section 44 – (b) we wanted to replace the District Clerk with Clerk to the Council, but this is already provided in the main amendment section 44 where it is indicated that section 172(3) of the principal Act is amended by replacing District Clerk with Clerk to the Council, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, we have a new Clause after 44.  After Clause 44 we want to amend section 173 which is going to be replaced in the main Local Government Act; and 173 will read:  ‘For any issue not provided for under this part of the Act, the Presidential Elections Act and Parliamentary Election Act in force, shall apply to the election of local councils with such modifications as may be deems necessary by the Electoral Commission.’    Mr. Chairman, 173 is allowing the Electoral Commission to refer to any of the above Act to ensure progress of elections so that there is no impasse during elections and that the Electoral Commission can modify these Acts, to suit any current elections they will be handling.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

DR. P. BYARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, we have no objection with that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45.

DR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, in clause 45 I have got a small amendment, inserting between the words ‘funds and contrary’ appearing in the third line of section 174(A) the words ‘and property’ in the amendment Bill it is the third line; to read that:  ‘A person who is not exempted from liability under section 174 and who directs or concurs in the use of public funds and property contrary to the existing rules.’   That is why I put property so that this public officer it is not only responsible for funds, but he can misuse a vehicle, he can misuse timber, cement of the council – so we want to put everything together, funds plus property, Mr. Chairman.

DR. P. BYARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, we have no problem with that. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 45 as amended agreed to)

Clause 46.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have difficulty in reconciling what is in the Bill as Clause 46 referring to section 183 of the principal Act.  The principal Act I have does not have section 183 and I have difficult in reconciling; I do not know if it is a printing error by the printers or there is something wrong.  If the Minister could explain so that we take note; otherwise, the amendment as presented in the Bill I support it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: That makes the two of us hon. Okumu Ringa; my own Act stops and 181, but here the Minister and the Cabinet are amending section 183!  We have a problem; Clause 44 says that section 183 of the principal Act is amended by adding after subsection 2 the following new subsection.  The point hon. Okumu Ringa has made is that, there is no such thing as section 183 of the principal Act. 

DR. P. BYARUHANGA: This is what I want to explain. Thank you Mr. Chairman, actually, this is the principal Local Act 1997 and Local Government (Amendment) Act, 1997 has got that Clause 183; the original without the amendment of 1997 does not have section 183. So, those who have got the Local Government Act, 1997 and the amendment of 1997 there is a provision for that section – it is available. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but when we say ‘the principal Act’ what do we mean?  We mean, as far as I am concerned, the Local Government Act No.1 of 1997 – that is the principal Act.   I know I have that, but which Act are we amending. 

DR. P. BYARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, we are amending this one with amendments, that is the Act. 

THE CHAIRMAN: This principal Act as amended by Act No.5 of 1997.  Okay, hon. Okumu Ringa are you now – I think you have followed.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Yes Mr. Chairman, even though I am not a draftsman I am satisfied.  Thank you. 

(Clause 46  agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 46 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: We now go back to where we started suspensions. Hon. Chairman, let us go back to Clause, is it 3 or 5?

MR. RWABITA: According to me, it should be clause 7 on page 6 of the amendment Sheet.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which one did we first suspend?

MR. RWABITA: Clause 7 is about the minimum requirements of Chairmen LC IIIs.

THE CHAIRMAN: Right, I recall that.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, the Committee inserted a new Clause after Clause 7, amending section 24 of the principle Act to provide for the qualification of a chairperson of a lower local Government as follows: b) “Has completed a minimal formal education of ordinary level standard or its equivalent.”  

Mr. Chairman, the justification of this was given during my discussion that a lot of resources, are going to sub-counties.  Some of the sub-county chiefs are going to be graduates and most of the Government policies are written in English, they need to be interpreted by these chairmen to the council and at the sub-county we have a three-year plan of the sub-county, which should be directed by this chairperson.  

So with all these, and then the money coming from Central Government to sub-counties is enormous; for feeder roads, education, UPE, for what have you.  So, we thought that a minimum requirement for only Chairman LC III would be desirable, so that he is at least of O’level or its equivalent.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

DR. P. BYARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, as all colleagues will remember very clearly here, when my senior colleague made a statement regarding this minimum qualification, he did mention that he had carried out a limited survey from the sub-county councils from some districts, some sub-counties from remote areas of the districts and some within town councils, but very limited in scope.  He also did point out that he had been requested by his Excellency, the President to really carry out a country-wide consultation and input on this particular matter and his Excellency, the President had his own reservations about putting a minimum qualification to the leadership at this level. 

At this material time, to quote his words, “when UPE and the rest of the educational curriculum, has not been widened enough to encompass the entire country and also to involve as many people as possible in this bracket for leadership at this level.” And also took into account that country-wide now there may not be people in some parts of the country with this particular minimum qualification and would, therefore, cause problems if we put this in legislation.  

So, our contention, Mr. Chairman, given that background, is that we leave this open so that even people with higher qualifications can aspire. People who may have less qualifications but have the necessary integrity and maturity and are able to follow proceedings of the Council and budget process, can also aspire as it is happening now in very many parts of this country as colleagues are aware. So, we feel that this minimum qualification of O'level at this time is uncalled for.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now hon. Members, the amendment of the Committee is that the minimum qualification should be a formal education of ordinary level or its equivalent, and the Minister is saying No.  His position is that we should leave it open so that even people, who are below that standard but are capable of understanding the proceedings and delivering, should be given an opportunity to stand.  That is where we are now.  Can you take it from there, the hon. Rwakoojo?

MR.RWAKOOJO:Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Whereas I appreciate what the Chairman of the Committee is saying, I have some difficulty.  It is true that there are resources that are going to the sub-counties.  That is true but it is also true that a lot more resources are going to the district and we do not have similar requirements for the District Councillors.  Therefore, I wanted to appeal to the Members of Parliament and to you, Mr. Chairman, that we should leave this choice to the people who know what is best for them. 

And what is the purpose of having only Chairman with O’level, whereas the entire council is probably P.1 graduates?  You are just going to have one person who is probably one-eyed among several blind people and he is just going to drag them through. Where people have a choice, where they have senior four, senior six graduates, they will pick those people. What the problem has been is that you might have some young man, who has these required qualifications but has no maturity and has no experience to direct and administer the council.  You will have people who are chairmen in absentia, people who live in Kampala but have no property or resources in the sub-counties that we are putting them in. 

I want to beg the hon. Members, to please leave this choice to the people.  Where you have a capable educated person, you will have that person picked. It is also true that you will have some people, who may not have had the opportunity to have senior four education but are good in administration. They can speak the English that we are talking about, they can balance their books and I am sure we would rather have this kind of person, than having someone who has just left school and has never had to budget for shillings 50,000. And yet is required to budget for the entire sub-county. 

We had a live example in Sembabule. Mr. Chairman. Our former Chairman for LC V was a graduate and we did pick him as the Chairman but he did not have the maturity, he did not have the experience to run the Council and he failed and was thrown out.  Therefore, I wanted to appeal to the Members here present to bear with those areas especially, when we know that -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ajeani, the rule is very clear. If the person on the Floor does not yield, you resume your seat.

MR. RWAKOOJO:  I am going to accept the information after I have finished this point. We know that the illiteracy rate in this country is probably below 50 percent, so what are we going to do with that 50 percent, are we locking them out even in LC3 administration? 

MR. AJEANI: Mr. Chairman, the clarification I am seeking from the hon. Member on the Floor, is in regard to this senior four as compared with the qualifications above and below. If we are going to go by experience, then why do we have to spend so much on high education, and so many children are coming out unemployed. I just want a clarification to the effect that, when people come to Senior four and continue, there are some people who drop out, if you are going to be spending time on those who have dropped out to take jobs which could be deserved more by those who have passed and have spent more money on education, then it is being unfair on high education.  Could you clarify this for me, please thank you.

MR. RWAKOOJO: I do appreciate the point raised by hon. Ajean.  The point is that we are talking about minimum qualifications; if you have a PHD you are welcome to stand, as LC3 Chairperson there is no problem.  But where there people who might not have had the advantage of getting that education, just like there are some sub-counties that do not have senior secondary schools today.   What are we telling them? Are we saying that they import people into their districts for purposes of administration?

There are areas that have just had or have not had senior secondary schools built. UPE has just started; there are some districts where literacy level is below 40 percent. What are we telling those people to go out and import Administrators? The people that are having problems in the districts are not necessarily those who have least education and this is a fact.  Where they have problems with CAO’s, the CAO’s have degrees and have diplomas in Administration, but they are not handling funds properly.  

So the question is not really education, but integrity and you do not get integrity by getting senior four education.  Mr. Chairman, I wanted to beg the hon. Members, I wanted to appeal to you, that let us leave this open, the people of Uganda are not stupid they know what is best for them. They know that education is important, they know that integrity is import, let them choose that person. Where you have a qualified person they will pick him.  But, to have a senior four just because he probably got one or two passes in art, that has nothing to do with English that we are saying they should understand; that has gone to our third grade senior secondary schools, with due respect sometimes they do not give us quality education and they go and are chosen because they just have a certificate. Surely I think, we should give the people the freedom and I am sure they will pick those people that we need best. Where integrity if important they will pick integrity and education.  I thank you.

MR.BWERERE KASOLE:Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since I am an educationist, I would be number one to support people with qualifications to come and take over LC3 Chairperson seat; but I am sorry I cannot support the Committee for one simple reason. Where shall I get O’level person in Madudu and Butologo?  It is not because they never wanted to go to school, but the Government has not built any single secondary school, up to today there is only one private secondary school. I have been pleading to Government even to up grade it, but I have not succeeded.

Where shall I get those people in the sub-counties of Butologo and Madudu, which do not have secondary schools at all? It was not until I came to Parliament, that I started this private one. Government has not taken it over, so where shall I get the Chairperson?   I am sorry; I am not supporting the Committee.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, the issue is really straightforward, I think we should not spend the whole day debating, we either go in for minimum O’level or we do not.  I think people have explained do you really want to explain more hon. Kinyata, let us hear a new thing.

DR. KINYATA: Mr. Chairman, I am wondering whether we are moving forward or backwards. We have a system of decentralisation, we have decentralised all the resources to the sub-county as a unit for development and all the graduates are now going down to the sub-county for research and doing whatever they do.  Now, you put them under a man who cannot even prepare a paper, who cannot even read and understand to come and supervise them; Uganda would be going backwards.  Those who say that in their sub-counties do not have people with O’level at least you have them in your counties; a county is also there people can work in the same area –(Interruption).

MR. BWERERE KASOLE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Hon. Kinyata I would like to inform you, the hon. Member known as Bwerere Kasole Lwanga has no O’Level and he is employing men and women of degrees.  He is able to draw his budget, I mean, there people who are talented, people can choose, people can select their own people.  Mr. Chairman, Ugandans are clever they know what to do, they know which people to come in we cannot import simply because  - although we are decentralising, but the powers of up grading secondary schools is not in the hands of the Local Government.  I have informed you there is only one secondary school and Government has not given a grant to it; what can those people do?

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you finish your contribution please?

DR. KINYATA:  If the hon. Member has no O’level, I do not know how he came here; he might be having an equivalent. But what I wanted to say, is that remember the resources of the nation which are going at sub-county, which have got to be properly supervised by a person at least who is literate not illiterate. And also remember that we are sending graduates at present even the sub-county chief especially in my area, are graduates and they prepare the reports. The reports must be read properly and analysed, and a man at a sub-county level if he is going to be, must he be having at least a minimum qualification of O'Level. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Members, do you forget that the Ministers are being advised on financial matters by the accounting officers, when they do not know anything about those complicated things?  Anyway, Ministers come and argue in the House about finances, but technocrats are advising them.  That is why we have the gombolola chiefs; they are now graduates, not so?

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, may be I better start from where you have made a statement.  The Minister of Local Government has advised us, that these Local Governments are both executive and political. They are executive and legislative. Therefore, they play both roles of legislation and executing decisions for themselves, the councils. 

I think the views given by the Committee are very persuasive. Are very persuasive that indeed we need to raise the standard of the LC.II chairman. I was rather disappointed by the comments by the Minister; because when you are carrying out a survey, you do not do it 100 percent. The hon. Bidandi Ssali made a very moving statement and said he carried out a sample, and the sample represents the whole. He came up for the first time, we heard a Minister who has done some research, and he was prepared even to tell us. So really to go against this in the interest of accommodating people who may be not be in place in certain constituencies is not fair to those constituencies which may have people that could be able to choose - (Mr Wambede rose) I accept the information.

MR. WAMBEDE: Hon. Mwandha I thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, the information I would want to give to hon. Mwandha is that, the whole of Bungokho North constituency, I have one Government school. You can see the situation. Where are we going to get S.4s if we insist on that requirement?

(Question on amendment put and negatived)

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, in the same Section 24, hon. Kabasharira unfortunately is not here, had proposed that we put a new proposal in Section 24, there are 4 sub-sections in that Sections, in sub-county, city divisions, municipal councils, then municipal divisions and town councils for lower -(Interruption)- Mr. Chairman, can I be protected?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you allow the chairman to proceed?   Which Clause are we dealing with? 

MR. RWABITA:  I am beginning with - adding on Section 24 an (f) on every sub-section, sub-county.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have reached Section 24, what about Clause 23, which we had also? -(Interruption).

MR. RWABITA: No, this is a new amendment by hon. Kabasharira, we stayed it over.  

THE CHAIRMAN: With respect to which Clause?  Which Clause are you talking about, which Clause of the Bill? 

MR. RWABITA:  It was a new amendment on Section 24.  It was following this of the minimum requirements.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you are referring to this, refer to it as Clause. If you refer to Section, some of us get confused, because a Section refers to a law, which has been enacted.  If you say Clause so and so of the Bill, then we understand it.  Now, which Clause are we dealing with? 

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, after inserting Clause 7, which amends 24, which I have just dealt with, then hon. Kabasharira brought in an amendment on the same.  So, we can take it to be Clause 7.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You see I want to refer to your report as a Committee.

MR. RWABITA: It is on page 6 on the amendments, after we had dealt with a new Clause after 7 which was amending Section 24 about a minimum qualification, then hon. Kabasharira brought in another amendment on the same Section about elderly, and that is what I am dealing with now.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us not confuse - if you are dealing with a Clause which we already pronounced ourselves on, it was not simply stood over, we pronounce ourselves on.  The best procedure is at a later stage to move a motion for recommittal. Now, where does hon. Kabasharira's come?  Which Clause, in respect to which Clause?  Ya, I want to know which Clause hon. Kabasharira's amendment is in which Clause of the Bill?  If it is in respect of the Clause of the Bill we have already passed, then you wait until we have gone through and then you can move a motion to recommit that particular Clause to amend it to include hon. Kabasharira's amendment. But my question is, I do not know which Clause you are dealing with. Yes, honourable, can you help us?

MR. KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, hon. Kabasharira brought a new insertion, because under Section 24 of the Principle Act, it talks about those who constitute the various executive committees of council. So, she wanted to insert a new Clause to say that there will be, I think an elderly.

THE CHAIRMAN: So amending Section 24 of the Principle Act?

MR. KAGGWA: Yes. It will be a new Clause amending that by adding a group of people to be part of the lower Government local councils. It will not require a recommittal because he was inserting something new.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Oh, inserting something completely new?  Where are you inserting it?

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, we are inserting it in Section 24, and as a matter of fact, the principle was passed, but the Committee revisited that principle and it wanted to propose the methods and the modalities of electing those elderly persons. So in my notes, I said, there was a new proposal in Section 24 of the Principle Act by hon. Kabasharira, that there should be – she had said an elderly; but when I consulted with her, she proposed that it should be an old man and a lady. So, there shall be two elderly persons, a male and a female above age of 55, on every lower Local Council.  That was her proposal, Mr. Chairman.

I said this proposal was passed but the modalities of electing the elderly persons, was not agreed upon in the Committee. She is proposing that the election of these persons would be by an electoral college of old people of over 55 years in the lower Local Councils and the Electoral Commission will handle the method of these elections. 

So, it is only the elderly who know their problems – the age of above 55, the old people who are above 55 would make the Electoral College to elect their two elderly persons. We think that is more reasonable than subjecting those old people to everybody in the village, because, we want to make sure that these elderly people choose the elderly persons that will cater for their interests. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, what you are saying is that you are proposing, having passed the initial amendment; namely that there should be a representation of the elderly, the method will not provide how to identify them, all right.  That is the case you are arguing and therefore, you are saying, Electoral College of people should elect them, you do not say old people really, just say, persons of and above the age of 55.

MR. KAGGWA:  Mr. Chairman I oppose that; I thought the rationale, hon. Kabasharira brought this was that the elders do give advice. I do not think she brought it specifically to cater for the elderly. She wanted the elders to be there, to give advice to the young ones.  Accordingly, I would want everybody to elect them, there will be those above the year she wants, but the Electoral College should be widened.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  So what do you propose? Let us be specific. It is now the methodology.  So, you are saying the Electoral College shall consist of –

MR. KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, in the first instance, these people are going to be on all Councils. Yes, that is what she proposed; they have to be on all Councils. So, if they are going to be on all Councils, then the respective Councils must elect these people.  I propose so.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are now looking at who should elect these people and hon. Kaggwa, it has been proposed, they should only be elected by the Electoral College, consisting of persons of the age of 55 and above, alright; that is the proposal. Hon. Kaggwa is saying “No”, let everybody, the youth as well identify the elders; they want to give them wise counsel on the Council. This is where we are; this is the debate.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, first of all, the retirement age in this country is 60 years and the age of 55 is middle age and I wonder whether the Chairman will not consider pushing the age up, rather than limiting it from 55. Because, I believe that at 55 is still not the kind of people that we are looking for, it should be at least after retirement at the age of 60.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which one are you talking about, the electors or the one to be elected?

MR. MWANDHA: Even the ones to be elected must be elected – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: That is already passed according to –

MR. MWANDHA: We have passed it? It was not, 55 Mr. Chairman, cannot be – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Then let us be systematic, I think I was misled. I was told that hon. Kabasharira’s amendment that there should be a representation by the elderly on those executive committees was passed. The only thing we did not do was the modalities of identifying and putting those people there, all right? Our notes suggest that it was passed, all right. That is my recollection and I think chairman, you are right. Now, let us proceed, how are these people elected?

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Mr. Chairman, we passed the principle that elders should be part of the Council, but they have gone and re-defined who is this elder and they have said, the elder is above 55 years. That one, we did not pass.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think let us – according to my notes, according to the notes from the Clerk, these are the people who keep the records, that even the age was defined, 55 and above. Let us get, how do we elect these people?  This is very simple. 

MRS. BIGIRWA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I wanted to differ with hon. Kaggwa, about the method of election, because we were caucusing with hon. Kabasharira of the inclusion of the elderly persons, the main issue was that on these Councils, the elderly are not elected, because you find the youth are the majority on the Electoral College and the elderly were complaining that their issue are not well articulated in the various councils.  So, I would like to suggest that the elderly are elected by their kind, so that – this is my view, Mr. Chairman, that there is an Electoral College of the elderly above 55 who will elect their kind to represent them on the Councils; because the issue was that, they are not elected and their issues are not well articulated in the Councils.

THE CHAIRMAN: We want the way forward.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, my way forward, if we go back to the election of the chairman at the lower Councils. If we do agree to what the chairman has proposed of electing the chairman and then he appoints his cabinet, it will be automatic, he will be able to appoint an elder in that village. And if it goes to the LC II which is the higher level, that is an electoral college, an electoral college of a parish. In this country, people know high standing citizens and people with integrity. All we have to do is to describe the kind of person this Council requires and they will elect one.

So, the Electoral College should be the one to add that person on that Council. And if we go to a higher Council which now is universal Suffrage, which is the LC III Council and the LC V Council, the Mayor and the Chairman LC III are elected and they elect their own executive.  In this case, that very council could, also elect the elderly person in the sub-country, probably. It can nominate somebody or the chairman nominates somebody and the council confirms that person.  Otherwise if we subject them to Electoral Colleges, we are going to have a very big problem.  I think these people should actually be appointed and confirmed by those councils.  That will be the easiest way to do it.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Appointed by who?

CAPT. BABU: The chairman and his executive can do nominations and the council confirms the person.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Okumu Ringa, this is a third proposal. Now I am going to ask you to move specific amendment of the chairman’s proposal.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I thank you Mr. Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment to the proposal by the chairman that, three names of elderly persons above the age of 55 will be submitted to council for approval by council. So that it is not just one person being picked and approved by council.  Three names one of which, would be of a female.  I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I want the clerk to read out to you the proposal of the chairman, all right! The hon. Babu says, “These people should be nominated by the Executive Committee and approved by the council.” The chairman says, “They should be elected by an Electoral College of their kind of 55 years and above.”  Hon. Okumu Ringa is coming yet with a third scenario that, “three people be nominated.” And then who gets one out of those three?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: And then three persons of the age of about 55 be nominated by the Executive for approval of council and one of those three should be a female.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now can you make a formal – because we are debating generally, I want specific amendments. 

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend the amendment by the chairman that “the chairperson and the executive of a council should nominate the elderly persons to be approved by the council.” For the purpose of Gender formation, gender balance must be taken into account.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that all right? Hon. Okumu Ringa that incorporates yours. Yes, hon. Minister, you have heard the amendment to the chairperson’s - Let us deal with this, if it does not go through then we go back to the chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you Mr.Chairman. What I am saying is not an official provision. But I would like to wonder; there is a tendency generally for the executives at these levels to be kind of people of the chairman’s liking, his group.  The chairman nominates his people who will work with him. Now the fear I have with a proposal by hon. Babu is that he is not going to improve on the contribution by these fairly independent minded elders.  If it is the Executive Committee that nominates them, they will nominate their type. 

And once again the purpose for which hon. Kabasharira wanted these people will be defeated. All I want is how can we guarantee reasonable independence of these elders, who are going to come into this group?  That is all I would like to know Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now we have this amendment.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman in order to guide the House, we should take these elderly as a special group, like the disadvantaged groups we have been talking about and these people choose their own leaders.  So, why do we not give a chance to these elderly to choose their own people?

THE CHAIRMAN: All right, I want to put the question.

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Mr. Chairman, we have just stood over a clause precisely because the cost of electing those people was colossal. And if we are going to add on elections by this college again you are adding on to costs and my Minister of Finance here is very fidgety about costs. The juicy part about nomination by the executive is that it does not involve a lot of costs; it does not even involve the Electoral Commission. And since there is a provision for approval by the council, the imbalance hon. Kagonyera is worried about is going to be cured, because the council is a mixture of all minds.  So Mr. Chairman I would like to go for nomination other than elections because of one; the costs and two, the election fatigue that is setting in our election process.  I thank you Mr. Chairman.
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Yah, I will put the question to hon. Babu’s motion. Read it out.

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA:  Yah, unless we have agreed on the principle that they are two at every level; If we have agreed that they are two at every level, then that is all right. But if we have not agreed, then you may have to qualify that motion by saying two people one of whom shall be a woman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Babu, we are still finding problems with your motion, can you refine it?

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman there was a mistake, I left out the words “two persons.” So I say that, “the chairperson and the executive shall nominate two elderly persons to be approved by the council, at least one of whom should be a woman.” I have removed the bottom bit –(Interruption). 

THE CHAIRMAN: One of whom?

CAPT. BABU: One of whom should be a woman. I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I am seeking clarification from the chairperson and also the Mover of this motion. The original philosophy was to have two persons one female, and one male elderly person. Now if that is the principle, how can that be married with what hon. Babu has proposed? My concern is that if it is explicit that one should be a male, another one is a female then the issue of gender balance will not come in.  It is already balanced.  

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I thought the last – it was clear from the statement for hon. Babu.

DR. BYATIKE: Mr. Chairman, I am just wondering whether we should not give the council a bit of choice, and say, give them four names to choose from rather than putting two names there which, are going to be automatically appointed or nominated.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, they can reject them.

DR. BYATIKE: If they reject the two then they bring another two again.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, with due respect to you, my argument has remained raised. I would like the chairperson to answer the query expressed by hon. Kagonyera. Namely, that how do you ensure that the nominator does, not influence the two names?  We are practically addressing what is happening on the ground with reference to what I have seen in these divisions and that query was not answered.

THE CHAIRMAN: It was answered as far as I am concerned.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, that is provided for because the council will have to approve and if they find that this chairman is trying to put his brothers, they will say, No, and they ask him to bring another person.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to)

(Clause 7 as amended and agreed to)

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, the next Clause to consider, is Clause 18 of the amendment Bill. In Clause 18, when we came to 2(b), hon. Kazoora had introduced an amendment to subject the chief administrative officer and the town clerk to respective executive committees, other than the whole council for removal process to commence. But unfortunately, hon. Kazoora is not around but he came to our Committee, and the Minister of Local Government was there, we agreed with hon. Kazoora that, he drops that amendment because the council is more open to problems of that district or that it would be handled by the council rather than leaving it only to the executive.

However, we said that the committee recommended that in future the CAOs, the Town Clerks, Finance Officers and Treasurers should be employed on contract terms as determined by the respective councils. So that these people do not seem to be permanent whether they are good or bad. We gave in that recommendation to the Minister, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now hon. Members, if I understood the Member right, hon. Kazoora’s amendment was withdrawn so that. There is nothing to comment on; the owner has withdrawn it.  Proceed.

(Clause 18 as amended agreed to)

MR. RWABITA: Then Mr. Chairman, you remember hon. Mwandha had brought about 10 amendments on Section 89.All his amendments were discussed with the Committee and the Ministry and it was agreed that only we amend sub-section (9) of Section 89 of the Principal Act by adding the following at the end of sub-section (9) of Section 89.  Those who have got books, Section 89 sub-section (9) reads; “the chairperson of the council and the chief administrative officer or town clerk shall implement recommendations of the Local Government Public Account Committee”’ and here we agree with hon. Mwandha that we add, from there, “and report on actions taken or to be taken on the recommendations to persons listed in Section 88 sub-section (3)”.

Now Section 88 outlines people who should get a report from PAC and these are Parliament, the Minister responsible for Finance, the Minister himself of the Local Government, the Local Government or Administrative unit which the Audit relates, all that up to the Resident District Commissioner. The reasoning was that, hon. Mwandha says, ‘many times PAC gives recommendations and they are not carried out or forward.’ So he wants to make sure that when these recommendations are given, these people should be aware so that they can implement them or they can be implemented. That is what we agreed with hon. Mwandha, Mr. Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, it is really adding an expression at the end of the sub-section (9) the expression and report on actions taken or to be taken on the recommendation to persons listed in Section 88 sub-section (3).

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. Whereas the inclusion or the addition to Section 89 sub-section (9) refers to Section 88 sub-section (3) (a) to (h), the clarification I am seeking is as to whether or not this has been the practice or if it is not, how can this improve on the implementation of such a report?  For example, under Section 88, sub-section, (3)(a) report to Parliament, to the Minister responsible for Finance, to the Minister for Local Government or Administrative Unit to which the Audit relates and so on and so forth. So why do we not come up with a proper schedule relating specifically to the functions of such reports to Local Government rather than referring to Section 88 sub-section (3)?  That is the clarification I am seeking.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Chairman what the hon. Okumu-Ringa is saying provides specific list. He does not want this business of by way of reference to 88.  I think that is your problem.  I do not know but does it change the position?  Are you saying that if he repeats whatever is there, it will be more appealing to you because here he is doing by reference? Say the Chairperson of the Council and the Chief Administrative Officer or Town Clerk shall implement recommendations of the Local Government Public Account Committee.  All right?  And do take certain steps report to those people there. What is the problem exactly?  

MR.OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, my problem – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Example report to Parliament, report to Minister responsible for Finance, report to the Minister for Local Government, report to Local Government or Administrative Unit and the lot.  That is your problem.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  That is my problem Mr. Chairman. My problem is the report to Parliament, it will be really redundant, may be just for the archive of Parliament or for the Library of Parliament for research work. So if it is for effective and ministering or administration of Local Government, we could have a separate listing where we refer specifically to the Local Government Accounts Committee, Local Government Inspectorate Department and so on and so forth.  I am just – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no you are changing the people to be reported to?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Exactly Mr. Chairman.  So you find that 88(3) really relates to the functions of the Auditor General, the national one.  Whereas what we are referring to under, 89(9) where we have amendment is referring specifically to functions within the Local Government.  That is where my problem is.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. P. Byaruhanga):  Mr. Chairman, I can see the concern of hon. Okumu-Ringa, but then he should also look at section 88(1); the Accounts of every Local Government Council and Administrative Unit, shall be audited by the Auditor General or Auditor appointed by him or her.  Then what follows subsequently in the subsequent Clauses clearly confirms to whom these reports will be submitted to.  Now, when we mention Parliament, Ministry responsible for Finance, there are administrative mechanisms within those institutions to handle those reports. So you should really not feel uncomfortable about this current position.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Yeah, hon. Okumu-Ringa is saying those details would like to be listed separately and taken care of in 88 and they could be administrative.  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: In addition Mr. Chairman this amendment – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you satisfied with that first of all?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: I am not satisfied with – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: You still have another point?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: I am expounding on that Mr. Chairman, that the amendment brought under 89 Clause 9 is referring to issues which is directly related to the functions of Chief Administrative Officer, Town Clerk and Public Accounts Committee. So the way the amendment is referring to 88 Clause 3 is making it face ambiguous and 2 we will be leaving it to be redundant.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question.   

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, now we are coming to the area of recommittal. Mr. Chairman on page 2 of the Committee’s amendment, we want to recommit the definition of Urban Authority, Mr. Chairman  – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: What happened to Clause 23 incidentally?  Have we dealt with it?  You remember it was stood over? You remember hon. Mwandha’s lengthy amendments, which I have here?

MR. RWABITA: Yeah.

THE CHAIRMAN: Was that what we were going to dispose off?

MR. RWABITA:  Yes, let us start with 23 then. No we did not 23. You are right Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWABITA: Clause 23 is on page 13 on our amendment sheet. On Clause 23 unfortunately we omitted it and we have got an amendment on it. Amendment 1(I) in paragraph (a) insert a new sub-Clause after sub-Clause 1(B). So this will be 1(C) “where the City fails to remit revenue referred to under sub-section 1(B), the division council shall retain revenue due to the City to make full recovery of the revenue due to it”.  

Mr. Chairman it has been found out that in Municipalities or Cities, some divisions give their percentage to the centre but then the centre fails to give the money, which is supposed to go to the divisions. So here we are putting a provision to make sure that if the City centre fails to remit revenue due to divisions, then the division will have the right to maintain or to retain the same amount of money which is due to them Mr. Chairman.  And this will solve the problems facing divisions and City Council.

DR. P. BYARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I would not have any problem with that amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Amendment item 1, we are dealing with?

DR. P. BYARUHANGA: Because that is 1(a).  

THE CHAIRMAN: So I will put the question the amendment in item 1

(Question put and agreed to)

Item 2

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, item 2 you are referring to the present 1 (c), which reads “subject to paragraph (b) of section 46” Mr. Chairman we find that this is redundant because in section 46 already it is indicated that an urban area is consisting of parish or wards and villages. So it is a superfluous Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So, it is deleted?

MR. RWABITA: Yes, that paragraph (b) of Section 46 should be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: We shall pronounce ourselves on the entire amendment that is a deletion. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. RWABITA: In paragraph (b), insert a new Sub-Clause before Sub-Clause 7 and renumber (7) and (8).  So, a new (7) will read, “Notwithstanding the Provisions of Sub-section 6 – disbursement of funds to any Council shall be upon accountability for the previous release to that Council”. This Mr. Chairman is meant for proper accountability. Because you find that a Council gets money, they do not account for it and then they are given more.  So, we want the Council, after getting money, they should give accountability before they are given more money, Mr. Chairman.

DR. BYARUHANGA PHILLIP: My only objection to this amendment, Mr. Chairman, is that from practice and from what we are observing on the ground, sometimes the problem is really not the problem of these respective local Governments; it is sometimes the delaying in the transfers from the centre. So, if the releases come late, for example, if the release comes in the last one month of the quarter, you will paralyse activities of some of these local Governments.  So, it is just on the basis of what is happening within our system that I am opposed to this insertion. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: The insertion, hon. Members, is that before the beneficiary gets more money, he or she or it should have accounted for the previous disbursement.  That’s all!  Is that the correct understanding?  His amendment is that, “notwithstanding the Provisions of Sub-section 6, disbursement of funds to any Council shall be upon accountability for the previous release to that Council”.  In other words, you starve the guy until he accounts for it. 

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Mr. Chairman, I am entirely in agreement with the amendment, in that, we must instil a spirit of accountability in a country, which has been rocked by a lot of corruption, especially, at the district level, so that before he accounts for the money, we should starve him.  I entirely agree with that.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, first and fore most, it is really very unfortunate when we stand in this Parliament and start criticising our own colleagues in the districts, that everything is so bad to the lowest possible – I disagree.  But let me now go to my point.  

Mr. Chairman, we have the financial regulations within the system of Government, both at the national level and at Government level. These financial regulations have got even a financial Commission we are to set – a Finance Commission, which is going to look at all the finances of all local Governments in Uganda.

Really, because of some delay of some chief or because of the incompetence of some CAO, you starve the whole group of the people when they deliver services; it becomes very unfortunate, because it is the people who suffer not the individuals.  Therefore, I am saying that, yes, there must be some stringent methods of bringing the CAO and his assistance to account for the money as quickly as possible within the financial regulations.  But I do not think we should starve a sub-county or a district because of the incompetence of one person. I think we should rectify that by using the financial regulations like we do in Central Government.  You do not stop Government from moving because a Permanent Secretary has made a mistake.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I implore you and all the hon. Members, that the financial regulation should be made a little bit stricter, against the accounting officers.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, are you for this amendment or against it?  

DR. BYARUHANGA: I am for it.

THE MINISTER OF ETHICS AND INTERGRITY (Mrs. Matembe): Mr. Chairman, I would like to tell this House and hon. Capt. Babu in particular, that when we are talking about mishandling and misappropriation of funds at the district, we are not saying that these people are not working. But I want to inform this House that so much money that goes to the district is really lost. As I stand here now, there is a case in Kiboga – shs.400m/=, we cannot find it; we are now on this matter.

Therefore, really when we are making these laws, we should make sure that we make them in such a way that we tighten the gaps and the loopholes that this money is going through. So, Mr. Chairman, when a district has not accounted for the money, there is no reason why they should continue to get more, when they have not accounted for what they have taken.  –(Interjection)- Mr. Chairman, please protect me.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are protected.

MRS. MATEMBE: In fact my Neighbour could be, wanting to enhance my point because he is the Minister for Economic Monitoring. We are having problems. When we are talking of corruption in this Country and we are talking of political will, and strengthening the efforts to fight corruption, we should do it through legal machinery. Through structures and through any other relevant instruments that can help us, and therefore, I want to inform this hon. House, as they well know, that at the Central Government, we have a commitment system – we have tightened the way the Permanent Secretaries spend money. They do not just spend anyhow – there is a system, which they follow and they must first account before they can receive more money. Therefore, this system should also be extended to the district. 

I would like to appeal to the hon. Members, I am telling you the fight against corruption cannot be by word of month, it must be demonstrated through the legal and institutional framework and this Law could be such of the legal framework that can help us in this fight.    Therefore, for me as the Minister for Ethics and Integrity, charged with this very difficult responsibility, while the local Government has continued to lose a lot of money, instead of getting the services that we are to get; we should tighten things down there and make sure that things work better. I thank you Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you for the committee's amendment?  Make it a Law and because regulations can be manipulated and so on.  

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Kagonyera): Thank you Mr. Chairman.  Mine is to emphasise what the Minister for Integrity has said. We are frustrated in Government by luck of accountability.  On a daily basis you read in The Newspapers about money not being accounted for. I believe we are the only Government in the World, who could accept that kind of thing at all.  

Therefore, instead of people saying there should be no accountability, you must find a practical way of how this accountability should be done. But there is no question in my mind, hon. Babu should know when the Minister of Finance makes a release they add a rider to the release and I hope he is listening. They add a rider that no further funds will be released until these funds have been accounted for.  

Therefore, in order for us to be able to get somewhere these Chief Administrative Officers and everybody should start accounting for the money, from the day they receive it. They should start making records, so that at the end of the period the records are ready they just dispatch them; that is all we are asking them to do. But Mr. Chairman I would like to appeal to this House to have zero tolerance for laxity. We have problems dealing with our development partners, because of our inability to account for funds, of our inability to even fail to implement projects. 

Therefore, I appeal to the House to pass the amendment that this money must be accounted for, before and that is what will wake up everybody else in the local Governments. If counsellors do not get their allowances they should know that the Chief Administrative Officer is not doing his job, and therefore they should demand that this guy does his job or he quits. Thank you Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment of the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman we have got a very small amendment on the old 7, now a new 8. We are adding in 'licenses' after 'tickets' and it reads; that a "Lower Government council shall share equally with the respective higher local Government the costs of printing of graduated tax tickets, licenses, books of accounts and receipt books provided the cost do not include salaries".  I beg to move Mr. Chairman.  We add the word 'licenses' after tickets.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 23 as amended)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 23 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr.P. Byaruhanga): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr.P. Byaruhanga): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered Clauses of the Bill entitled, 'The Local Governments Act (Amendment) Bil,l 2001”, Clauses 41 to 45 and also some which were stood over and passed them with some amendments. Thank you.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr.P. Byaruhanga): Mr. Speaker I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: This brings us to the end of today's proceedings. We will adjourn until tomorrow at 2:00p.m and hope to complete consideration of the Bill. I would like to remind you, hon. Members, you are so many, when you come in this place it is not even enough for you, but I do not know why it takes hours for you to appear in the House and sometimes only to vanish after the communication from the Chair. Let us stick around and do business. I would like to see you do that tomorrow.  Thank you very much. The House is adjourned until 2:00p.m tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5:33p.m and adjourned until Wednesday, 4th April, 2001 at 2:00p.m)

