Thursday 1st April,1999

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to remind you that those of you who have come in with your mobile telephones, some of which I have heard ringing, should deposit them outside the chamber.  Thank you.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE AFFAIRS OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE ANIMAL INDUSTRIES AND FISHERIES.
 
(Debate continued)

THE PRIME MINISTER: (Mr. Kintu Musoke):  Mr. Speaker, you indicated that today, debate on the report on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries will be concluded.  Government has followed closely the debate of the report and studied the  Committee's recommendations and other related materials both of which have far reaching implications on Government policies and officials.  Government appreciates the work done by Parliament in assembling all this information and materials, however, Government is requesting that more time be given to further consider the recommendations.  Government will be ready to make an appropriate response when Parliament resumes after Easter.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker - (Applause).

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I believe that you said the debate continues. I thought the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was going to give us a thunderous contribution.  Mr. Speaker, he has really let me down and my Colleagues because, Mr. Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is acting as if he does not know the rules of this Parliament.  There is a report on the Floor, it is being debated by Parliament. If some Member wishes to move that the debate on it be adjourned, it must be an individual Member of Parliament not Government.  And it must be by motion seconded dully and then debated and the House will decide on it.  Mr. Speaker, I think I am quite sure you will consider that this debate continues.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Prime Minister has made a request on behalf of Government, and I think we should treat it seriously; but before we do that, I think the Chairman of the committee, the person who presented this report may wish to say something on that. I do not know what he says about that.  

THE CHAIRPERSON  OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr. Anthony Kanyike): Mr. Speaker, a Committee of 18 Members of this House was selected by the Speaker and put on a Select Committee to investigate the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  Your proposal, Mr. Speaker, was brought to this House and it was accepted by the entire House.  

The responsibility of the Committee, Mr. Speaker, was to make a report and recommendations to this House which it has done but, Mr. Speaker, Government has now come out with a statement that they would like more time to consider the matter contained in the report and also the recommendations in the report.  We have not been given the purpose for that request. This is an important matter which I think the House might want to consider but as far as the committee is concerned, Mr. Speaker, we do recognise that we have fulfilled our responsibility and brought a report to this House and  that has now become the property of the Parliament. 

Mr. Speaker, we do also consider that we have in our Constitution the separation of powers.  After this Parliament has considered the report, the Executive will have to take action if it is intended that Government takes action on the report and this recommendation after it has reviewed them. I think for the purposes of unity, for the purposes of good governance, for the purposes of democracy and for the purposes of national unity, that is a request that this House should, I think, consider favourably -(Applause)-  because at the end of it all, ours are recommendations and a resolution that has to be implemented by the Executive. It is important that the work of Parliament and the work of the Executive complement each other and I think this is where I talk about good governance because we as Members of Parliament are also responsible to see that this country is run in good manner.  

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity, to thank the Members of the Committee who prepared that report; I would like to thank the Members of Parliament who have contributed to that report and whatever Parliament decides about that report today, I would like to request that it remains the property of Parliament until the final resolution is taken on it.  I beg to support the Government position on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I said earlier, on the Prime Minister made a request for the adjournment or deferment of the conclusion of this debate for the purpose of enabling Government to consider the recommendations of the Committee and I am not so sure whether the Prime Minister did go as far as saying that the results of this consideration would be ready by Tuesday next week.  If I understand by saying after the Easter holidays to mean that this should be next Tuesday, then I am right in stating this.  But the important thing is that the Chairman of the Committee has come out clearly that his Committee and him are agreeable to this request if it is going to solve the very problems, the very issues which they raised in their recommendations and, therefore, I think it is a reasonable request on the part of Government. I think it is something which is intended to solve the very problems that we have been debating all this time. I think this is a request which should be granted. I therefore adjourn the House to Tuesday next week and I wish you a happy Easter.

(The House rose and adjourned until Tuesday 6th April 1999 at 2.00 pm).

