Thursday, 05 April 2007

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to inform the Committee on Government Assurances that Parliament has arranged a workshop for you from Thursday 12 April to Saturday, 14 April 2007 at Hotel Triangle Annex in the Busogaland. The workshop is about understanding the mandate, scope and challenges of the Committee on Government Assurances. Of course I know that you are going to be on recess, but you are required to assemble here on that Thursday at 4.30 p.m. There will be transport to take you at 4.55 p.m. Kindly, Committee on Government Assurances Members, please do the needful. 

2.59
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of great public importance and urgent in nature. I think all Members here have noted that on Tuesday this week the Constitutional Court passed a judgment to the effect that the existing local councils are not established in accordance with the law, and for all intents and purposes they are a nullity. So, I would wish to know from the Attorney-General, what will be the position right now as far as these local councils are concerned because the public out there is in a state of confusion as to the legal status of the current local councils. 

We have had conflicting statements in the press, actually there is a statement where Dr Kiggundu, the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission is quoted saying that the officers now handling matters at that level are volunteers; that they are actually good Samaritans. These are the press statements. So we are just wondering as to how people can be good Samaritans or volunteers in public offices? Is that the position of Government? We would like to know:

One, the position of Government on this matter as far as the legal status of these local councils are concerned or rather the lower local administrative units.

Two, there was a call from their Lordships that Parliament should urgently come up with legislations to address the crisis. So I do not know when this legislation is going to be put in place, but for the time being, what do we have in place? Do we still have these local councils or not? If they are there physically, certainly legally they are not in existence, there is a vacuum. What does the government intend to do about this? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes Attorney-General, is this a question you can handle right now or you need time to do your research?

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague and Shadow Attorney-General for raising this very important matter. We all know that the Rubaramira case just before it was instituted, we were in the process of elections to fill these vacancies at those levels; and we could not proceed because there was a matter pending in court. Now that we have heard the judgement, we shall carefully study it, we shall come out with a position and since it is as urgent as you actually say, we should have a position on it by the close of next week because we are resuming on the 17th. Immediately we resume we should be able to give you an authoritative position of the government as to what we intend to do next. But of course legislation is one of the courses you are likely to take. 

In the meantime, we shall go by the ruling of the court. (Laughter) 

3.03
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. I rise on another matter of grave national importance. About a month ago the Judiciary, as we all know, closed their doors to the public in protest of what they termed invasion of the temple of justice by the Executive. To get their Lordships back to work, it took the assurance and commitment of the chief executive officer of this country, the President of Uganda, to assure the Judiciary that henceforth the court decisions would be respected and what happened on the 1st of March could never be repeated. 

I regret to inform the House that on Thursday last week, the 29th of March, court issued an order to produce the 10 PRA suspects before Justice Mwangusya this morning. Production warrants were issued to both Bushenyi and Arua courts. Unfortunately, they were not produced this morning. A junior officer from the prisons came to court to inform court that the Prisons Department did not have fuel to bring these people to court whereas the orders to these prisons were served on Thursday. 

Madam Speaker, we remember that the PRA prisoners last reappeared on the 1st of March in the High Court of Kampala and they were forcefully removed from there by 8.30 in the evening. By 7.30 the following morning, or 6.30 - whatever time it was, fuel had been found for a helicopter to take only seven people to Arua and for a pick-up to take only three people to Bushenyi. I do not know whether there had been notice, but fuel was found. I beg this House to consider this a matter of very serious repercussions for this country. I stood here sometime last month and reported that there was war between the Judiciary and the Executive. It was happening at the High Court. 

Yesterday I listened very carefully as hon. Felix Ogong told us the story of the farmer in the USA. I think it was not the farmer, it was the professor. When it happened to the farmer, the professor said, “That is a farmer.” When it happened to other people the professor said, “Those are other people.” Until it happened to him and there was nobody to speak out for him. Yesterday we saw the very same thing happening here. People have been crying of injustice, but we have been going on with our normal business because “those are other people”. The Judiciary closed their doors and we sat here and continued with business and said, “We shall look into it on Tuesday”, because that was the Judiciary. Yesterday it was right here in Parliament, when the Executive and Parliament were clashing over decisions of Parliament. 

We need to know from this House and from the government, how far we are going to sit in this House and pretend to be representatives of the people, when the role of Parliament and the role of the Judiciary are clearly not an issue with the Executive? Thursday’s order to court was the fifth to be contemptuously ignored by the Executive. Just like last time, the Solicitor-General was too busy to turn up in court to explain this. Today he had other business in Entebbe and sent a junior officer to explain to court that there was no fuel. How far are we going to sit here and watch the Executive usurp the power of court and the power of Parliament, disrespect court and Parliament, and every institution in this country?

I think it is about time. When the Opposition walked out, that was the Opposition and since the numbers were available, business continued. It was the decision of the whole House. How long are we going to sit here and watch the Executive flaunt everything that they are supposed to do? I beg this House to consider this matter as one of very serious concern. We know that the President of this country said that the only way these people will get out of court is when they take amnesty. When he gave his assurance to the Judiciary that they were going to be respected, people who do not know the President sighed with relief, but those who know the worth of the President’s word knew better. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to end my submission by asking this House to get involved in this matter, which is clearly personalised around the PRA suspects, for the sake of them seeking amnesty, so that they get out of prison. I thank you.

3.10
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. First of all I thank my colleague, Betty Kamya for raising that matter. However, I thought that it would be important for me to stand up so that Parliament proceeds on a clearer note. I am sorry that we did not consult each other on this matter. I was in court today when the case was brought up for mention. The lawyers on both sides argued their cases and mutually agreed to the process. Those representing the office of the Attorney-General, who represented the Solicitor-General and his colleague, argued and made two representations:

One was to the effect that Government was unable to facilitate the transport of these suspects from Arua Prison to Kampala, and from Bushenyi to Kampala. 

The second issue was that the Solicitor-General has been given another urgent state assignment and that he would not be able to participate in the court process up to 24 April. 

The lawyers for the suspects made a very passionate plea on the need for the people representing Government to show seriousness about the case because it was their representation to court to review the bail. At the end of the day both parties, before the Judge, mutually agreed that the case be adjourned to 24 April.

In a situation where the officers representing the parties to the conflict have mutually agreed, it will be very important that we respect the process as it is. Although my colleague hon. Betty Kamya made a very strong presentation, I like to make an appeal to her that this matter be left to play itself out in court. Should we have any difficulties associated with the process that will necessitate us coming to Parliament to appeal, we will do that. 

However, it is important for the government to take note of the concerns that hon. Betty Kamya presented. It does not reflect well on Government when they cannot come to court to pursue their own case. The judge said, “Look, you have told me that the Solicitor-General is not available and the convenient date for the Solicitor-General is after 24 April. Has it occurred to you that the people involved - the suspects - would be inconvenienced by this delay and would even spend Easter in prison without knowing their fate?” 

I think the Judge, in the circumstances today made a point that it is extremely important that people who are parties to any matter in court and seek to be present to hear their case, should be brought to court. He urged the arm of Government responsible for production of suspects before court to do so. In his ruling, the judge said that he is going to issue a production warrant for the suspects to be presented to court on the 30 of April and I think -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it on the 24 or 30 of April?

PROF. LATIGO: On the 30 of April.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is happening on the 24 of April?

PROF. LATIGO: The Solicitor-General said that he would not be available up to 24 April, yet if the matter had been fixed on a date before 30 April, it would not be convenient for the lawyers of the suspects. So both parties had to agree. I would like to say that we will abide by the agreement made in court as we wait to see what develops. I know that my colleague hon. Betty Kamya is anxious to see something done, but I think the right thing to do is to respect that mutual agreement in court and wait for 30 April. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think let us wait for the outcome of 30 April.

3.16
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is now more than a year since the government of Uganda last had an Auditor-General, yet the Constitution is very clear on the duties of the Auditor-General; that is to audit the books of accounts of the government of Uganda and its bodies on an annual basis. We know that the accounts for the financial year 2005/06 are supposed to have been signed on 31 March. Can the Minister of Finance or the Prime Minister tell us who signed those accounts? 

Could he tell us when we shall have the Auditor-General and when the audit Bill will be coming to Parliament? Remember it is the Auditor-General who audits all the trillions we pass in Parliament and all the resources we have in the country. If we do not have the Auditor-General in place, it means all the resources of the country are at risk. Can we have the minister in charge, or the Prime Minister tell us -(Interruption)— -(Mr Ekanya rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not really a debate. It is just about asking simple questions. He has asked the question, “Do we have an Auditor-General?”

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, this matter concerns both hon. Nandala and I. We are aware that there is an interpretation by the Solicitor-General on this matter. This interpretation, however, falls short of the Constitution and other requirements, and the standards of the office of the Auditor-General in the Commonwealth. It does not also give the qualifications of the person who can act in absence of a substantive Auditor-General. I wanted to put this on record.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to preface my remarks by thanking the Leader of the Opposition for being extremely reasonable -(Applause)- I wish we had three million people of his quality. (Laughter)  

Regarding the Office of the Auditor-General, we are aware that under Article 163 of the Constitution, we must have one and there is now an acting Auditor-General. We are handling the situation so that we may have an Auditor-General. However, we have problems because the one who resigned felt that he was getting peanuts. So there are problems of remuneration. True, we do have problems but we are handling that matter systematically. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.20
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have chosen to write my statement on paper because it is a matter of extreme grief on my part. I rise to inform this House over a matter of grief of the families in my constituency where family members were murdered in cold blood by the Police on the night of Friday, 30 March. 

A group of young men were returning from a burial. The four of them had attended the burial of a neighbour in Kibega parish, Kanyaryeru sub-county. Police personnel attacked them and killed two brothers, Mugarura and Nayebare, on the spot. One other person, a shopkeeper in the neighbourhood, was seriously injured and he is hospitalized. The fourth person, a disabled man and a Church priest, survived to tell the story.  

The dead left behind young widows and children. These are poor families without means to hire services of a lawyer and seek justice. The people of the affected sub-county are mourning and as I speak they are totally scared and in disbelief. Some of the dead were local leaders in the area: Nayebare was an LC I chairman as well as the Movement Chairman. Kiiza, as I mentioned, is a Church priest. In the eyes of the people of Kanyaryeru sub-county, this attack was made on the leadership of the people they trust most. 

The Police claims to have killed thieves, however, the population rejects this position. One wonders why the Police would choose to kill unarmed people on the spot rather than arrest them as suspects. Is it not possible that it could have been a case of mistaken identity, and if it were, what next? 

I, therefore, wish to use this opportunity and ask this August House to seek redress for my people. I also request Government to do the following: 

First, have independent inquiries into this incident using investigators outside the Police personnel in Mbarara because they cannot be expected to convict themselves. I must state here that we are not in favour of covering up for thieves. We want law and order to prevail in society; we want law and order to prevail in our area. 

Second, we request Government to compensate the families of the victims. We know that lives cannot be put back but the relatives of the dead, in case they were innocent, must be compensated. The Government should move quickly to show care and consolation to the people in the affected sub-county.

The security situation in Nyabushozi has deteriorated significantly in the last six months. In a period of one year we have had a number of people murdered in the area in different incidents and on this I can give a clear report. Madam Speaker, Government needs to move in fast and address the security situation in Nyabushozin, including facilitating the Police with mere means of transport to be able to respond to cases of insecurity. 

I, however, wish to end by acknowledging the positive response and reception that the minister and the Inspector-General of Police have accorded me. However, I urge them to follow up this matter to a logical conclusion. I thank you, for your attention and for this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Internal Affairs wish to say anything?

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaijja): Hon. Speaker, and hon. Members of Parliament, this matter came to my attention about three or four days ago, and we have moved very fast. We have instituted investigations, there is a preliminary report, which I do have here, but I would not want to use it because I still want to cross check on a number of things. 

All I want to assure my colleague, hon. Mugyenyi, is that everything within the powers of the Police is being done to bring the culprits to book. At an appropriate time I shall be able to bring a full and comprehensive report of the action that we will take to conclude this matter in giving justice to the people who have fallen victim of this unfortunate incident. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF PETITION
PETITION BY RESIDENTS OF LIRA SUB-COUNTY TO GOVERNMENT 
TO GAZETTE TE-ILWA CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE

3.27
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to present the humble petition by the residents of Lira sub-county on Te-ilwa Central Reserve Forest. 
The petition is to the Parliament of Uganda under rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. The humble petition of the communities living within Te-ilwa Forest Reserve is presented by me on their behalf, and states that: 

Recent moves by the National Forest Authority (NFA) to evict residents of Anyalo, Ayere, Ongica “A”, Ongica “B”, Anai Agali, Anai Ober, Anai Opio Onyoro and Apelo villages, have affected these communities both psychologically and physically, despite the following facts and realities.

Ever since the forest reserve was gazetted in 1952, the communities listed above have been living and earning their livelihood there, especially in the 1970s in response to then Government Double Productions Programme.

The total population of the people settled and earning their livelihood in this reserve is over 2,000 (285 households) who, if evicted, have nowhere to go.

Social facilities and infrastructure developed and offered by Government in this reserve includes: two primary schools; fourteen protected water sources; community roads opened under the Local Government Development Programme (LGDP) and NUSAF; and on the eastern and western sides of the reserve is a site for a proposed Anai International Airfield and a Government diary farm at Bala Stock Farm respectively.

Five is that the proposed extension and expansion of Lira municipality covers and includes four parishes forming part of the reserve.

Six is that Lira sub–county, therefore, remains the smallest in Lira District with an increasing population but land to support the peasant growing population is being reduced drastically due to the disputed Te-ilwa forest reserve, the proposed Airfield, Bala stock Farm and the expansion of Lira Municipality to cover the remaining four parishes and 36 villages in the sub-county.

Therefore, your petitioners pray that:

1.	The National Forest Authority abandons the disruptive and untenable plans and acts of evicting the said communities from the reserve. 
2.	That Government instead effects the degazzetement of Te-ilwa Central Reserve Forest to allow the affected communities live and develop peacefully; and your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray, No. 1 - (Interjection)- I wanted to read just a few of the names –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, no! The petition is committed to the Committee on Natural Recourses.

MR ANGIRO: The total number of petitioners is 285, Madam Speaker, and I lay a copy of the petition on the Table.

MOTION TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED 
“THE UGANDA FORESTRY ASSOCIATION BILL, 2007”

3.32
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to move a motion seeking leave of the House, to allow me introduce a Private Member’s Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR NGABIRANO: Madam Speaker, I am moving under rule 105 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament and the motion is as follows:

WHEREAS the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 was enacted to provide for the conservation, sustainable management and development of forests for the benefit of the people of Uganda, and for related matters;

AND NOTING that the Act did not address the issues of professional standards and ethics for foresters and other practitioners involved in the activities in the forestry sector, the provision of relevant training and capacity building, and the need to foster a partnership between forestry and civil society in the development of standards;

REALISING that there is need for a law that deals with the standards of professionalism in the private and public realm of the forestry sector;

FURTHER AWARE that in effect, there is a lacuna in the enforcement of professional standards and ethics in the forestry sector, which makes the public vulnerable to the dangers paused by those who engage in the practices of unprofessional conduct;

DETERMINED to ensure that activities in the sector are handled in a professional manner and to that end establish a body corporate to enforce standards, ethics and codes of conduct for the good of conservation, sustainable management and development of forests in Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill for an Act entitled the Uganda Forest Association Bill, 2007, a draft of which is hereto attached, and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

3.19
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you Madam Speaker. The hon. Member of Parliament carried out the consultations and the minister in charge of the sector approves. I want to thank him for having gone through the proper procedures. The Government has no problem whatsoever in recommending that he be granted leave - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since the government does not have any objection, do we really have to debate this? Leave is granted to the Member to move the Private Members’ Bill.

MOTION TO HONOUR THE GOOD AND EXEMPLARY PERFORMANCE OF HON. NAMIREMBE BITAMAZIRE AS MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let us defer this one. The hon. Minister Bitamazire is out of the country.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

3.37
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my personal explanation to the Parliament of Uganda on the statement made by hon. Ben Wacha following the article, “Onek threatens to sue Kitgum boss” in the Daily Monitor of Tuesday, 03 April 2007, on page 14. 

Hon. Ben Wacha’s statement following an article by Jimmy Kwo was a concoction by some of my political opponents to create conflict between me and my colleagues, Members of Parliament and the government. There is no journalist by such a name in Kitgum District. The article was complied by a one Wokorach Oboi, who was guided by politicians, including three Shadow Ministers in this House, the LC 5 Chairman Kitgum, a former Member of the NRC representing Aruu County and who lives in Kitgum Town, and Mr Wokorach, the journalist by the pseudonym Jimmy Kwo -(Interjection)- hiding under the fake name –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, I am forced to raise this point of order. Our rules are very clear that a personal statement is not supposed to be controversial. But as the Minister is proceeding, he has mentioned and in fact he has alleged that there are three Shadow Ministers who worked hand in hand with the reporter to put his name in the newspapers the way it was put. Can he mention the names of those Shadow Ministers and if not, is he in order to proceed with this controversial statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our Rules of Procedure really dictate that if it is a personal statement it should not contain controversial issues. What you are saying now is going to require us to call these people to speak if they are here, and then the whole House will have to be involved in the debate –(Interruption)

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, I have got a right to defend myself. I am going to mention the names if you wish -(Interjection) 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, you have given guidance that is helpful to this House. There can only be one way about this. Either we on this side, or whoever else is listening, specifically be told the Shadow Ministers responsible and we continue with the controversy, or that is withdrawn and we continue with the personal statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, let him speak. He was just starting to speak again; I do not know what else he was going to say. But, Mr Minister, no controversies!

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, in this House Members can, with impunity, destroy other peoples’ images but their names are not supposed to be mentioned. However, I can mention their names right away –(Interruption)- yes. They are: hon. Beatrice Anywar, hon. Ogenga Latigo - this thing was written here in Parliament - and then hon. –(Interjections)- yes! You want me to mention the names –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you asked him to substantiate and he is doing so –(Interruption). Yes you asked -(Interruption)- he is substantiating!

MR ONEK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was made aware of the motive and the masterminds behind the bad publicity by a sympathetic FDC youth. Ekimeeza was to co-ordinate its publicity. He showed me the draft concocted on Friday evening, 30 March 2007, and promised to bring me the final copy -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, considering the statement being presented by the honourable minister and the nature of the utterances he is making, it is very clear that he is making counter-accusations and allegations against honourable members of this House. I am wondering whether our Rules of Procedure do permit him to make such allegations here on the Floor. The question is, in a matter of this nature, where he is supposed to make personal explanations, is he in order to make counter-accusations against honourable ministers in the Shadow Government, and in particular against our leader? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I tried to guide the Minister by telling him to concentrate on the issues of his personal explanation, and then you demanded substantiation so he substantiated –(Mr Okot Ogong rose_)- yes, hon. Ogong?

MR OKOT: The statement has become very controversial. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear that a personal statement should not contain controversial matters. Right now the honourable minister has implicated hon. Members of Parliament in his statement. I would like to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, whether this matter cannot be referred to our Committee of Rules and Discipline. This is a serious matter and it should be referred so that these people can discuss it and we get the report from the committee –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members - (Interjections)- the matter will go to the Rules Committee and then they will give us a report. You can all go and appear there. 

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, you have ruled that the first part of the statement of hon. Hilary Onek be referred to a committee. I want your guidance because the whole thing is not on record. Hilary Onek was making a personal explanation following what appeared in the press and what hon. Ben Wacha -(Interjection)- please, this type of debate is not going to help us. Now that the explanation is not on record, what is the committee going to deal with? Are they going to deal with the first three sentences he has read or are they going to deal with the whole statement? I want your guidance on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As far as I am concerned, he has brought a statement here, which he has given to all of us. The committee will take the whole - [Mr Atubo: “It is not on record.”] - I asked him to concentrate on the personal issues but he went on to the others. Unless he agrees to concentrate on some areas and leave out the others –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I have been sitting here considering what is going on. I think it is very important that everything that is in the heart of my brother, the hon. Minister Hilary Onek, comes out. If you stifle it, you will not know that hon. Onek has something serious against his brother, Prof. Latigo. I would propose that hon. Onek be allowed to speak his heart –(Interjections)- because if it does not happen in this House, it will happen outside and yet it is safer in this House than outside because my name has already been mentioned. 

Those whose names are not involved in this, allow us to express our views because if hon. Onek had made his statement, I would have had an opportunity to speak so that it is also on record since my name has already appeared in this House -(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. You have ably ruled that the Committee on Rules should scrutinise this, interface with all parties, then report to this august House. It is only then that all of us will have the opportunity to discuss it or debate it. I also think it is the appropriate time that hon. Latigo will raise his concerns. What I suggest, for purposes of record, is that the hon. Minister Hilary Onek, lay the statement on the Table such that it is officially received by Parliament, the committee will scrutinise it and then hon. Latigo and others will debate it when the committee brings the report.

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, let us not set precedents that are harmful to our activities in Parliament. Personal statements are only personal matters, which following debate or following consideration, when they are in full, can then be considered to be so sensitive that maybe a committee of Parliament must deal with it. You cannot say that somebody who is supposed to make a personal statement writes the statement and brings it here and is then referred to the committee. What are you referring to in the committee just because they mentioned Prof. Latigo’s name? I think it is important for us to do these things correctly. 

Hon. Onek is making a personal statement. Some of us who are mentioned in that statement will take him on by his statement. If I think the matter is so great, I will ask Parliament to refer this matter to the Discipline Committee, but I would like to hear what hon. Onek has on me. I will not hear it in the committee.

3.50
THE MINISTER IN THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Adolf Mwesige): I rise to support the views expressed by the Leader of the Opposition, that although this statement, on the face of it, contains controversial issues, I think it is fair that it is read and captured by the Hansard. If there are controversial issues that we think should not be discussed, they can be expunged, but after hon. Onek has been allowed to read his statement. 

And, Madam Speaker, yes, you have ruled, but it is not out of order to invite you to review your ruling if there are reasons to do so. It is, therefore, my request –(Interjection)- no, you stand up to challenge her ruling if you do not agree with it but she can review her own ruling. Yes, she can review her own ruling without being challenged. You challenge her ruling if you do not agree with it. And if she has declined to review her ruling, I am inviting the Speaker to review her ruling and allow hon. Onek to read his statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are about to set a precedent against our rules. The first one is that our personal statements should not have anything controversial. If we allow the honourable member to read it, are you going to have a debate or not?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I stand here to support Prof. Latigo and hon. Adolf Mwesige on this matter because when I perused through this statement, there were accusations that were grave. They have not named people. I could be one of those who could be among those named. If you look at the last paragraph of page 2, it talks about wicked and dirty politicians. These should also be named such that when this matter goes to the committee we know whom the wicked and dirty politicians are, and who should also attend the Discipline Committee meetings.

MRS SENINDE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The fact that the honourable minister’s statement has raised controversy and tension in the House and the fact that you had initially ruled that probably this matter goes to the committee, the Member of the Opposition has risen up and expressed his dissatisfaction that this report must be expressed before Parliament. 

For a procedural purpose, I would suggest that we allow the Minister to lay his report on the Table and then this report be taken to the committee, be debated and later on be presented to the House for debate. Otherwise, we are going to have a problem if we continue like this because Members are not satisfied with what the Minister is doing. I would suggest that it is laid on the Table. 

MR KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, I think we should allow our Rules of Procedure to work. Unless we do that we are going to run into problems. Already the conduct existing in the House indicates that there is a serious controversy. You do not want to start discussing personalities in this House. We are going to degenerate into doing this if we are going to continue debating this matter –(Applause)- really, what has already been stated is sufficient for the Committee on Discipline to be able to handle this matter. An accusation has been made by a Member of this House against other Members of the House. It has raised controversy. They have been named and you have made a ruling that, “Let the Committee on Discipline look at it” so –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the Office of the Speaker of Parliament is a fountain of honour for the institution of Parliament. While the Speaker is chairing the House, nobody is supposed to interrupt and disrupt her from hearing the proceedings. Is it in order for the Government Chief Whip to interfere with your hearing ability on other matters of the House? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I hear from both sides. (Laughter)

MR KAWANGA: For the dignity of this House, I pray that the ruling you have made be complied with. Let this matter be referred there and whoever wants to debate this matter will do it in that committee. (Applause)

MR RUHINDI: I take note of our colleagues who are insisting on strict compliance with our Rules of Procedure. There are two sub-clauses to the appropriate rule and that is 42(1) and 42(2). 42(1) says: “A Member may explain a matter of personal nature but no controversial matter may be brought in the explanation nor may debate arise upon it”, we emphasize the word “may”.

42(2): “Unless the situation warrants otherwise - we don’t know whether the situation has warranted otherwise - any personal explanation under this rule shall be submitted to the Speaker in writing by 11 a.m. on the day on which it is to be made.” This means there is need for some guidance on a statement of this nature from the Office of the Speaker. This actually comes in with the issue of “may”, meaning that if any matter, which is controversial has to be brought in, it may be on the advice and guidance of the Speaker. 

In view - and I do not know whether this statement came to your office as the rule provides - if it did not and we are strictly complying with our rules, wouldn’t it be prudent that this matter first goes through your office?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would mean he would have to make the statement when we return after recess? I really do not want an exchange among Members. 

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, given the rules and also given the heated arguments going on, I would wish to withdraw this statement and then confer with you and later on come with a statement, which may not point fingers. Although they have pointed fingers at me in the papers, I am not going to point fingers. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Onek, my office will be open for you after Easter to work on the statement.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, there is a serious precedent we are setting. With due respect to the understanding generated in the House, I do not want us tomorrow to be caught under the same precedent set. Having concurred and having internalised the matter, you referred it to the committee. If it were challenged, Members would have stood up to defy your ruling but they did not. This means that they concurred and observed your ruling. Right now we are bypassing our very rules to bring up the matter. We are not using the proper procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Ssekikubo. We have operated under rule 42. It says there should be no controversy in the statement. If there is a controversy, the Speaker should have cleared it. He has withdrawn the statement. This statement is not there. He will come back after Easter.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, last week and in the past weeks, an issue was raised by a number of people: hon. Kawanga, hon. Nandala Mafabi and I. The Government gave us assurance that a statement would have been produced last week; it was not fulfilled. 

As regards Tristar, we agreed that the statement comes today, Thursday. I looked at the Order Paper today and did not see it there. The hon. Ministers for Finance are not here. Madam Speaker, is this another defiance by the Executive on their own assurances? 

Yesterday, we had another controversy on the issue regarding NTV. How do we treat matters pertaining to the Executive and in particular regarding Tristar? It is a big issue and we need an explanation from the Executive. We trusted the Prime Minister on his word but here we are today. Now that we are moving towards the Easter weekend, I hope he is able to give us something regarding Tristar.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to assure this House that that statement was ready and hon. Prof Kiwanuka was ready to read it but when it was not on the Order Paper, he did not come. I think that is the mistake he has made because he should have come with it so that he could read it right away.

MR OKUPA: Hon. Prime Minister, I have just had lunch with Prof. Kiwanuka in the canteen. I have left him in the canteen –(Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Precisely, but he is not here – (Laughter)– that is the point I am making. When he realised that he was not on the Order Paper, he has urgent matters. Finance is under great pressure but I want to assure you that hon. Prof. Kiwanuka is ready with the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Prime Minister, he was here. I saw him -(Interjection)- no, you are now making it appear that the Speaker’s office was inefficient by not putting it on the Order Paper and yet when you are ready, you tell me that your are ready. I put it on the Order Paper several times but you were not ready.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, this is also related to Government assurances and how ministers tackle questions raised by Members of Parliament. More than two months ago, the hon. Dr Okulo Epak brought a question to Parliament. This was in respect to asbestos that was previously used on rooftops.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Amuriat, what are you addressing?

MR AMURIAT: What I am raising is, there was a commitment by Government –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: According to our Order Paper we are moving to item No. 4 and hon. Amuriat is talking about something to do with asbestos. Is he in order to interrupt the Order Paper when we are already set?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he cannot alter the Order Paper. Prime Minister, Tristar is a serious issue. Members have been waiting for it for a long time. Can we demand that when we resume you should be on the Order Paper? We shall put it on the Order Paper, if you are not ready again that will be your problem.

MR WACHA: Madam, since hon. Kiwanuka is in the canteen, can’t we send one of the ushers to call him? (Laughter) Because honestly, he is not doing anything serious in the canteen. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have it when we return. Let us do with the business of today. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE MORTGAGE BILL, 2007

4.06
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Hon. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Mortgage Bill, 2007” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Somebody seconded it? It has been seconded.

MR OMARA ATUBO: It is also seconded from the other side –(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, I hereby lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications given under Section 10 of the Budget Act, duly signed by the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development, hon. Dr Ezra Suruma. It is dated 30th October 2006.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Mortgage Bill, 2007. The Bill is hereby committed to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for perusal and report back to the House.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on the issue of the Certificate of Financial Implications. Can we have a way where Members of Parliament can freely inspect these certificates? I have a feeling that very soon we are going to see papers being flashed on the other side of the Table –(Interjection)- at least even the Leader of the Opposition or the Chief Whip should have earlier access. For example, this one is dated October 2006. We are in a different financial arrangement. I do not know if we could find a means of having greater attention paid to the Certificate of Financial Implications other than the ceremonial activities, which seem to take place on the other side of the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the certificate is attached to the Bill. The Bill goes to the committee; the committee is a public place. What more scrutiny do you want?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will allow the Minister of Energy to make two statements because of matters that have been raised. One is on the issue raised in the budget debate and the other is on fuel, which has been a matter of concern. You will make two statements.

4.09
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A number of issues were raised by honourable Members of Parliament during debate on the report –(Interruption)

MR PETER OMOLO: I am rising on a matter of procedure, Madam Speaker. We do not have copies of the report in relation to fuel and energy. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you bring sufficient copies?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I availed copies to Parliament and I was assured that arrangements would be made to produce enough copies for the Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many do not have the text?

HON. MEMBERS: We do not have.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I think the Minister has of late not been regular in this House. You guided that ministers who would have something to present in the House should have at least 300 copies. That was long time ago and I would imagine that the Minister should not be accusing you or the Clerk at Table of not availing copies. They have sufficient budget for producing copies for us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, we reminded you that each of you should bring at least 300 copies. We are not supposed to do it for you here. You are supposed to come with them.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I take your guidance on this matter very seriously but I am going to read in such a manner that everybody will be in a position to follow what I am saying. (Laughter)

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, you had been very generous to the honourable minister and he read nothing out of that generosity. When a minister prepares a statement, that statement belongs to him not to Parliament. Why must the Minister think that the burden of his making a statement as minister must be carried by Parliament? We do not ask for these for nothing. We keep them in our files so that another day we review it and ask you, “The other day you made this statement.” No matter how slowly you read it, I cannot file what you have read –(laughter). Now that the matter seems to be very serious, maybe we ask the minister – but I think let him make the statement.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I fully appreciate the sentiments of my brother Prof. Latigo and the other Members of the House. Arrangements are being made to make sure that copies are availed to Members. I thought on issues like fuel, Members instantly need to know what is happening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matters the Minister is going to raise are matters you have been demanding for, for some time. Since this is our last day, I think we should allow him to make the statement slowly while the copies come.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we agree the matters are very serious and that is why the Minister deliberately decided not to bring the written statement -(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, as you and Members of Parliament are aware that our Minister, hon. Migereko is a very humble minister. Actually he is very efficient. I would like to urge Members that we have a good leader, a minister, is it in order –(Laughter)- therefore, for a Member of Parliament, my good friend now to try to undermine our good minister and also to undermine the ruling of the Speaker? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we should not speculate on motives. I think the Minister made a mistake and people do make mistakes. So, let us allow him to make these two important statements and the copies should be delivered. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I agree the Minister is very efficient. Of course he is efficient in load shedding; he is efficient in lack of bills but –(Interruption) 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I have two copies here for the Leader of the Opposition so that - if I can pass this on - a number of issues were raised in this august House regarding the Energy sector during debate, which has been on for the last two weeks. I want to thank you for the opportunity you have provided to us as a Ministry of Energy to respond to these issues.

Indeed, I would like to take this opportunity to thank Members of this House and the general public for the support they have given to the Energy sector as we try to provide solutions to the power supply problems in the country.

During the debate hon. Kaddunabbi raised the issue concerning increased power exports and high power tariffs. Although Uganda has a long-term standing contract to export 30 mega watts of electricity to Kenya, we have stopped this export mainly as a result of the shortfall in regard to power supply within the country. Instead, we have entered into a contract with the government of Kenya to avail to Uganda up to 20 mega watts of power in order to help us address the shortfall that we are currently experiencing. 

On the side of Rwanda, we have cross boarder exchange of power between the two countries to overcome constraints caused by the terrain. Kisoro is supplied with power from Rwanda and Uganda supplies Rwanda with power at Katuna. This involves approximately 5 mega watts.

Regarding the high tariffs for power, the country has been forced into this situation for reasons, which I am going to state but which we have also stated before. The first reason is to do with the prolonged drought, which we experienced from 2003 up to the end of 2006 affecting the cheaper hydropower resource resulting into reliance on the more expensive thermal power supply as a short term intervention measure. I would like to assure Members that as we bring into the system power from cheaper sources, I am sure we shall be in a position to see corresponding adjustments in the tariff.

Number two has been the delay in investing in other power sites for instance the construction of Bujagali and Karuma projects, which would have provided cheaper hydro power. If Bujagali or Karuma had been built and commissioned on time there would be relief as the same water used for generation of electricity in the Kiira and Nalubale power stations would be used to generate electricity at Bujagali and Karuma, which are downstream.

The other reason has been the delay in diversifying our power supply sources. However, I would like to assure Members that we are seriously pursuing diversification of sources of our power supply.

Madam Speaker, in order to mitigate the high tariffs Government is providing substantial subsidies to the power sector. During the financial year 2006/2007, a total of Shs 207.122 billion was provided for purposes of bringing down the tariff. The Government is also implementing energy efficiency programmes to ensure that consumers rationalise their use of electricity. The distribution of 800,000 energy saving bulbs has started. Efforts are also underway to reduce the losses in the system and as I speak now, losses have reduced from 41 percent to about 33 percent. This has been as a result of the investments that have been undertaken in the system with a view to managing transmission and distribution losses.

Several questions were raised in regard to Bujagali hydro power project. These were to do with the development of Bujagali hydro power station; the costing of this particular project, and the current status of this project. My ministry is working on a comprehensive statement, which I will present to this House as soon as the House resumes. 

On the Energy Fund, I wish to confirm to this august House that the Energy Fund has been established and an account for the same has been opened in the Bank of Uganda, as had been decided by this House. The account has been capitalised and funds from this account are going to be used in activities aimed at hydro power generation and transmission. These very funds are going to be used for compensation of people who are currently going to be affected by construction of a transmission line between Bujagali and Kawanda.

In effect, the funds are on the Energy Fund. These funds are presently available to us for utilisation in the Energy sector. With the establishment of this fund, our development partners do now also appreciate Government’s commitment towards the development of the Energy sector because previously, many of the people that we tried to work with were always skeptical about Government’s seriousness in regard to addressing the problems of the Energy sector without coming out clearly to make any financial provisions for the same.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm to the honourable members that we are making all efforts to ensure that we boast the country’s electricity supply so that goods and services in the country can be obtained at affordable prices. More importantly, we would like to ensure that power to run the industries and sustain the economy of this country is provided.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and honourable members for giving me an opportunity to respond to those critical issues that were raised by Members in the last two weeks during debate here in the House. 

I would now like to submit a statement on the fuel supply situation in the country –(Interjections)- why doesn’t it come after this one?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let him present both, and then Members can respond.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much. Following the current shortage of diesel or fuel in the country, my ministry would like to make the following submission. 

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has been monitoring the fuel supply situation in the country. For over a month now, fuel supply has been below our normal requirements. This has been aggravated by increased demand in the market, more specifically during the month of March we have received only half of our normal requirements. Against our monthly requirement of 65,000 cubic meters, we only received 32,022 cubic meters. 

The worst hit product was diesel, which registered 11,341 cubic meters against our requirement of 40,000 cubic meters. Petrol registered imports of 13,002 cubic meters against the normal demand of 17,000, while aviation fuel registered 4,059 cubic meters against the requirement of 5,000 cubic meters. Kerosene has not been affected as it received its normal supply of 3,620 cubic meters.

The major cause of the low supply lies in technical constraints on the Kenya pipeline system, which essentially have two types: operational constraints and capacity limitation. The Kenya pipeline is facing frequent shutdowns arising from power and other mechanical breakdowns. It is reported that power supply to the pip line is inadequate and as such the transformers are tripping fairly often. Between December 2006 and February 2007 shutdowns due to power and mechanical breakdown totalled to 59 hours, 26 hours and 32 hours respectively. Of this, 80 percent was a result of power outages. 

To address this problem, the Kenya pipeline is installing new transformers to supply the line. It is hoped that this will improve the situation although the timeframe for ensuring that supplies are back to normal is yet to be given by the Kenyan authorities. 

The second constraint is that of capacity limitation. The Mombasa-Nairobi pipeline was built with a capacity of 440 cubic meters per hour. At the time when this was constructed, this capacity was sufficient to meet the demand of both Kenya and the exports to the neighbouring countries. The pipeline from Nairobi to Eldoret-Kisumu was built with a capacity of 220 cubic meters per hour. This was to meet demand for both western Kenya as well as export requirements. With time, demand has grown beyond what was estimated and these capacities are no longer adequate. To address this problem, the Kenya pipeline company has signed a contract to increase capacity on both lines. The capacity on Mombasa-Nairobi is to be doubled from 440 cubic meters per hour to 880 cubic meters per hour; and that on the Nairobi-Eldoret-Kisumu from 220 –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just a minute. Sorry for the interruption but I have to inform the House that we are having a power problem and, therefore, we have switched off the air conditioning and opened the windows. So, let me ask Members in the lobby either to come back in, go away or keep quiet; they are making a lot of noise.  

MR MIGEREKO: I am sorry that our power problems are manifesting themselves in that form.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you are on the Floor! (Laughter)

MR MIGEREKO: This contract is expected to be completed in early 2008. Arising from the above, Government has been in dialogue with the Kenya authorities to find a solution to ease supply to Uganda. So far, Kenya authorities have responded by allowing Uganda oil companies to lift their products by truck from Nakuru and Nairobi in addition to Eldoret and Kisumu. This is still not sufficient. We have, therefore, been negotiating to allow the lifting of products directly from Mombasa by truck. Indeed the five leading oil companies in the country, that is Shell -(Power Interruption.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, Minister.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I want to assure Members that we shall soon overcome these problems. 

The companies are: Shell, Total, Kobil, Caltex and Hared and these have now sent out trucks to Mombasa to do the loading directly. Given this supply position, the ministry wishes to advise the motoring public to use the available fuel sparingly. In particular, motorists are advised to do the driving only when it is necessary. Meantime, we shall continue updating you on the various interventions being taken to remedy the situation.  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. As I could notice, Members were following my submission very closely. I thank you.

4.32
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is good that the honourable minister has told us about the fuel situation in the country. The first question that came to my mind immediately he wound up was the mere fact that he did not tell us about fuel reserves in this country and that to me is seriously worrying. Do we have any fuel reserves in this country? Are they exhausted? And if we have run out of stock even in our fuel reserves, where do we go from here? I can understand the Minister’s advice that I should park and walk around - that is manageable for me. But there are institutions in this country that must be kept running, like ambulances and the power stations. How are they going to park? I should hear something about the fuel reserves.

The other question is; we have been hearing about our oil and since this fuel crisis came, Ugandans have been asking, “Where is our oil?” We discovered oil, it was inspected, they tested they did everything - honourable minister, where is our oil so that we do not go on waiting for oil from the Middle East, the pipeline? We need to know what is happening with oil. 

Besides that, honourable minister, where is the policy? When are you telling us how the Banyoro communities from where we are going to drill the oil are going to benefit from - how are their in-laws in Teso are going to benefit from the oil? When are you making these available to the public in form of a policy or probably do you have a policy? Actually, there is speculation and you might need to put off that - the oil is actually available and you are just waiting for some gymnastics left and right. I am saying this so that you put off those fears that the oil is actually available and that the Ugandan oil - you do not ask me where, the Ugandan. 

You see last week, Madam Speaker, I stood up here and I said that there was speculation that they were going to begin cutting the trees in Mabira before degazetting comes to this House and indeed this morning we have got information - the media is live with the same information. Could this speculation be true for oil as well? Thank you

 4.36
MR LIVINGSTON OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the Sixth Parliament, during the last three sessions, I was a member of the Committee on National Resources and we discussed power shortage more than anything else at all levels, including the President. We were assured that Kiira Dam would do the trick. We were assured that after the inauguration of Kiira Dam, there would be no power shortage. 

In 1999, when we were going to inaugurate Kiira Dam, statements came up from the Ministry of Energy declaring load shedding history. Sadly, there is more load shedding now than before the inauguration of Kiira Dam. What is going on? The talk about power shortage is becoming a national anthem in this Parliament. When shall we stop talking about power shortage? I would have liked to hear the honourable minister give hope and assurance to the country that maybe within one or two years, we shall be better off. 

We talk about funds being made available to be used in the energy sector. However, it would appear that the more funds we pump in, the less power we get. It does not add up. I would like to request the Minister to give us some reasonable time estimate, so that for the time being we continue living on that hope that when that time comes, we shall be okay. 

On the fuel shortage, honourable minister, some of us come from very far. I intend to go to Kitgum tomorrow. Now you are advising me to use fuel sparingly. How do I use fuel sparingly to go to Kitgum? (Laughter) What do I do? What is the method? Some of these matters are very serious. 

Just today I read in the media that the Uganda economy is one of those in Africa which remained stagnant last year. I am tempted to believe that fuel is the main culprit. Are we going to have our economy growing downwards amidst inflation, industries closing down, cutting of forests? Are we going to spare our forests in a situation where we do not have power? 

In the Sixth Parliament, the Minister for Energy made a statement. She said that “I am also using charcoal”. I hope this present one has not reached that level. It is a very serious matter. If at a home of a Cabinet Minister you look for old newspapers to set up a sigiri for cooking, it is a big shame. What can we do? Are we going to talk year in and year out and the situation keeps getting worse and worse? What are we going to do? Mr Minister, I think you have a job to do. We are very happy to hear about the funds, but we do not use funds to light our houses. We need the real thing, and that is power. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we only have 20 minutes, so be very brief.

4.43
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two points to raise here. One, the statement seems to be insufficient specifically about the power shortage. The honourable minister has talked about the alternative measures taken, but I see nothing concerning the proposed establishment of the thermal power plant in Namanve. Why is there no explanation as to why this project has stalled for this long? 

The deadline for the establishment of this thermal power plant was June 2006. Today, there is nothing on the ground. I was told that the Norwegian Government committed a sum of 3.4 million Euros towards this project and the whole thing was messed up by your ministry. This was according to the report of the IGG. The procurement processes were not complied with in awarding the contract to Jacobsen. Electromax, which was also a competitor, complained and then the project stalled. 

You will tell me the matter went to court, but the consumers are concerned. Ugandans who want this power in place want to know the position. The IGG made a report to the effect that the whole transaction was illegal. You did not comply with the procurement laws. You did not comply with the requirements under the Electricity Act. You did not comply with the NEMA regulations, and so on and so forth. What action have you taken? 

I know you wrote a letter dated 14th July 2005 to the Attorney-General seeking for the way forward about the situation. This is because the IGG had directed you to cancel the transaction and begin the process afresh. I thought you would comply with the directive of the IGG. You simply wrote a letter to the Attorney-General seeking for clarification. How far have you gone, honourable minister, with that? The deadline has since passed and no action is being taken as far as establishment of the thermal power plant is concerned.

Secondly, I will be very brief on this; you have talked about the increasing power tariffs, but no tangible solutions have been offered. You are simply giving reasons as to why the tariffs will continue to increase. You have not at all addressed probable and workable solutions towards this. How are tariffs likely to go down soon? The law provides for tribunals, but you have not briefed us. If I am not satisfied with the tariffs imposed on me as a consumer, I should have a remedy. These tribunals are established under the law, but we see nothing in action. They have not been put in place. What is happening? Mr Minister, can you explain? I thank you.

4.45
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister for the statement. Mr Minister, I think it is high time your ministry saved us these stories of drought as the cause for reduction in generation of power and told this country the truth. Members will recall that a comprehensive report was brought to this House by hon. Onek, giving a clear explanation about the reduction in the level of water at Owen Falls Dam. It seems to be in consonance with what is actually happening on the ground.  

I use that route while going home and every time I stop over to try and make an assessment of the level of water at the Owen Falls Dam. It is true that this level keeps lowering, even during the wet season. We need to come out and explain to this country the real cause of the mess in power generation.  

That aside, Madam Speaker, I recall that this House voted Ushs 99 billion in an effort to see that more power is generated. This was specifically supposed to be used in the construction of the new hydropower dam. I had expected the Minister to tell us how far his ministry has gone towards the construction of a new power dam. By the way –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Minister came to respond to the issues you raised during the budget debate. This is not a comprehensive statement on energy. There were specific areas members had pointed out.

MR AMURIAT: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. However, since I have already said it, I do not know whether the Minister would not respond to this when the -(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: In my statement, I have clearly indicated that I will come back when the House resumes, to provide a comprehensive statement on the hydropower stations we are going to construct. If you just looked at your statement, it is there.  

MR AMURIAT: Unfortunately, the statement is not written. It was not presented to us –(Interjections)- the second statement. So, it is very easy to omit some of those things. In his statement to this House, the Minister says that there is a deliberate campaign to urge consumers to rationalise their use of power. By this I understand that they have started to do work, especially in the distribution of energy saving bulbs. The honourable minister revealed that they have cut down losses as a result of this, from 41 percent to 31 percent. That is a 10 percent cut in energy loss. Unfortunately, this is not reflected by the prevalence of load shedding in this country. How can we trust these statistics given to us by you?  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the Minister, and indeed from Kampala, whether there is anything to do with planning for energy in this country. I am asking this question in light of what is now becoming a crisis in the supply of oil. You have revealed in your statement that we are receiving just half of what is required by this country in terms of fuel supply. I am sure that this line was built so many years ago, and it should have been envisaged that the demand for fuel would increase. 

I have seen in your statement that construction of a new pipeline is just underway and it will be completed in the year 2008. This is a very long time. If there was a planning function in your ministry, these kinds of problems should have been mitigated before coming to terms with them. I would like to demand an explanation from the Minister as to whether there is an animal called “planning” in his ministry. If so, why were your planners not able to detect this problem before it came face to face with us?  I thank you.

4.51
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the statement. I am happy to see that they have made arrangements for trucks belonging to different oil companies to ferry fuel to Uganda. I only pray that government finds a way of intervening in this bad situation. Ugandans usually want to exploit situations they should not gain from. We may find that some trucks do not reach Kampala. They could just stop on the way. While we are here waiting for the fuel, they may be diverted to other areas.  

Madam Speaker, Ugandans –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank my sister very much. The fact is that right now any truck that carries fuel is cleared at the border. So, they pay the taxes at the border, and there is no loss to government so long as the taxes have been paid at the border. However, does the Government of Uganda have reserves? That is the only problem. We had reserve tanks in Jinja, Bombo and Kasese, but just a small crisis and we are in danger. Suppose it was a bigger crisis, what would happen to this country?  You imagine!

MRS MAGOOLA: I thank you, honourable member. Madam Speaker, I was saying that Government should not allow Ugandans to exploit people by escalating the prices. It will not be news if the prices of fuel doubled tomorrow or the other day while Government is looking on.  

When we have a crisis, we do not get more money than we usually get. Money will not be doubled by Parliament, but you may find us paying twice or thrice the amount we have been buying fuel. I pray that you intervene right from the beginning as they ferry it from Mombasa to Kampala, so that there is no way these people will cheat us by either diverting the fuel or by escalating the prices.  

Our oil from the western region is being awaited for eagerly. Shall we have a taste of it as quickly as possible? 

4.55
MR HOOD KATURAMU, (NRM, PWD, Western Region): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the honourable minister for giving us a situational analysis on the energy and fuel situation in this country. 

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has told this House that Ugandan companies have been authorised by the Kenyan government to go directly to Mombasa, Nairobi and other destinations so that they can bring fuel. Much as I appreciate this top-dog action, the real problem that could arise would be soaring prices on the part of consumers, because road transport costs will be higher. I do not know honourable minister, whether your ministry has put that into consideration, and bearing in mind that we may not even have enough reserves that could be used in this temporary situation where we have inadequate supplies. 

Madam Speaker, a few months ago, this government entered an agreement with a South African company to start rehabilitating the rail system in this country. It was further agreed that the Government of Kenya would also enter this arrangement. May I know from the Minister whether the railway line is under consideration for transporting fuel? It is my considered view, and I believe the view of other colleagues in this Parliament, that rail transport is the most cost effective in this country. 

Mr Minister, we have had the power crisis for some time, so the problems that befell the Bujagali project should have been a lesson to us. If we had a master plan for energy production, distribution and supply, this would have been a basis for us to plan for the future. The point I am putting across to the Minister is that we have valuable sources of power scattered all over this country, which have not been utilised. 

Madam Speaker, I had the opportunity to visit the Republic of China. In one of the provinces which we visited, Guangzhou Province, they have low cost dams, which do not require a lot of money. May I know from the Minister whether he has a master plan that has such dams, so that we can adopt the use of such cost effective dams. 

I also want to ask the Minister if, in the bilateral relations between Kenya and Uganda on the utilisation of the Kenyan pipeline, the terms as they stand today really favour Uganda as a landlocked country. Secondly, in view of our East African integration in the pipeline, may I know whether there will be cost sharing in having a sufficient and efficient pipeline? I ask this because, as you have indeed said, this pipeline was constructed to accommodate very few cubic metres of fuel. May I know whether through the East African Federation we can enter into an agreement of co-production with the Government of Kenya, so that we are placed at a better bargaining position in case there is a crisis of such a nature? I thank you.

5.00
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we are out there, we have to explain to the people what is going on. The press has been awash with information that we are building a dam at a cost that is three times the normal one. It would have been fair if the Minister came up and explained in time. When it drags on, we struggle with a question we cannot answer - (Interjection) - Yes, we cannot answer. It becomes a problem to us to explain to the people. Can’t the Minister, in such controversial matters, come up early either to say, “Yes” or “no”, so that we can explain to the people? That is my concern. Thank you.

5.02
MR SAMUEL ABURA, (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very kind of you to give me this opportunity. I would like first of all thank the Minister for his elaborate explanation on the crisis of energy in the country. However, there are areas in Uganda, which will never get the supply of energy from the source in Jinja. I would have loved to hear from the honourable minister what measures he is putting in place to address such areas without power, like Karamoja where there about five districts now. Areas like Kitgum and perhaps Moyo are equally affected, but we do not talk about giving an alternative form of power to these areas. The water we get will always flow from the Nile Basin. For us who are very far away, we should think because one time we should enjoy power in Karamoja. 

What has happened to the group diesel engines, which were giving us power day and night? I have been in this Parliament for 10 years, and soon I might even make 15 years. When will the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development plan for those areas that are strategically far from the Nile? 

Similarly, there is too much talk about minerals. I happen to come from the district that they say is the richest with a lot of underground wealth. We have marble, gold and so on. Unfortunately, some of the investors you send come autonomously, with their own policies. They do not consult people but just begin mining, especially limestone and marble. Nothing is given to the district or to the local people. They just ferry these resources basing on power authorised from Kampala. These are the investors who have come here. 

I think that there should be guidelines on how to handle these people who come to invest. Otherwise, they have spoiled our roads for nothing. Moving from Mbale to Moroto now takes about eight hours and yet the distance is about 120 miles. I use the British metric system. I do not know what it is in kilometres. The roads are getting damaged and these people are operating basing on an authority in Kampala. Please, we need some clarification on how they come and what they are hiding from us.

On the current crisis, honourable minister, return our generators. It is only during your term in office that Karamoja has had no power. Where have you put our generators? Please return them so that Kotido, Abim, Nakapiripirit and Moroto can have power. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are trying to do a bit of work so I will give you opportunity on another subject. Let the Minister now respond. I will give you an opportunity on defence and on one of the other subjects.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank honourable members for the important contributions, input and clarification that you have sought in regard to many of the issues that I talked about. I would like once again to state that I will come back here and provide a comprehensive statement in regard to the big hydropower stations that we are working on.  

I will also talk about our short, medium and long-term interventions to ensure that this country has sufficient power supply for the next 25 years. We have a very clear plan, which we are following, and I would like to remind members about this plan because we have talked about it before. This time round, as I had indicated earlier on, I had just come prepared to answer and respond to issues that had been raised when I was away during the debate on the report from the Committee of National Economy on budget performance. Members will kindly bear with me.

Hon. Alaso raised a number of issues. The first had to do with our reserves for oil and petroleum products.  Yes, we have reserves and facilities for these reserves, which were established to handle about ten million litres of diesel, ten million litres of paraffin and ten million litres of petrol. These reserves are in place, but I must say that because of the intermittent nature of the supplies we have been getting recently, we have drawn on those reserves. When you have reserves and you have a situation like the one we have been having, the prudent thing to do is to call on your reserves.  

We are now making arrangements to ensure that we replenish these reserves and get a steady supply from Kenya. In fact, because of the kind of interventions we have been making, despite the fact that traditionally we have always had fuel supply problems over Christmas time this time round we did not have any fuel supply problems. We are going to step up our efforts with our neighbours in Kenya to make sure that the situation normalises. (Interruption) There is a problem of time, but if the Speaker can permit –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow him to finish? 

MR KIBANZANGA: We have a reserve facility in Kasese, so I want the Minister to clarify on whether there is oil there or those are just empty tanks.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, we have facilities in a number of places, and as I have told you we keep on replenishing stock. However, depending on the demand for the products at any one given time, we draw on the stock. At one point the tanks can be full but as the demand continues changing, we draw on whatever is available. 

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of our oil discoveries. –(Interjection)- When I say that we continue drawing on stock, this means they cannot be empty because you cannot draw on nothing -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you really want this country to be told that there are no reserves in the country? Is that what you want the Minister to say?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, there is the issue of oil discovery, which hon. Alaso raised. It is true we discovered oil and His Excellency the President made a clear statement on our oil discoveries. It is also true that ever since the President made that announcement, more discoveries have been made. We have not once been in Mabira, which I know you want to –(Laughter) That was an April Fool’s Day joke. Nobody should take that seriously. 

More discoveries have been made in the Lake Albert region, and we are steadily moving towards production. His Excellency the President also referred to the plan for production. Next week, we shall be concretising this. When I come to the House I will also bring members on board in regard to the steps that we are taking to make sure that production takes place in the Lake Albert region. 

Hon. Alaso also asked why we do not use this oil. It is still underground. We need to get it from there and process it in a mini refinery, which we are going to set up. That mini refinery will be producing heavy fuel oil, tar, diesel, kerosene, and jet fuel oil. 

When I come here to make a statement, I will bring members on board in regard to the quantities and the other activities that we shall be undertaking in that region of the country, and indeed in the whole country. I also would like to inform members -(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Since you are coming back to bring us on board on the question of oil and oil exploration, is it possible for you to also bring to the relevant committee the various contracts which the Government of Uganda has made with the various companies that are trying to mine this oil?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, hon. Wacha knows very well that NRM does things in a very transparent manner. I will live by those dictates and we shall make sure that we provide all the information that members will require. 

Madam Speaker, there was also the issue of the pipeline. As I talk now, we are in the process of designing a pipeline from the oil producing regions to serve the country and to also serve neighbouring countries. The issue of Kenya not being in a position to construct a pipeline that can meet the entire regional demand will be on maybe for the next two years, but after that most of the products will be coming from Uganda. As usual, government is taking the necessary steps to make sure that we have a network for this pipeline, which will adequately serve the entire country and neighbouring countries within the region.

I have already informed you that we have been working on an oil and gas policy. We shall bring it here for consideration. The new issues that have come up regarding reserve management, production, royalties for the communities and corporate governance need to be captured in a new policy and law. We shall bring this to the House for consideration. Madam Speaker, things are moving very fast. We are also being forced to make sure that we move very fast so that we do not find ourselves on the wrong side of things. 

The hon. Okello-Okello raised issues concerning Kiira Power Station. It is true that at the time the commissioning of Kiira Power Station took place, the view was that we had seen the back of load shedding. We thought load shedding would be history. At that time, one was not in a position to take into account the dictates of nature, which my brother here has been discussing. 

We had also hoped that there would be another power station. However, given the fact that nature and the other power station - the issue that I referred to earlier on - caught us on the wrong side of things, we have continued to experience power cuts. However, when we bring our report here next week, we shall be in a position to show you the various interventions that we have taken. These include using heavy fuel oil before the end of this year to generate power, on top of the thermal power stations which hon. Lukwago has talked about. We shall also be utilising our own oil supplies from the Lake Albert region. 

I would like to assure hon. Okello-Okello and others that these interventions that we are pursuing will surely enable us to get rid of load shedding in the next two to four years. You know, the population is growing and the demand for power is also growing. That is why we need to make sure that we invest in a bigger capacity than we have done before. It is important to note that even when we have the money, it could take three to four years before we can generate power from some of those facilities. My statement will bring out all this information clearly.

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of how to use fuel sparingly. This may entail sharing transport, so that instead of using two or three vehicles, in case of a family which has more than one vehicle, you use one at a time. I am sure that would reduce –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify when it comes to using fuel sparingly. You are aware that Parliament as an institution in this country is on the list of places that are load shed, and I think as he was making the statement power went off. We are getting towards the budget time, supposing we are deliberating and we would like to give more money to the Ministry of Energy, how shall we use the fuel in our generator sparingly? 

The point I am trying to put across is that the Minister should really strike Parliament off the list of places to be load shedded. It is so embarrassing that we are always in darkness. Honourable minister, how are we going to sparingly use fuel in as far as our generator is concerned vis-à-vis load shedding?

MR BYARUGABA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister is talking about shortages within the energy sector. The last time around when this issue came up, we were talking about the performance of the budget. So far, I have raised a pertinent issue regarding the development of energy sources, like on River Kagera where we have two very good sources of energy and where energy power has ever been generated for this country. As had been alluded to by my colleague, hon. Katuramu, the Chinese are interested and they have their money. They only need our support, but there are frustrations coming from sectors within your ministry. Would you like to kindly clarify on this matter, honestly? I thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: I thank you, my dear brother. I must say that the amount of power available for utilisation has been increasing. On top of the 100 megawatts of thermal power, I know we have increased on hydropower generation by another 40 megawatts, and there has been some improvement in as far as power supply is concerned. It is not sufficient, but there has been some improvement, and I would like to say that we should be in a position to see steady improvement over time. 

When it comes to managing supply to the House, I am sure this is a matter that we can take up with the system managers and Parliament, to make sure that supply of power to the House is not affected particularly when important business is being transacted. 

We already talked about the issue of using fuel sparingly. If we can also use buses, it would be helpful for this short period. The fact is that reduced power supply and ever increasing prices of fuel affect the performance of the economy. That is why government has singled out the energy sector as a priority as far as allocation of resources is concerned, so that we can be in a position to step up power supply.

The discovery of oil in Western Uganda was also a result of the commitment of resources from the Government of Uganda. If the Government of Uganda had not committed resources to it, the discovery we are now talking about would never have been realised within this time – (Interruption)  

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. I would like to inform the honourable minister that during the Seventh Parliament, the Committee on Tourism and Industry visited Bundibugyo. When we arrived at that area where they were drilling with that gigantic equipment, they did not allow the committee to enter into that arena. Since then, the operation has been going on. I am aware of some international conmen. Is that professional work? Are we sure that we are going to get oil there? I am worried that up to now, we have not got even a litre of oil from that work. Can you clarify please? 

I get worried when you talk about discovering oil in Uganda. It makes me behave like Thomas of the Bible story. I went there personally and after arriving, we were told to come and get permits from Kampala in order to see and monitor the activities of the oil drillers. How much do you know about their activities? What progress are we making really?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I had some clarification that I wanted from the minister, which was not attended to last time when we were handling the Budget Committee report. I wanted the Minister to at least clarify on the issue concerning the money we put in the budget, the Shs 169 billion; Shs 89 billion was for construction of hydropower projects and Shs 70 billion was for a thermal power project. 

I am interested in what is going on in regard to that activity. When I was following it up, I was told that the second phase cannot extend to my constituency, to Muzizi Tea Estate, because all the money has gone to the energy fund basket. I am interested because Government had already signed contracts with this contractor who was going to move power from Kagadi to this tea estate. They had even given him an advance. Now they have withdrawn the money from the project and they are bringing it into the energy fund. I am interested in its performance.

Madam Speaker, since you gave me the opportunity to ask, I want him to also clarify about the concerns of the people of Bunyoro region. We are concerned that oil is in our region but the government is not telling us what is going on. We only see prostitutes selling themselves in Bunyoro. This thing has never existed in Bunyoro culture. Honourable minister, you may disregard us, but we are stakeholders in this matter and we demand that –(Interruption) 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I wonder whether the honourable member is in order to assert that oil discovered in Bunyoro belongs to those people in Bunyoro. I wonder whether he is in order to say so. My understanding is that the discovery is for all of us. It is a national asset. Is he in order to say that it specifically belongs to the people of Bunyoro?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, the oil belongs to all of us but the place where is it drilled entitles the residents to some royalties. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I wind up, –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you have made your points.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I want to wind up, Madam Speaker. As the honourable minister is preparing his oil with those investors, the people of Bunyoro need to be informed of what is going on. We are so worried. We even do not know the technology that is being used. We are only told that there is oil under the lake. We are worried. They may end up laying their pipes that may enter the water. We are so worried about what is going to happen. The Kingdom wants to be assured that we shall get some share from this oil, which is going to protect our culture. I want some clarification.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to assure everybody that this discovery of oil in Uganda is for real. I know Members of Parliament have wanted to visit the oil producing areas. We are going to make arrangements for Members of Parliament to visit the oil producing areas and see for themselves what is taking place. I am sure that the kind of problems that you had last time will not be there this time round.

I had already indicated that we shall come here to the various committees of Parliament and to the House to discuss the Oil and Gas Policy and other oil related matters. So, we are not going to keep anything from the honourable members of this House. I have already met the Bunyoro Parliamentary Group. I have been able to appraise you – you chaired the meeting - on the kind of plans that we have. (Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I want to find out if the honourable minister is in order to stretch the truth. It is true he came to our meeting, but on that particular day he said he had nothing to brief us on, that he was not ready, and he went back. Is he in order to come here and assert that he has already briefed us when actually he told us nothing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not a member of the Bunyoro Parliamentary Group and I did not attend the meeting, so I cannot rule on that matter.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. It is a fact that the chair invited me for the Bunyoro Parliamentary Group meeting. I told the group that there was an Oil and Gas Policy coming out, and all their concerns were going to be dealt with. I could not talk about what shares they were going to get at that meeting because that is what they had wanted.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform members that we have been very seriously pursuing the issue of diversifying our energy supply sources. One of the things that we have focused on is the development of mini-hydro sites in the country. Hon. Hood Katuramu and my brother from Kikagati have raised this matter. I know that we have advertised in the papers the various sites we have in the country. I have addressed three meetings of Uganda Manufacturers Association to try and interest Ugandan businessmen in developing these mini-hydro sites. 

Let me also take advantage of my presence here to appeal to Members of Parliament to come and discuss the development of these sites, not only as Members of Parliament but also as investors. We think that this is the right way to move –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you said that you are coming back soon after Easter to talk about Bujagali, the other hydro projects and the oil. Why don’t you hold on until then? Can we put you on the Order Paper in that week as soon as we come back?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I have been to Kamuli, Tororo and Bunyole. Hon. Migereko is a very serious and committed minister. However, it is high time he came out honestly to tell us the challenges he is facing, so that we can address them together.

We approved a loan in this Parliament under Energy for Rural Transformation, for which the minister is saying he is going to meet us. Some of us had opposed it, but we were accused of delaying government, so that loan was passed. I have met several investors who have submitted proposals, and the head of that project is the husband to one of the members here. It is very hard to access that World Bank money the way they want. The Minister needs to come out honestly so that we review the loan. Otherwise, we are paying a lot of money yet nobody can access the money –(Interjection)- Let me conclude, Madam Speaker. I want to ask the minister to be honest.

Secondly, in Kamuli, Tororo, Butaleja and other places, government went ahead to put up transformers and poles under the Rural Electrification Project. However, to this date, in some places work stopped, in other places even where wiring was finished, UMEME has refused to switch on. I have engaged the minister for over one year. Even long before he became minister, I used to ask hon. Syda Bbumba, the then minister. The technical officials said that UMEME refused to switch on because their agreement does not allow them to operate beyond one kilometre.

I remember, Madam Speaker, in the last Parliament some of us had refused the Minister to sign the agreement with UMEME as it was. We wanted him to bring it here and study it. He said that we were sabotaging. Now, even in health centres in Kamuli, Tororo and other parts of the country where they finished wiring, people cannot access power because UMEME refused. So, the Minister needs to be honest with this Parliament so that we can help him.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my good friend, the honourable minister. He has made a very exciting statement. He has said that he is now inviting members to start thinking about investing in the energy sector. I want him to be very clear, because I am very exited and I can even plan to start tomorrow. Are you going to grant us loans as you granted to other investors? Are you going to advance money to us as you do with other investors?

MR MIGEREKO: First of all, I would like to thank members for the points they have raised. I welcome the support. I know we have had some problems with ERT and UMEME, which we have been trying to overcome, but we shall also discuss that. I will be in a position to discuss the bottlenecks with you.

With regard to the investors in Kikagati - the Chinese who are developing a ten megawatt hydropower station – yes, there were some problems regarding the site but we have dealt with that problem. I know that a lease has been granted to them for about thirty years, and we have also been in position to secure money for constructing a transmission line from Kikagati to the other demand centres. If there are still any problems, you are most welcome to discuss them.

On the issue of investment, one of the problems that we have run into is the belief that whoever has to invest in the energy sector must access a loan from the World Bank before he invests. At some of these mini-hydropower sites, we are talking about developing a one megawatt hydro power station. The sites are many and we can discuss this. If you have resources to invest in a house of about two million shillings in Kololo, then you have got enough money to spend on developing a mini hydro power site, generate power and sell that power to the various institutions that need it.

We have had delays in increasing on generation capacity because we are waiting for loans all the time. It is for that very reason that Government decided to set up an energy fund, so that we can be in a position to reduce on our dependence on loans and donor funding. It is true that under ERT, such money was supposed to be available to facilitate those who are investing in the energy sector and in mini-hydropower stations. We are going to get the second tranche and we are going to make sure that conditions for access are eased, so that the various investors can be in a position to access this money. (Interruption)

MR ODIT: The Minister is encouraging us to utilise the second tranche, but where is the first one? How many interested investors are now generating power to sell out from these resources?

MR MIGEREKO: Before we move to the second tranche, there will be a report on how the first tranche was utilised. We shall report whether we are satisfied with the way it was utilised or not.

Regarding Kibale, we have already extended power there. It is true that we have not yet been in a position to cover all the areas that need power in the Kibale area, but that is a matter that we are going to address, particularly when there is a factory in the area. In extending power to the various parts of the country, our target is those areas that have got economic activities and that will be in a position to take advantage of the power that has been supplied.

Madam Speaker, there have been persistent questions on this energy fund. I have made a statement here where I explain what that energy fund is meant for, how we are going to utilise it and some of the activities that we are currently financing from that fund. One of the activities, for instance, is compensating the people who are in the way-leave from Bujagali to Kawanda. Those are some of the activities, which are supposed to be financed under the energy fund. 

I would also like to clarify that we had developed a budget for rural electrification. It was also clearly explained that we shall try to undertake rural electrification activities. The pace at which we had intended to move would have to be slowed down mainly because of the requirement to pay for diesel to generate the power that has got to be utilised in the system right now. However, as we continue accessing resources, we shall be in a position to address the various demands under rural electrification, including completing the uncompleted schemes.  

There was the issue regarding people pursuing energy saving measures and yet load shedding is not reducing correspondingly. The fact is that the generation capacity is still limited. Some of the energy saving measures we are pursuing will enable access to about 40 megawatts of power, but the demand is actually much higher than the 40 megawatts we are saving. So, pursuing energy saving measures pays, but we must also enhance generation capacity in order of us to be in a position to totally eliminate load shedding. Let us have another session for discussing this. 

Regarding the issue of trucks collecting fuel products directly from Mombasa and whether this will not increase on transport costs, first of all, I would like to point out that the cheapest means we can use to transport some of these products, like the petroleum products, is by water, pipeline as well as railway. If you do not have a fully functioning railway system, the pipeline is not giving you sufficient capacity and then you do not also have water in between, the only means left for you to utilise are the trucks to collect the fuel products from Mombasa. That is what we are doing. However, as soon as the railway capacity has been sufficiently addressed, we shall make sure that the products are transported by rail. 

Similarly, the capacity of the pipeline will be increased in one and half year’s time. We shall make sure that the bulk of the products are transported by pipeline. I would like to assure members that we are aware of the most optimal ways of transporting some of these products. It is also true, however, that we are constrained by realities on the ground.  

As far as prices of oil products increasing is concerned, and those who want to take advantage of the shortage, we are trying to make sure that we do whatever we can to get more products into the country. As you know, once there is a shortage, there will always be some people who will want to take advantage of that shortage. The only way we can eliminate some of these guys who want to profit from this kind of shortage is by making sure that we get as much oil products into the country as soon as possible. This is what we are trying to do.

On the issue of the cost of Bujagali, which is giving many Members of Parliament a headache, I have clearly indicated that we shall come here and give a comprehensive statement. The issue of the costing of the Bujagali hydropower project will be dealt with thoroughly.

Hon. Abura raised the issue of power extension to Karamoja and the diesel generators from Moroto, Moyo and so on.  We are trying to deal with this matter. Our capacity to find a solution has been slowed down by budgetary constraints. I would like to assure hon. Abura that we shall definitely find a solution to the issue of power supply. There is a shortage of cement in the country, and the only way we can be in a position to take advantage of the limestone and cement industry in that area of the country is by ensuring that we extend power to Karamoja. (Interruption)

MR FRANCIS KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister has just told us that there is a plan to extend power to Karamoja. That plan has been on from 1987, 1992 and 1996, promised by the President himself. Can we get a definite time when this power will be got, because we do not like to hear that. You better not even say it.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to once gain assure my brother, hon. Kiyonga, that we have not forgotten the issue of power supply to Karamoja. You can come to the ministry so that we discuss it. It is prime on our agenda. Our ministry is not only responsible for energy but also for minerals. There is no way we can develop the minerals in Karamoja if we cannot take power there.  

MR ACHIA:  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister for these two statements. I know the first statement may not affect Karamoja because it talks about power. The one about fuel is very important because I know the people who will be affected in my constituency are about two or three. It is only those with cars, that is, some other person and I. Every time I am in my constituency, children ask me, “Honourable, what is that bush fire in Kapchorwa? Every night there is a bush fire.” I tell them, “No, that is not bush fire. It is something called electricity, the one you see in missions.” 

I wish the honourable minister could tell me that the wires are going to arrive by next year. We will be happy. Some people like hon. Ekanya are not happy with the wires, but I think I would be happy to receive wires in Karamoja. As we talk now, in my constituency 40 big trucks pass by everyday on their way to Mbale. Those trucks go to pick minerals from my constituency. Marble, cement and limestone are collected from Karamoja. What is the problem with extending power to Karamoja? We have minerals. The internal rate of return could be even if they had the capacity. What is the problem? For the last so many years, what has hindered the extension of power to Karamoja?  

I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister so that I live in hope that maybe in the next 18 months, we will have received electricity. Even if it is one day of electricity, even if it flickers as a candle, the most important thing is that it arrives. When will the wires arrive? Thank you very much.  

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, as I have clearly indicated, the issue of supplying power to Karamoja is prime on our agenda. However, I cannot give an exact date from here because I will run into a few problems if the date is not found to be correct. We shall be able to hold a meeting with Members of Parliament from Karamoja on this matter.

Similarly, on the issue of minerals, -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable Commissioner of Parliament, hon. Kasule Lumumba, to conduct another meeting when we are listening to serious matters regarding electricity?  Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have degenerated in some way. There are so many small meetings taking place in this House. Can you please attend to the business of the House?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of minerals, royalty and so on for Karamoja, I think we need to hold some discussions with the area Members of Parliament. They can also help us sensitise the local administrations in regard to what to do, and also engage the companies on matters of corporate responsibility.  

The issue of the heavy fuel oil generation station for Namanve was originally handled by the Electricity Regulatory Authority. It is true there was intervention by the IGG. My ministry was subsequently directed to carry out a re-evaluation, which we have done. I think the decision regarding the most successful bidder must have been taken, maybe two or three days ago. I need to get more information on this one.  However, I can tell you that that matter is going to be disposed of.  

I know it has been a contentious matter, particularly on the part of the competitors. My view is that we need more such stations. Instead of pursuing just one particular facility, we should be in a position to sit down with whoever wants to supply power and advise them on the other opportunities available in the industry. We should do this instead of trying to make sure that if you do not get this particular one, nobody should get it. 

The tribunal is in existence. We have got an electricity tribunal chaired by Mr Charles Owor, an Advocate of the High Court of Uganda and highly respected citizen of this country. It also has members with very sound track records both in business and public affairs, and with very good academic credentials. It has been attending to all the business that is brought to its attention.  I thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
5.57
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. Copies of the statement are being distributed and they are enough for all the members -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, though I said I am rising on a matter of procedure, it will be slightly different from that. It is a question of the importance of the statement going to be made by the Minister, given the time constraint. This is a serious and very important matter, which needs a lot of time. I request that if possible, this matter be postponed to another day when we have sufficient time. I humbly pray, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information is important because of what is happening currently.  So, let us proceed with it. 

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to assure hon. Lukwago that for as long as our troops are in Somalia, we shall regularly make these statements to update colleagues in the House.  

You will recall that on the 13 February 2007, in accordance with Article 210 of the Constitution and sections 39, 40 and 41 of the UPDF Act, Parliament voted to authorise the President of the Republic of Uganda to deploy UPDF troops to Somalia as part of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

Subsequently, on behalf of Government, I signed a memorandum of understanding on 21 February 2007 with the African Union in Addis Ababa. This was a requirement by our law. It was also a necessary condition to formalise our membership in AMISOM. As we said when we discussed this matter, the functions or the mission of AMISOM have four elements:  

1. To support dialogue and reconciliation in Somalia.
	
2. 	To provide protection to the transitional federal institutions, to help them carry out their functions of government and also provide protection to the security infrastructure in that country.

3. 	To assist with the effective re-establishment and training of an all-inclusive Somali security forces.

4. 	To contribute to the creation of the necessary conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance.  

The mission of AMISOM was to last six months, starting on 19 January 2007. Thereafter, this mission would be reviewed and the United Nations would take over the mission.

On 1 March, His Excellency the President formally flagged off the troops at Gadaffi Barracks in Jinja. The Ugandan troops are already in Mogadishu and have started their duty.  

The troops were mainly moved by aircraft while the equipment went by sea. The Government of the Republic of Kenya was very helpful in regard to the movement by sea. They did not only allow us to use that routing but also provided their Navy to accompany our troops and equipment from Mombasa to Mogadishu.

In keeping with the mission, AMISOM, the UPDF troops have not been involved in the ongoing fighting between the TFG troops and the Ethiopian Army on the one hand and the remnants of the Islamic Courts Forces on the other. 

However, on the 7th of March, almost a day after our troops arrived in Mogadishu, a group of UPDF soldiers in armed vehicles on the way to town to go and protect the force commander came under attack from an ambush laid for them and three soldiers were injured. The three injured were evacuated back home. Two of them were successfully treated in Uganda while the third one, who had an eye injury, was treated in Nairobi. He is also back in Uganda and recovering quite well. 

About three weeks later on the 31st of last month, there was shelling at the Somali Villa, which houses President Abdullai Yusuf. This injured eight soldiers. One soldier was fatally injured, that is, he was killed. The killed soldier was a corporal by the name of Wilber Rwigira. His body was brought back home and was buried in his home in Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura District yesterday Wednesday 4 April 2007. May his soul rest in peace.  For avoidance of doubt, I would like to assure colleagues in the House that the process to ensure that his family is compensated in line with the agreement has already started. 

Madam Speaker, of the eight people that sustained injuries, four of the injuries were serious enough to require evacuation to Nairobi. The rest had slight injuries, which were treated in the field health centre in Mogadishu. The four in Nairobi are making good recovery and their lives are not in danger. 

Over the past three days, there has been some quiet in Mogadishu. The projection we have is that the TFG troops with the help of the Ethiopian troops will bring the situation under control. 

I believe honourable members will want to know if other troop contributing countries have performed on their undertaking. Besides Uganda, the other countries that pledged to send troops to Somalia were Burundi, Ghana, Malawi and Nigeria. We have kept close contact with these countries. We know that they are preparing their troops and organising logistics. It is expected that soon they too will join our troops in Somalia. 

At the same time, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, it has been agreed that the withdrawal of the Ethiopian troops cannot be completed until the forces are fully deployed. In fact, as a matter of information, when the fighting escalated in Mogadishu, some of the troops that had already withdrawn had to return to reinforce their colleagues in Mogadishu. 

The training of the Somali forces is on-going, and so far a sizeable and broad based Somali force has been formed. The UPDF and other African countries will continue giving capacity to the Republic of Somalia so that as soon as possible, they too have an army and police of their own. 

In the meantime, honourable colleagues, the Transitional Federal Government continues to prepare for the national conference for dialogue and reconciliation. The conference had been planned for 16th of this month, but due to logistical reasons, mainly money which the donors have not yet come up with, this conference is being postponed to May, that is, next month. 

In the meantime, His Excellency the President maintains contact with his colleagues in the African Union. On my part, Madam Speaker, I have also maintained contact with the Peace and Security Commission in Addis Ababa, with the Minister of Defence in Ethiopia and also my counterpart in the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia. 

Accordingly, a delegation from the TFG was in Kampala between 27th March and 30th March. We held meetings with them and urged them to make the planned dialogue as broad based as possible, and in particular to consider inclusion of elements of the ICU in the dialogue. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude the statement, let me take this opportunity to inform the House that on Thursday 22nd March, an estimated group of 80 ADF terrorists under the command of one Isiko entered Uganda through Bundibugyo. They were immediately engaged by the UPDF in the area of Sempaya. The Army has so far counted 52 bodies of the enemy, including that of Isiko who was their commander.  The UPDF is still checking out the battlefield for any survivors or other bodies. Six of the terrorists were taken captive and are with the Army.  

I undertake, Madam Speaker, to issue a more comprehensive statement soon after we return from recess on this matter of ADF and other insurgencies in the DRC as well as the situation in the Karamoja region. I could have given the statement now, but I thought this would blur this statement on the key subject of Somalia.  

With that brief statement, Madam Speaker, I thank you and honourable colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think let us start with hon. Kyanjo who originated the question.

6.08
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportune moment. This House will recall that some time last year, on the 30th of November, I sounded a warning in regard to this Somali exercise. This afternoon as the Minister of Energy was enumerating part of the problems that we have with the energy sector, I had expected him to tell this House about the fuel tank that was shipped alongside the troops when they were going to Somalia, and the truck owners in Kenya who as a result of our action in Somalia withdrew their service. This did not come out. I think he will mention it in his comprehensive report later. Madam Speaker, I have listened with care –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, should that be to the Minister of Energy or the Minister of Defence?

MR KYANJO: Either way. I had simply anticipated that the Minister of Energy was going to mention this important component in his statement on the shortage of fuel. Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but honourable members, I really think it is not fair to expect issues you have not asked about to be answered by the ministers. I have not quite understood what the oil was doing near the soldiers.

MR KYANJO: Well, Madam Speaker, this is not the gist of my response to the Minister’s presentation. I will mention it afresh later on. This is just because I did not have the opportunity to contribute to that subject anyway. 

We have heard the honourable Minister of Defence telling us about AMISOM. This mission was intertwined; the purpose, for a reason unspecified here in this House, has been changed from one probably to two. What I mean is that this House was informed that UPDF had gone to assist in helping the transitional government. This transitional government, as you may all be aware, is a weak government that cannot stand on its own. So, the idea of reconciliation is a bit absent in the situation of Somalia. What is present is insisting on giving power and force to this weak government. 

We went there to keep peace. Purportedly by the time we went there, the count was lower. Since we went there, 600 have died including civilians. Those numbers also include our own as has been reported by the Minister. One thousand have been wounded, and people in Mogadishu are wondering whether this is the mode of peace that we are supposed to provide. 

Madam Speaker, AMISOM, as the Minister rightly put it, started on the 19th of January. This brings it close to half the time we are supposed to be there - six months. We are, therefore, remaining with three months. Those that were supposed to form part of AMISOM, the other African Union members, have not brought their forces to beef up the existing ones. It was a requirement specifically by the Opposition; I said we may agree to going, but we would like to go there alongside others. Now, Uganda has been thrown into a quagmire and the explanation of the Minister regarding the other contributing countries is very unsatisfying.

Madam Speaker, when the Minister talks about reconciliation and at the same time goes ahead to refer to the Islamic Courts Union as remnants in their own country, it is painful. We have seen people on television dragging Ethiopian soldiers on the streets calling them invaders. It now looks like we went there to compliment the efforts of Ethiopia, which is regarded as an invader.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Minister to tell us what is supposed to happen a month from today if other African Union contributing forces do not comply. Two, I would like the Minister to tell us about the members of Uganda, military or otherwise, who were involved in a scuffle when there was an attempt to kill Abdullai Yusuf and one of them was taken to Nairobi for hospitalization, the other killed instantly. I behaved as a gentleman, I did not want to come here and cause a constitutional crisis because Uganda sent troops before this was ratified. However, I would like to get clarification on whether we have the opportunity to get it from the honourable minister. I thank you.

6.16
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the Minister for the statement. Yesterday I was listening to BBC and they were trying to interview countries that have pledged their troops to join the AU troops, of which it is only Uganda that has so far arrived. To my amusement, most of the countries in that interview noted that the condition in Somalia at the moment is too dangerous for their troops. Some of them are even considering withdrawing their commitment from the African Union and not taking their troops to Somalia. 

I want to know from the Minister, like my colleague has stated, in the event that this is the true reflection of these governments, and considering that actually the original AU number that were pledged was insufficient to deal with what African Union wanted, and that Uganda remains the only country in Somalia, what is the fate of our soldiers? What will Uganda do to ensure that our soldiers are safe or are withdrawn? At the moment, you cannot have even one third of the total army of the African Union in Somalia. Hon. Ekanya is saying he will add more.

My other concern is that we went under the mandate of peacekeeping, but when you look at one of the mission objectives stated in number 1.2.3, it talks about assisting with effective re-establishment and training of all inclusive Somalia security forces. Go to 1.2.4, it says “to contribute to the creation of the necessary conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance.” Really, in a combat situation, in a situation where you are a soldier, how do you create the necessary conditions for humanitarian assistance if you are not going to forcefully defend yourself or to engage in combat?

Thirdly, also on the same issue, somewhere the Minister is stating that –(Interruption) 

MR ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I remember the last time we were debating in this House about the deployment of troops to Somalia, it was very clear from the statement brought to this House by the Minister of Defence that our troops are being deployed under several commitments, that is AU and even the UN. In this particular case, they were going to be deployed under Article 7 of the UN Charter, which specifically defines the conditions and mandates we are deploying our troops under. 

This peacekeeping is not just peacekeeping; it is about peace enforcement. This means if they come under attack, they must have the capacity to defend themselves. That was very clear, if you refer to your statement. Maybe you missed that. Thank you very much. 

MS AMONGI: I think my colleague does not understand the international charter. When you start talking about peace enforcement, this is a different charter which is not under peacekeeping. So, your information does not contribute anything. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, on page 2 under 3.2, the Minister points out the cause of the injury and death of one of our soldiers. Again to go back to the question of peacekeeping, when you go for peacekeeping, you do not keep peace where there is danger. It is zoned in such a way that you keep peace where it is peaceful. If you hear about shelling at the Somalia Villa, which houses President Abdullahi, then it is a dangerous area in which peacekeepers are not supposed to be, according to the Charter of the UN and the African Union.  

I want to know whether there is any peaceful area in Somalia where our soldiers can keep peace. If it is not there, then why don’t you come and ask for a change of mandate? This Parliament can give you a change of mandate. Otherwise, we are not peacekeeping, we are moving from the mandate of peacekeeping to that of combatants. 

If you look at the way Eritrea warned Uganda, it is worrying. We have all seen in the newspapers what Eritrea is saying. The information I have is that they have already entered Somalia and they are targeting the UPDF and Ethiopian troops. So, let –(Interruption)

MR ODIT:  The information we have, Madam Speaker, is that a delegation of Ugandans was denied entry into Eritrea from Addis Ababa. They had to fly to Dubai in order to qualify to enter Eritrea. So, Uganda’s international relations are worsening because they see us as fighting against their interests in Somalia. I thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, honourable member. Madam Speaker, we also thought that the honourable minister would tell us what transpired in the meeting that took place between our President and the President of Eritrea. We all know that Eritrea is part of the problem and can be part of the solution. The Minister did not mention anything about what transpired in these meetings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the visit of the President came after hon. Kyanjo had asked this question. The Minister was addressing the concerns raised by hon. Kyanjo.

MS AMONGI: Thank you very much for the information. This re-enforces my point, that broadly, we will have a problem with countries that are not for us. At the moment, most of them are against Uganda and they think we are there to re-enforce the agenda of the so-called terrorists, and it is a dangerous trend we are going to take. 

The Minister has talked about compensation to the person who was killed, but is there also compensation for the injured soldiers who lost their eyes and those who will be brought back?  Thank you. 

6.24
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for giving this statement. I also send my condolences to the family who lost their dear one. 

Madam Speaker, when the Minister read the statement, I got a little bit confused. On page 1, paragraph 1.2.3, the Minister clearly stated that part of our mission in Somalia is to assist in the effective re-establishment and training of all-inclusive Somali security forces. Then on page 3, the Minister goes on to say, “The training of the Somalia forces is ongoing and so far a sizeable and broad based Somalia army has been formed and UPDF and other African countries will continue giving capacity of the Republic of Somalia so that soon they will have their own army…” 

My understanding was that this AU support came because Somalia is almost stateless, and in the name and spirit of Pan Africanism. Many African countries realise that regional efforts have become a necessity for regional stability, and therefore, a requirement for countries within the region to contribute in order to stabilise the region.

The Somali situation is a little unique. What was required in Somalia was first dialogue, before you start establishing a national army. You are supposed to engage all the other factions in dialogue, agree with them and then you eventually form a national army. I wonder which army you are training in Somalia. Are you training the army of the transitional government, which is a faction? They are part of the problem. They are part of the conflict. I thought our going there was a neutral responsibility as Africans, to contribute to the stability of Somalia. All our efforts as a country should appear to be neutral in Somalia, because that will not endanger our troops. 

However, given the Minister’s statement, it looks like we have now gone ahead and started establishing an army in Somalia. How do you establish an army in Somalia first of all before the other African forces have arrived? The African forces are not in control of the entire Somalia. The only AU force available in Mogadishu is the UPDF. The Ethiopian troops have not withdrawn. They are still in Somalia and they are the ones who still call the shots, and there is fighting going on. Where and why do you start implementing that mandate? Is Uganda entitled to implementing the AU mandate solely without the other African countries contributing to it?  

We arrived first, that is a fact, but the fact is that we should wait for the other people to come in. As a country, we should be neutral and not portray ourselves in such a way that will make our troops vulnerable because of lack of foresight. Perhaps we would be misunderstood as people who have now taken sides with the transitional government, which is a faction and part of the problem in Somalia.  So, I want some clarification on that.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the Minister said he maintains contacts with his colleague, the Eritrean Minister of Defence in the transitional government. What kind of contacts are those?  Don’t you think this kind of statement is reckless and will make Ugandans more vulnerable? We might be misunderstood as people who have taken sides in the Somalia situation. The people who do not like the Ethiopian troops will now take us as enemies. I find this a reckless statement. We went to that country as a neutral force to bring harmony and bring all sides to dialogue and stabilise the country.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want the Minister to clarify on bullet 5.2, because language means a lot, when he said, “Accordingly a delegation of the transitional Government was in Kampala.  We held meetings with them and urged them to make the planned dialogue as broad based as possible, and in particular to consider inclusion of elements of the ICU.”  Who are these elements?  This is bad language.  Because if you start calling others “elements”, who are these elements?  I thought you were talking of a recognised group.  But here now you are talking about elements. This is a reckless statement. 

 Mr Minister, with all the due respect we would be misunderstood. I have heard some people make similar statements here; they are not so much welcome in Somalia. Now, if we continue alluding to those kinds of statements- what do you mean by elements?

Finally, I want you to clarify on the threat from Eritrea.  We have read from the newspapers, Eritreans have threatened us and asked us to leave.  What do you comment on this? The other day when I was travelling to Botswana, I met at the VIP lounge a large Ugandan delegation, going to persuade Eritrea, but they did not make headway. 

You know, in the Somali situation, it was agreed that the neighbouring countries have great interest and should be excluded from that effort.  This is why countries like Kenya and Ethiopia are not part of the team trying to resolve the Somali situation.  Now that Eritrea is threatening us, what do you say, Mr Minister?  Why do you think that that threat would affect our stay in Somalia?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish you could really be brief so that other Members can contribute.  But people take the Floor and submit for so long.

MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for the statement.  I also extend sympathies to the family who lost their gallant son of UPDF.

Madam Speaker, you remember this House reluctantly endorsed the deployment of UPDF in Somalia because of the reasons that were given at that time.  One of them was that we wanted the deployment to be done together with other countries that had promised to deploy.  Now the Minister is telling us in his statement that soon other countries will deploy.  What do you mean? When is soon?  Can you be specific and tell us, give us a timeframe so that if within that time those countries have not deployed, then we will be at liberty to withdraw our troops because we are not about to allow our troops to die in Somalia.  We have been warned by Eritrea.  

I know, Madam Speaker, you said the meeting between the Presidents of Uganda and the President of Eritrea came after hon. Kyanjo had paused his question.  But now that the Minister has heard, he should be in position to comment on that meeting.  Because we read in the newspapers that we had been- but even in the first place we made an error to rush and this House had also warned Government not rush to deploy UPDF soldiers in Somalia, and urged Government deploy as a group.  So, I wish the Minister could comment on that one.

Madam Speaker -(Interruptions)

MR BARTILLE: Madam Speaker, I just wanted the Member on the Floor to clarify.  Eritrea is a country like Uganda.  Uganda is in Somalia under the arrangement of the AU and the United Nations.  Now if one country talks, should Uganda shy away just because Eritrea has spoken?

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Somalia and Ugandan are all independent counties and we are in Somalia.  So, I do not understand the clarification the hon. colleague is asking from me because all these countries are independent.  So, why are we in Somalia in the first place?  Because we have an obligation and you should know this because you are our representative in the African Union Parliament.  You must be in a better position to understand some of these things.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way and I wish to thank you, Madam Speaker.  The information I want to give the House is that, it is common knowledge that Ethiopia and Eritrea have been engaged in a conflict for a very long time. Although that conflict had been resolved, it does not seem to have been resolved to the satisfaction of either party.  So, what is happening now is that since Ethiopia has moved into Somalia, the Eritreans are also developing interest.  

Actually there is some information to the effect that the Eritreans are actually preparing to move into Somalia if they are not actually already supporting the ICU.  So, Somalia is going to degenerate into an arena of a proxy war between the two warring countries and this is something that this House needs to know. We run the risk as Uganda, of being sunk into this conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea.  This is even highlighted by the fact that recently following a meeting between our President and the President of Eritrea, the Eritreans have asserted themselves and even asked us to leave Somalia.  That is the information I wanted to give.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for your submission.  

MR KAJEKE: Thank you very much, hon. Amuriat for that information.  Those are the fears we are expressing, that we do not want to be dragged into the war between Ethiopia, Somalia and Eritrea.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, the Minister has said that he is projecting that for the last three days, there has been a bit of comfort in Somalia.  Are you therefore assuring us that our troops are now safe?  If not, if anything happens later, what should we do?  Should we consider the option of recalling our troops?  Because the other countries have not deployed, we are alone there and if things go bad, what shall we do?  If things become worse, don’t you   think we should withdraw our troops?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.38
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity.  I have only one concern. Many Ugandans now know how to read and write and when they decided to join the UPDF I guess they read Article 209 of our Constitution, which defines the functions of the Defence Forces. As members of Parliament we reluctantly allowed our forces to go to Somalia but we had fears. 

What is very clear now is that the functions our children are performing in Somalia are more than what is laid down in the Constitution. According to your report, our soldiers have been injured and one of them has died. I want to know from the Minister. Within these six months –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I am just seeking clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor and hon. Kajeke. They are consistently saying that this House reluctantly approved the deployment to Somalia when actually we all remember that the honourable colleagues were not here in the first place and the members of Parliament who attended that day unanimously approved. 

I am just seeking clarification on whether he actually made a submission to that effect implying that Parliament reluctantly approved the deployment. 

MR MALINGA: Well Madam Speaker, you remember very well that there was an NRM caucus meeting and the deployment was rejected. You also remember very well that in the absence –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, is it really in order for some Members of other parties to restrain other parties from having their internal meetings? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, you cannot bring here the resolutions of any caucus. We resolved here to send troops to Somalia and the word “reluctantly” was not in the text. 

MR MALINGA: Well, Madam Speaker, it is in the records of our Hansard that in the absence of the opposition the Members of the ruling party sat here as a caucus of the Whole House –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. If you insist along those lines, I will withdraw the microphone from you. Either you are here or you are not.

MR MALINGA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. My question is, given that our brothers and sisters are performing an extra assignment in another State and some of them have got injured and we expect more of them to get injured or even die, what does the Minister have in store for these people? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But was that not part of the debate?

6.42
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A number of issues that I wanted to raise have already been touched. One of the mandates on page 1, 1.2.1: “Support dialogue and reconciliation in Somalia and you are aware that there are two major factions, the Transitional Federal Government and Islamic Courts Union”.  It looks like since we went there we have only been in touch with the TFG. May I find out how many times you have been in touch with the Islamic Courts Union because if you are trying to bring about dialogue then you have to meet both sides?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I am deeply concerned about the slow pace with which the other African Union member states that promised to send in troops are moving. They have dragged their feet. We are left barely with two months to end the mission and they are still preparing their troops.  

I am also concerned that it is only after the mission has carried out its mandate that the United Nations will then come in. Hon. Minister, don’t you think that it would be safer for us to, first of all, consider the safety of our own troops just in case the other member states that had promised to go with us have backed off? Should we continue running the risk?

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, my colleague for giving way. We know very well that UPDF has done a lot for this country and this year when NRM was celebrating their day a number of successes were counted regarding the achievement of UPDF. Among the successes counted was defeating ADF in Western Uganda. 

Today we are receiving yet another worrying report that ADF terrorists under the command of Isiko have matched in Western Uganda. Right now as we talk, about 65 dead bodies were counted and more are yet to be counted –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what are you informing hon. Epetait?

MR OYET: I am just seeking a clarification from the Minister –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is hon. Epetait who is on the Floor.   

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker for your wise guidance. I was now waiting to see how that information links with the issue that I was handling. Hon. Minister, I was particularly concerned about the slow pace with which the other African States have taken in as far as deploying their troops to Somalia. Don’t you think we are now in danger of being left alone and therefore highly exposed?  I think the Minister has to consider other strategies of saving the forces that we have deployed there just in case we are left alone.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.46
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I got worried when you said, “From this side I will go to this side” because some of us do not have sides. The main reason I thought I should speak on this point is because it directly touches on my constituency, the UPDF that I represent in this Parliament. 

While many times we watch when both sides trying to out do each other on issues that concern the deployment of our troops in any assignment be it internally or outside, I want to appeal to members of Parliament first in particular and the general public about the way we refer to the UPDF when they are on their own assignments fulfilling their responsibilities. These are legitimate assignments mandated by this House and other authorities.  

I want to appeal that when they are carrying out their work they need all your support; they need all your morale and your entire backup so that they are not wavered in their assignments by statements made whether for political motives or otherwise. I want to add that what was presented by the Minister is evidence that this is a challenging assignment and it is on behalf of the African Union. 

I have heard statements that we are afraid in case anything happens. All these are possibilities. What I wanted to say is that after the first shot in any battle, the situation always changes or may change and you have to take appropriate decisions depending on how it changes. I want to assure you that the mandate under which UPDF was deployed is very clear according to International Regulations. Peacekeeping is in chapter six and peace enforcement is in chapter Seven. 

Under the AU arrangement and according to that mandate, it is very clear that if you are attacked or if you are fired at, you have the right to defend yourself. I would like to appeal to Members of this House that as we speak about this, let us remember that as our UPDF fighters and combatants are there and that they do not know some of your caucuses and the arguments that you might be having. They are there for all of us and for the peace of all of us. I only want to appeal that as we speak on this motion we remember that they have been there for less than a month and that they are doing very well.

On the issue of some of our combatants who may pass away in battle, I want to tell you that we might be losing more here in Uganda than the number proportionately in Somalia. The assignment of every soldier and the incidents that have happened are not that scaring beyond the boundaries that we normally have in our normal assignments here. I really would like to give you the confidence of the UPDF troops. The morale they have there is that they are in charge and they are improving the situation according to the mandate and nothing out of order has so far happened -(Interruption) 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I stated that since we went there and as a product of our exercise, there are 600 dead, 1000 seriously injured and none hospitalised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are these Ugandans?

MR KYANJO: Is the hon. Member in order to say that the situation is improving?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, excuse me. Hon Kyanjo, have we lost 1000 soldiers of the UPDF? 

MR KYANJO: The hon. Member is talking in terms of our own troops only. We are talking in terms of general humanity, including those we purportedly went to provide peace, not the UPDF soldiers only. This is the reckless talk that hon. Okumu referred to. Is he in order to say the situation is improving simply because we have not lost many soldiers but so many other people? This Parliament should not be heard to sound like that. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is the UPDF in charge of the total security of Somalia so that we have to hold them accountable?

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I do not know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then I cannot know.

MR KYANJO: I do not know. It should be the Minister of Defence to know that. I thought the hon. Member was not in order to say the situation is improving. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where the UPDF are is not where the other people are. So, I think that is what he knows about it.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very clear that the deployment of the African Union Force was not to say that no Somali would die once these forces go there. Whatever numbers die; it is not because the UPDF has gone there. It is because there has been continuous fighting not only in Somalia but also in the entire continent and the World at large. 

I, therefore, would not like anybody to mix-up the results of the conflict between the Somali people and the role of the African mission under which the UPDF is serving. I would also like to encourage you not to be afraid and to assure you that concerning the other countries that are not yet moving; this is not an issue for this Parliament to decide. It is being handled. I am sure and that is not part of what I want to talk about. I only want to appeal to all of you to talk about UPDF as your force –(Interruption)- let me finish my point. Talk about UPDF –(Interruption) 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Just clarify some points -(Interruption)

GEN. TUMWINE: No, let me finish. Take UPDF as your force and do not look at it as the other’s mission because every party wants to get the other party out. That is all that I wanted to talk about. The rest I am sure our Minister will respond to it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.55
MR PETER NYOMBI (Independent, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Madam Speaker, on page 1 of the Minister’s statement, paragraph 1 sub-paragraph 2(iii), one of the missions is to assist the effective re-establishment and training of all-inclusive Somalia security forces. 

On page 3, paragraph 4(iii) of the same statement it is stated that the training of the Somali forces is on going. Is the Minister in a position to project within what period Somalia will have a fully-fledged army?

6.55
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the first place, I want to thank Government because we made a historical move in this Parliament and indeed in this country to formally and constitutionally approve the deployment of troops on foreign missions. I want to thank Government because of the level of transparency in the whole mission. As Parliament we were able to know the financial and all other details, the causalities and other things. 

Madam Speaker, as a committee, we have been following this issue keenly and at one time, we were told that it was more than one soldier that died, and that many others became causalities. But following both print and electronic international media, there is consistence between what we get from the international media and what Government is telling us here. So, I just want to thank them for that consistence.   

Secondly, the deployment of our troops in Somalia coincided with the disarmament process in Somalia because of the fact that the country has been stateless; guns were everywhere. So, I think it is because some of these other forces in Somalia - the clans resisted disarmament and somehow the situation changed. But I think Parliament, and Uganda as a country should acknowledge that it is a general concern that the other troop-contributing countries are slow.  

Madam Speaker, when we brought the report to Parliament, one of our recommendations was that the other troop-contributing countries must send troops in time because, first, we want the Ethiopian forces to be out of Somalia, and that Uganda could not handle the situation within Somalia minus other troops. 

So, this is a general concern that we urge the African Union to persuade other countries to bring in troops, and in any case, we have a mandate of six months.  That is food for thought - I am just thinking aloud. If we realise that these other troop-contributing countries cannot bring in their troops in time, could we reduce the mandate of AU from six months, such that we make it a UN mission and get troops from other countries outside Africa? I think that is something that we can think about.

Madam Speaker, I want to end with one issue and that is reconciliation. The minister in his statement said that the National Conference for Dialogue and Reconciliation was meant to take place on the 16th April, but that it was postponed because of resources. 

But in our report to Parliament, we seriously recommended reconciliation and dialogue. Now, the zeal and the enthusiasm that these other donor countries used to support the peacekeeping process should be the same zeal and enthusiasm with which support the reconciliatory efforts. Because, now we realise that both must work hand in hand if we are to get meaningful stability in Somalia. And in that case, we cannot talk about meaningful reconciliation if we are referring to just elements of the Islamic Courts Union. We need to get to the leadership; try it, if they fail, then that will be another aspect. 

But we also need to get to the leadership, actually to AU not Uganda. AU should make efforts to get in touch with the leadership of the Islamic Union and persuade the Transitional Federal Government to include all these other forces such that we can have stability in Somalia. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.02
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sincerely thank the Minister of Defence for having given a comprehensive report or statement on the Somalia situation. It is important for us Ugandans to follow up what is happening to our soldiers in Somalia. 

I have been listening to the BCC interviews, they were interviewing a correspondence in Somalia: it is reported that the Ugandan soldiers are truly executing their duty as assigned. That means that they are specifically responsible for the African Union assignment as already enumerated here on page 1 of the statement. So that is really very true, because as I have been listening- 

Therefore, I send an appeal to the Ugandans that we should not make our soldiers in Somalia worried; we should give them morale support; we should motivate them because they listen when we speak here. If they hear us talking as if we have just thrown them away, it will not be good. They should really feel motivated, whatever difficulties they will have, they must be able to share those difficulties with us.

Also, the minister has given assurance to Ugandans that at least Government is also responsible, as he has mentioned they are taking care of the concerns of what happens in Somalia- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take the information?

MR ACHIA: No, the time is running, so I will not take it - (Laughter) - for now. So, I appeal to you my dear colleagues to please motivate them. Let us give them assurance so that they can feel that we are really with them.

Madam Speaker, I would also want to give my advice about the Karamoja situation, if you may allow me. The Karamoja situation - can I give it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no.

MR ACHIA: Okay. Thank you very much.  I will give it at a later hour.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Karamoja will come later in the substantive statement.

MR ACHIA: So, I appeal to you, honourable members, to please work together with them.  Thank you.

7.04
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Likewise, I want to also add my condolences to the fallen son of Uganda who died on duty in Somalia. I also want to thank Government and the Minister of Defence for the timely report. At least now we are able to get a report, unlike those days when they were in Congo we could not easily get reports. But now, we are getting reports from time to time and we can get information any time, even from the internet. 

So, I want to tell this Parliament that we are the ones who accepted these soldiers to go to Somalia, we approved. It would also sound ridiculous for us – it is not even a month ago, to start lamenting. We know that when soldiers go to war, some of them die, some of them come back and some get injured.  So we expect all this. 

I remember in 1992, when America sent troops to Somalia on peace keeping. These people were badly hit in Somalia and yet they were only there for peace keeping. It is being played on televisions up to now. 

In the same manner, I want to thank UPDF for having rescued Bundibugyo on Tuesday last week. In fact as we talk now, if the UPDF were not alert, our people would be in the camps now. I want thank you, the Minister of Defence, and on behalf of the people of Bundibugyo, I want to really encourage you to continue camping in those areas to ensure that all the remnants of ADF are completely –(Interruptions)

MS KAMYA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also take the occasion to thank the Minister of Defence for this statement. My heart goes out to the family and the people of the soldier that died. 

My clarification is on the point of ADF, raised by my sister the hon. Member for Bundibugyo. I have been battling in my mind on why ADF would have started fighting after a very long time. I would like clarification from the minister. Could it be that ADF are frustrated by their colleagues or suspects who were captured as far back as 2002, who sought amnesty and are still in jail? Could it be that they are frustrated by the double standards on amnesty? We all want peace in this country, and we all support any efforts to bring peace in this country. 

So, I would like to know whether the minister has investigated this. Perhaps these people have come out because their colleagues asked for amnesty many years ago, but are still in prison, and indeed two of them died in prison. They died in Luzira Prison after seeking amnesty. Should we not investigate why the –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamya, I thought you were giving information to hon. Alisemera; now you are addressing the minister.  

MS KAMYA: Okay, I am going to conclude, Madam Speaker. My point of clarification is on the question of ADF. We are very happy that the UPDF repulsed the ADF. But we do not want it to happen every time; we want to be happy once and for all. So, why do they come back?  Is it because their friends are not given the amnesty that they asked for?

MS ALISEMERA:  Hon. Betty Kamya, I think that one is not mine really. I think you were making your own statement. I want to say that actually I have had many people on the opposition mentioning that they want Government to negotiate with the ADF. The people in Bundibugyo who have been attacked from time to time would like Government and UPDF troops to continue camping there. If it means killing, let them kill them, but for us we cannot be there to be attacked from time to time. 

So, I want to thank again UPDF for the work they are doing. Continue please, we are happy with the work you are doing. Thank you very much.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, there has been generalisation here. I listened to this debate, and I did not hear anybody here saying that we talk to the ADF. So, I thought it would be very good for us to be specific on that matter. The opposition sits this side. No body said it. So, could the honourable member, just for the sake of the record withdraw that?

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I have also sat here and listened to contributions of people saying that this side seems not to think about the UPDF in Somalia. I would like to challenge even the UPDF representatives here, if any of them got the number of votes I got in my constituency, from UPDF directly. I represent those who voted for me and they include the UPDF. 

So, I think it is bad for our records in Hansard to continuously portray that this side has nothing to do with UPDF, because we do not represent them.  UPDF is the national army; they are recruited from all over the country and they voted for me overwhelmingly. It was very clear because they voted from outside the quarter guards. You can go to the Electoral Commission and see, all the barracks in Aswa County. I won in all those polling stations outside the barracks. 

So, I think it is bad for us, including the UPDF representatives - hon. Gen. Tumwine, to have even stood here and said that we on the other side should talk like this. Because then, what is the essence? Why did the minister bring this here if we are not supposed to comment on it?  

I also wish, Madam Speaker, that the guidance could be put so that our Hansard is cleared.  People who read tomorrow must understand that when people raise concerns, they are not against the UPDF; they are not opposed to the UPDF. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Hansard does not know, which direction; it cannot point out which side of the House the matter came from. So, nobody has been named. As far as I am concerned, no one has been named in the Hansard that he or she did this. So there is no problem. 

7.13
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very grateful to the minister for the information given, and I hope that we will continue to get an update of what is happening even without having to ask for that information as Parliament. 

I have no question about the presence of UPDF in Somalia. It is an action that we authorised here and indeed I want to agree with the representative of the UPDF that we must continue to support them. This we would like to do. 

But to begin with, I am disturbed that Government expect support and teamwork from us, when it lacks the courtesy to inform when one of our constituents has died. Honestly, you could have called on phone, besides we meet here every day. It could have been good for you, because we support them even in the field – we would have consoled that family and explained many things that are happening; why UPDF is there and so forth. But I am just hearing this on the Floor of Parliament, after Parliament has asked for a report. I am sure this soldier died some time back. 

I am requesting Government - and I am sure many Members would agree with me, because you came here and asked for our authorisation and when we lose a Member of our constituency these are human beings with souls.  They need our support.  We need to continue working together. Do not come to work with us when you need us and then you forget about us when it is finished. I am quite disturbed about that. I have lost a constituency member and yet I am not informed. I am hearing it in a report here and yet I have to go there and answer many questions- (Interruption)

GEN.  TUMWINE: Thank you, hon. Mugyenyi. I would like to use this to inform Members of the House and the public on the procedure that is taken whenever a UPDF officer or combatant dies, so that we all know how it is done.  

First of all, in the case of the comrade who died in Somalia, we were not happy with the way it was flashed by the press immediately without due regard to the family, which makes it very difficult because there is a procedure.  When a colleague dies there are steps which are taken to first get the facts, check in the files about the next of kin, know the people who should be informed first before it goes even to the general public.

 I think hon. Mugyenyi is raising an important point, that it would be necessary to inform the Member of Parliament of the Constituency.  I want to inform you that normally there is a procedure, which the office of personnel and administration follows. I can assure you in this particular case it was done.  There might have been a mistake not to have informed the Member of Parliament but I think with the honourable minister’s permission, now I could tell you on behalf of the UPDF that we will be doing that.  I thank you.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you so much for that information.  Secondly, through you, Madam Speaker, we know that when we authorised UPDF to go to Somalia, there were certain conditions that the AU had promised to fulfil. I want to go back to the “supposing” that the General talked about.  Supposing those conditions are not met, supposing the Nigerians do not go, supposing other armies do not go, do we leave the UPDF men and women who are there to perish? (Applause)- It is possible indeed and this is a question that we must get an answer to so that we can know how to inform our people.  

Now that we are starting to have some victims we do not know whether it would continue. God forbid! It may not continue and we pray that it does not happen. But supposing those other armies do not go, maybe they are informed of circumstances that make them fear sending their people there. Really, will this country then be able to come back to us and say, “Given the circumstances, we cannot remain in Somalia.” It must not be a question of ego when the blood of people is being spilt. Those are some of the clarifications I would like the Minister to respond to, so that I know whether that option is there; so that in future when Parliament is asked to authorise certain issues like those we know how to handle them.

I thank you, honourable minister. I pray that UPDF is being well looked after and that those who are supposed to be compensated like the family of this man who have fallen are being considered. This should not become a process that will take years where the widow comes to look for the money and then it does not come. Could the compensation be prepared as soon as possible so that this family does not have to suffer to get what they are entitled to?  I thank you, Madam speaker.

7.20
MR ACHIA REMIGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank the Minister for bringing this report and also to thank Members because I think this one has been a transparent exercise from the beginning. We have got information step by step and it is very clear that we are getting the right information because what the Minister has mentioned is what we also read in the press.  I would like to encourage the Minister of Defence to continue with this level of transparency.  

Secondly, I would also want to urge the Minister - you know, we have sent our gallant soldiers to Somalia. In every war, you must have to think about a second strategy. The second strategy is you must be prepared to have - if you have gone with one stick, you must know that there is another stick coming from behind. What I mean is that we must also be thinking about reinforcement. If we see fire we must also think about reinforcement. Somalia is not just outside this Parliament. It is a distance from here and if there is an issue of attack of our soldiers, we must think of reinforcement and that means we must have the capacity to support them in the circumstances that they may come under. 

Lastly, I think I want this to be corrected and the Hansard should reflect this. Peacekeeping is a much wider concept.  When Prof. Bansh in 1945 was asked to decide to write up the articles of the United Nations - he was a professor in Hood University. He predicted that there could be two options in peace keeping; one of them is the traditional one, which was done until the 1980s, where the two sides in a war agree. They might say, “Okay, let us come and supervise the peace.” That is one. It is under article 6, chapter 6 of the UN charter. 

There is also another definition of peacekeeping and normally this one is called peace enforcement. It is in chapter 7 of the UN Charter.  I would want to correct this because our gallant soldiers have been deployed under chapter 7 of the UN charter and AU, which means that they must have the capacity to defend themselves in case they receive fire. They did not go there to hide under the tables but to clean up and support the transitional Government and to bring about reconciliation. In that process they are going to receive fire and we should expect this.  

In Kotido, when there was a crush between UPDF and 16 warriors died, in this case, we are talking about one gallant son of Uganda we have lost, where are we the alarmists in this process?  In Acholi, we have had a lot of problems. I think we need to be focused and say, “What else can we do to innovate and to support our soldiers in Somalia?”  Thank you very much.
  
7.22
MR ODONGA OTTO ((FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are not here in anyway to be alarmists. May I bring it to the notice of this Parliament that one of the former MPs is also in Somalia? He was an MP from Western Uganda and he is at the rank of maybe - I should not even mention the rank but he has called a few colleagues. 

I rise up just to raise three concerns. The information I have even today - I have talked to one person who has returned from Somalia with an injury on the right leg, a boy from Kapchorwa. 

As Parliament, if other African troops cannot bring their forces, then we should add more UPDF forces because they are very thin on the ground. This is what he told me. I am not a military person. He said that their numbers on the ground given the withdrawn efforts of other African states is suicidal for the existence in Somalia. 

I want the Minister of Defence to tell us what option we have; forget about the six, seven months. What options do we have to ensure that we are not endangering the lives of these 1,400 soldiers who went there anticipating they will meet other people from other countries to constitute a buffer of 10,000 soldiers plus? (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, all along, when we were debating this particular statement, I have been very uneasy because whatever we are debating here will have a direct bearing on our soldiers in Somalia. And whatever we say here will affect their position. As a citizen of this country, I am very concerned about our troops in Somalia. I know that there is some other information that we know which we cannot even state here on the Floor. 

I suggest that one day we should organise a closed session of Parliament so that we get a clear position so that we can plan strategically, because for the strategy the Minister cannot discuss it here. Our strategy cannot even be discussed here. But if one day the Minister will come in a closed session, then we also can give information that we know. But right now, if we are to make disparaging statements, it will actually affect the morale of our troops there. It will affect them and compromise our position there. Even the statement you have read here can also affect our position internationally because there are so many stakeholders in this matter. So, I would propose that one day maybe we would – so, I want you to guide us, Madam Speaker- (Interruption) 

MR ATUBO: Yes, I know, Madam Speaker, somewhere in our Rules a closed session is provided for- (Interjections)- It is there in the Rules and I am acquainted with the Rules. I do really appreciate the feelings of my brother Okot Ogong on this matter, because matters of security, matters of land, and matters of domestic relations are very much in our hearts. But, I am just wondering, if we are to hold a closed session, it will be closed in terms of doors, windows and the press. I am just wondering how closed it will be in terms of information. It is well intended, the press may not be there, the doors will be closed for the few hours we are here, but as soon as we leave, I am just wondering from my good brother Felix Okot whether the good intention he has may be defeated as soon as we walk out of the closed session.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he was only giving information to hon. Otto. 

MRS OGWAL: Further clarification?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From who?

MRS OGWAL: To the point raised by hon. Okot Ogong. Madam Speaker, I think what hon. Otto is saying may not necessarily be a secret because when we read on the internet and all the available information, there is so much in the internet that nothing is really a secret at the moment. So, much as we may be provoking more problems by encouraging a closed session - because people may think you are either siding with one side or sucking ourselves to support one side of the conflict. 

As far as I am concerned, Madam Speaker, much as it is important for us to discuss this issue in greater detail, the issue of a closed session may not help us much. That is the clarification I want to give.

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, any one who would want to keep quiet on the calls our brothers are making to some of us whom they know, we can talk. That person who does not want us to talk is an enemy of the deployment of the UPDF in Somalia. I took time to talk to this wounded soldier from Kapchorwa up to 1.00 a.m. and he just made one request. I want the Minister of Defence to make a concrete statement in an event that other African Union forces do not contribute their soldier, what measures do you have to ensure that the domain of the UPDF in Somalia is catered for?

The second issue they raised that I want to raise to the Minister of Defence is that over the last one month, none of the families has even got one shilling. As per my conversation today, they say they understand the process is on and it may take place within two to three days. But he has told me even him –(Interruption)

GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the Member on the Floor talking of his sources from which he wants to make this Parliament believe that these are facts on the ground. To the extent that now he has gone to talk about the welfare of UPDF from that one source of his and make this country believe that the UPDF families of the comrades who are in Somalia have not received money when actually, first of all, even one month has not elapsed. 

Secondly, before those combatants and officers of UPDF went to Somalia, they had a whole holiday and arrangements to go and make arrangements with their families to make sure that their families continue to get their pay. Wives were given their cards to be receiving their money, and I know many myself and I can give numbers and names of wives who have received money from their husbands’ salaries this month. 

Is he in order to stand here and mislead the House from information that is neither credible and substantiated nor authoritative? Is he in order to inform the House basing on that information on the telephone by spreading those rumours? Is he in order to cause demoralisation of our troops?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, don’t you think it is premature to – if a month has not elapsed, it is premature to talk about not getting money.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I respect your guidance, but much as I am not a UPDF MP, I would just appeal - I do not want to go into responding to the issues hon. Elly Tumwine has raised. I will talk to the Minister of Defence in confidence. But, I really want to beg this Parliament that before the expiry of the six months, at least we should resolve to review the entire issues surrounding the deployments of UPDF in Somalia. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know if we can have it as a standing order in this Parliament or bring in a motion. We want this deployment to be mandatory reviewed seriously by this Parliament after the expiration of the first six months. I would seek your guidance on that aspect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I believe the Minister has said that he will be periodically reporting. I think there is no bar to us reviewing depending on the environment from time to time.

MR OTTO: Thank you very much.

7.33
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two or three issues to raise on this matter. First of all, I would like to pass my condolences for the deceased and the person who has lost life in the defence of our people in Somalia because in the spirit of Pan-Africanism, what is happening in Somalia does affect Ugandans. So, I think as a Parliament, we should pass our condolences to the family of the deceased and also express our sympathy for those who have been injured.
  
Madam Speaker, I think the concern of Parliament should be what the government is doing to look after the injured soldiers. This is very important because it will discourage others if people get injured in that process and they come back and they are not looked after, it will pass a wrong message.  I would like the government to look into that issue and to make sure that they are properly attended to. 

I am saying this because in the past we sent our policemen on a similar mission and some of them got injured; one of them is from my constituency and this man was a very senior officer. He is now languishing in the village just waiting for death. That is not a good message. I hope these soldiers engaged in Somalia will not be treated likewise.

Madam Speaker, I am not very conversant with all these international conventions, but I do understand the concept of peace keeping and the combatant liberation operations. Looking at the statement of the Minister in generality, it does compromise that position - the terms or the framework of the mission from two up to four – let me focus on two up to four. It demonstrates that our soldiers are supposed to go beyond just peace keeping because I was made to understand that they can defend themselves - that is allowed. But I do not think what the Minister has stated here involves only maintaining peace and just waiting for self-defence. I do not think so, because our mission there is to make sure that we protect the transitional Government. 

Now, how do we protect the transitional Government without compromising the other side? That is one issue I will want to understand. I want to understand how we are going to effectively re-establish the security forces in Somalia without compromise. Looking at it in generality, it compromises our position and actually that is one of the issues that we need to focus on. We should not expose our people to danger and to condemnation.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to know from the Minister the role of our soldiers as defined by Minister of Defence. It is important because this statement does not give us a clearly defined role of our soldiers in Somalia. If we understand the role they are supposed to play, then probably, we will be able to give our views on whether we are overstepping our boundaries or not. Thank you.

7.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of deployment of Ugandans in Somalia and their security and well being in Somalia is a matter that is of concern to all of us and, therefore, everybody with various perspectives would want to say something.  

But I would like to start not so much by my own concerns about specific issues that are taking place in Somalia, but on what happened today. I sat in my office and saw the Minister of Defence making a statement on the situation in Somalia. I tried to keep abreast with things; I watched television; I read the news; I read important media to get various perspectives and I was compelled to come down here and find opportunity to express my personal appreciation to the honourable minister for coming out with a statement which reflects to a very large extent the facts on the ground -(Applause)- It is a similar situation to a motion that I was seeing today which hon. Okot Ogong wants to move. 

We in the opposition have an obligation to oversee Government and we want to do everything possible to let Government know that sharing information with the opposition is in the best interest of both Government and the country. Therefore, when a minister of Government brings before the House information that is inaccurate in respect – in fact completely inaccurate in respect to the things that happen to our soldiers - the death is one; the injuries are the serious ones as reported by international media. 

I would personally encourage the honourable minister- because Somalia is going to be a tough one - it can still be worse than what we have seen and therefore, the only way that we will move as a country on the matter of Somalia will be to share information and to be pro-active in informing the country. In the absence of facts, so much speculation comes in and really this is something that I must truly commend the Minister on -(Applause) 

I would like also to commend hon. Mary Mugyenyi because she brought in an aspect of the deployment in Somalia that I personally agonised about. For instance, as legislators and, therefore, people who have responsibilities to our constituencies, would it not be good if the UPDF gave us information that, “Honourable so and so, we have three of your people” because they are records of the Members. So, that we remain alert to what happens to them because I saw hon. Mugyenyi really agonising about the fact that the very first death in Somalia that occurred was of a member of her constituency. 

According to the report, burial has taken place and she is not even aware. So, it would only be good - I know it is probably an oversight - what Gen. Elly tried to explain on procedure; politics does not understand some of this procedure. As a Member of Parliament, she is expected to be at the burial.  If she is not there, people even might even say, “It is you people who sent our children to Somalia and when they die you do not come for their burial.” and your opponent will work on this. So, help us as hon. Mary Mugyenyi has said- and you have my sympathy; it was tough

Let me take this opportunity on behalf of the opposition to convey our condolences collectively.  When you go, convey the condolences of the opposition to the bereaved family.  We appreciate that they made the sacrifice and offered their son to serve this country.  

We all have constituents in Somalia, which I know as a fact and I keep praying every day that nothing happens that will necessitate me going for a burial in my constituency.  Therefore, our own wish is that, as they serve in Somalia, God should protect them. The Opposition has expressed all the concerns as to how the situation can be handled so that it can be brought down without too many casualties.  

Therefore, I would like to appeal to you that the concerns of the hon. Members in the Opposition are neither to show dissent nor discourage our people in Somalia but just an attempt to express their deep worry.  Like I said, talking about this and providing information helps to strengthen every body in this process.  

Honourable minister, it will be most important that Government, through the appropriate organs quickly addresses the issue of countries that have not yet fulfilled their commitment of deploying troops.  Because the biggest target in Somalia are the Ethiopians.  If there is a repeat of what happened recently, it means that the Ethiopians are not leaving Somalia. More Ethiopians will come back to Somalia like it happened two to three days ago, and then we shall be faced with a situation that we did not anticipate.  Because the fundamental thing was that as the African Union forces build in numbers, the Ethiopian forces would reciprocate.  

Obviously it will be very irresponsible of us to suggest that Ethiopians withdraw without having other forces in place.  But now that other countries made commitments - I know Nigeria is in campaigns, and there maybe no Government to make a decision on this.  But at least Ghana, Burundi and the other countries should fulfil their commitments because we are going to enter a situation, which is very dangerous.  Eritrea is very categorical because for them it is a war between them and Ethiopia, extended to Somalia.  But if the Ethiopian forces could go back, we would say, “you go and fight your war there while we see how to resolve the conflict in Somalia.”

Lastly, we made a commitment to support deployment of Ugandans to Somalia in principle. We set out conditions and it is against those conditions that whenever you come, we will review what has happened and therefore we talk strongly in support of or against.  The intention is simply to ensure that this deployment yields peace in Somalia with as minimal casualties to our people as possible. A quick return of those that we sent out there is imperative.    Otherwise, I thank all my colleagues for their contribution.  But I would like to end by once again thanking you, honourable minister.  This is the spirit that allows us to move forward.  Thank you very much.

7.50
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to sincerely thank all the colleagues who have taken the Floor to say something about the situation in Somalia and particularly regarding the UPDF troops there.  Let me thank Prof. Latigo for your kind words and the struggle continues.

Now, it is really in the spirit of accountability that we put in the Constitution of Uganda that if we are to deploy Ugandan troops outside the country, the people’s representatives must give approval.  So, we would not be doing our work if we did not come to Parliament and inform you of what is happening to the mission you approved.  I would like to immediately support what hon. Gen. Tumwine has said, that in the future, it must be part of our policy not to only inform the relatives of a person who has either been injured or killed, but the Member of Parliament too should be informed.  

In this case, hon. Mugyenyi, may be interested to know that I have only known today the death of our brother took place on the 31st March, today is the 5th of April and as you know, in the field there is attending to those injured, making sure they are treated and of course they know who has died immediately but the information flow takes a bit of time.  But we undertake that in future a Member of Parliament must be made to know what has happened to their constituents.  

The Rt hon. Speaker has advised me to try and be as brief as possible so that we can do other business.  Therefore, the way I will move is first to deal with the general aspects of our debate.  

First of all, the question of the mandate under which we went; it is true that under the UN, you have these terms clearly defined, “peacekeeping,” “peace enforcement;” you have Chapters 6 and 7.  The African leaders have deliberately been using the terminology, “Peace support” and that terminology is somewhere between Chapters 6 and 7.  So, obviously if our troops are shot at, they have the right to shoot back, and this is very clear in the documentation that we provided to this House throughout the stages that we discussed this situation.  

For the record, let me emphasise that the motion to authorise the President to deploy troops to Somalia was supported 100 percent.  There were 150 members of Parliament on the Floor and all of them voted for this motion without any dissenting.

Honourable Colleagues, it is only natural and responsible that we should show serious concern about our brothers and sisters out there in Somalia.  We want them to be as safe as possible and thus it is well said and stated.  But we in this Parliament are the apex of the leadership in our country.  So, when we talk about issues of coordinating with other African countries, the responsibility lies here.  That is why we sent people to the AU Parliament and the East African Legislative Assembly.  Africa has problems and it must be us to address them and find solutions jointly with our colleagues in the sister African countries. 

Our continent continues to bleed and be unstable - We are just discussing the situation in Somalia. Everyday we listen to the television and to the radios reporting on the African force and how it is ill equipped and has no resources and everyday our brothers the Somali are dying. 

In my view, while we must show concern for our children who we directly sent there, it is our historical duty to show equal concern for the Somali people, our brothers and sisters who have had no stability for 15 years. We are trying to find ways and means of how to help them and not only to help them but also help ourselves in the process. In my view there is no way any part of Africa is going to move forward or develop if other parts of Africa are still unstable. 

I think if we had a good place, one would want to go out of the Parliament of Uganda and say to the other African States that we in Uganda have today done our part, please come and join us. That should be the message. It will be negative if we state on this Floor that we went but since you brothers have not come, we are also pulling out. I think the message that should go to all African States is that Uganda has thrown the first stone. We all talked as a team, please come and join us so that together we can work to stabilise –(Interruption)

MR WASIKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other problem is the threat coming from Eritrea because when you go by the newspapers stories, it was reported that our troops were ordered to get out. Now we are there as African Union Force not Uganda. If another country comes up and say, African Union get out, is there nothing we can do or appeal to other people to do or maybe even call in sanctions so that other people can also say, “Please do not chase these people they are here on a mission?” Is there nothing we can do to appeal so that those threats do not come in?

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, given the time we have, I would appeal to colleagues to listen to my response. It is not possible to give everything today but this should be a continuing debate in the committee, on the Floor and even bilaterally. But if we are going to go back and forth, I think we may not finish quickly. 

What are the factors behind this slowness, if I may refer to it as slowness, in the response by our other sister countries? First is the issue of resources actually. The money committed to those countries and organisations which agreed to support the European Union, the United States and the UK is from the European Union and it has just been paid into the fund in Addis Ababa. Just like Uganda, many of these African States are not in position to manage the financing of these forces. That is one of the reasons why there is this apparent slowness. 

The second reason is the same one that we are expressing. We must pay attention to the security of our forces. Although they are going on a risky mission, they must be prepared and trained. The Ugandan troops have been trained for over one year just to go on that mission because we made the commitment early on when in the process when the deployment was still under IGAD. Some of these brothers came on board when the mission became AU because they are not members of IGAD. That is why they have to do some minimum training before they can join us.

The mission that Parliament gave is for six months. Of course it cannot be that in six months we shall have solved the problems of Somalia hence the plan that this mission should become a UN one. I agree that we shall review this matter in Parliament but the expectation is that those of us who are there will probably agree and volunteer to continue under the United Nations. 

Of course under the United Nations we have a bigger catchments area because we will not be drawing forces from Africa only and we will have better resources from the United Nations. Therefore, colleagues, although you gave us only six months, we should not run away thinking that six months will solve the problem. I hope that when we come here to Parliament given the circumstances at that time you will give approval for us to continue even under the UN. 

I would like to say something about reconciliation and the factions in Somalia. It is amazing brothers and sisters- and I would suggest maybe through the Defence Committee that we who are in Government should give opportunity to more MPs to get in touch with the Somali people including the leadership. The situation there is really- I will use the word ‘interesting’ because that is neutral. 

You can be talking in a meeting to people with high qualifications but their base of construction is the clan. All the time the doctors are talking about their clan. When I used the word ‘elements’ which my friend Okumu Reagan was quarrelling with, this was deliberate because when I said that we urged our colleagues to consider including elements of the ICU, some of the people in the TFG did not want to hear about ICU. Some said, “Yes, we can go that far and include moderates,” and it is true that ICU has moderates, radicals and also some elements of Al-Qeada. 

I think hon. Kyanjo will agree with me for once that the meeting that took place in Cairo only two to three days ago in the headquarters of the Arab– have pronounced themselves in this and said that radical elements within the ICU of people who are on wanted list should not expect to come on board during the dialogue. So, when I said elements I was getting to this question of who are the moderates in the ICU and who should come on board. 

It is inaccurate for someone to think that the factions in Somalia are just the ICU and TFG. TFG is like the broad based movement we used to have. All the clans there are fighting even the Parliament in their structures. “My clan is not represented”, “Why are you the Prime Minister?” All these debates are going on there. Permanent secretaries here are appointed on the basis of their qualifications, but the information that I have and I do not doubt it is that to enter the Ministry of Councils is on the basis of your clan. The positions are shared according to the clans.  

They are not only talking about clans but clans and sub-clans and all those people must share in the power. Ministers must come from particular clans, to get a seat in Parliament depends on which clan have you come from, to be appointed permanent secretary also depends on which clan have you come from. This is before they talk about your qualifications -(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Point of information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let him complete his statement.

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, allow me to continue and we can pick these other points as we go on. Therefore, TFG is a broad based organisation. That is why when we talk about putting and training a force for Somalia it is a broad based matter because every clan is in the Cabinet, in Parliament and they are seeing how the recruitment is going on. When we argued to bring ICU on board as an organisation they said, “No”. This is why I think they should disintegrate and go to their individual clans because at least the one credit you can give ICU is that it is national in nature and not operating at clan level. However, the majority of the people want you to go back to a clan. 

The force that is being put together is a broad based one. They have arguments and some people have said that President Addullahi Yusuf seems to be recruiting his own people and stationing them where he wants. We are not taking sides by assisting the TFG train their own force. Yes, some people who are operating mainly under ICU may be left out and actually there are some warriors who were supporting ICU who have already come over and joined the TFG and they are participating. People who used to work under Said Barre in the army are now commanders in TFG under this new arrangement that is broad based and we are taking clans into account. 

I think the only point that hon. Reagan has is that we cannot claim that TFG has everybody as of now. Even if TFG has 80 or 90 percent, there is still the remaining 20 percent. Therefore, the question is, if we recruit now and finish forming the army, what will happen to the 20 or 10 percent when they arrive? The plan by our brothers in Somalia is to have a certain figurehead for the army that I do not want to mention here. They have deliberately decided to recruit only up to a certain percentage so that an opening remains as more people come in. Then they can also have their quota in the army during its formation. 

I think it was either hon. Prof. Latigo or somebody else who asked if we could specifically mention the directives that were given to the Ugandan troops although they are part of the AU mission. In flagging the troops, the President in my presence told them that they had three functions. Their first function is to protect the government that is the TFG, which is the internally recognised Government formed under the auspices of IGAD and supported by AU and UN. The mandate is clear. We must protect the President and the government.

Secondly, he said they must go and give capacity to the Somali people so that they can carry on their businesses. I think the central thing here is to help the Somali people by working from a broad base, training and giving them an army and a police force of their own. Otherwise they will remain dependant on other people and it will take a long time to sort out their problems.

The third point the President emphasised is for the troops to be careful with their lives. He said, “Do not go and be in the bars, do not go and walk everywhere because you will be targets. Keep together, do not go and expose yourself to suicide bombers”. Those were the three missions that the Commander-in-Chief gave these brothers and sisters who went out there. So you can see clearly as stated by the Head of Government that the question of the security of our people is uppermost in the minds of Government.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I will quickly go through key points that may not have been captured in my general statements. My brother hon. Kyanjo, I would plead that let all of us act as democrats. If we go to a forum to debate and 70 or 80 percent of the people say we should go this way, and I am in the minority, I should go along because that is the only way we can decide. Therefore, for us to be reviewing here and for someone to say, “I warned you and you just went despite my warning” is in my view not being democratic. We all decided, Parliament spoke and we went out there. 

You may describe TFG as weak or strong but that is besides the issue. The TFG has a mandate starting from an IGDA process. It would have been wrong for us to wake up and say, “We are not with TFG, we are going with ICU”. It would be incorrect. All the Somalis were in Nairobi and all the clans that had quarrelled over many years were there. They finally put together something that could be the basis of forming or reforming the state. 

Despite that, our position is not to say that TFG is everything. We are telling them everyday that you must bring in other people who are not with you. So, to continue describing TFG as weak and therefore not worthy of support will not help us.

I am not aware of the scuffle that hon. Kyanjo is talking about. I know that a soldier died but I also know that the solders who were injured particularly after the initial ambush were in armoured vehicles and they were caught in crossfire. What do I mean? The Ethiopians who are directly involved in the fight had placed part of their equipment on the hill that houses the State House. After sometime the ICU worked out where this equipment was and they started shooting to disable that equipment and whoever was handling it. 

Now when a bomb falls it does not just go to one point but scatters and kills people in the neighbourhood. That is how these soldiers were injured and that is how we lost this brother. I am not aware of any scuffle besides that. If Ndugu Kyanjo has information, I do hope that he can share it with us. Personally when the President was in Australia, I talked to President Abdulllahi Yusuf after that event and he gave me his own account of what happened.

Hon. Amongi said that peacekeeping means that we should not go where there is trouble. That is not a correct definition. Our role is to protect the President and the government. The President lives in the State House so how can we not be in the State House when it is going to be shelled? We must be there and take the risk. Otherwise what have we gone to do if we are to say, “Oh, they are shooting and the President is here. Let us leave him and go somewhere else.” What shall we have gone to do in that area?

Concerning Eritrea and Ethiopia, hon. Members, I think we are all educated about the fighting that has been going on between the Ethiopia and Eritrea and what determines their standpoints whenever an issue arises. I would have thought that Parliament would commend the President who knows Ethiopia and Eritrea and who went out of his way because he is looking for reconciliation. He said, “Although Eritrea has warned me to get out, let me reach out, go face to face and talk to my brother about reconciliation”. When two people are fighting you need a third person to come in to try and help. The central objective of the President was to appeal to the President of Eritrea to cooperate so that we can stabilise Somalia.

To say that Eritrea has ordered us to get out of Mogadishu or Somalia is I think not the right word. We are not under the command of Eritrea. Eritrea can say that they will kill us because we shall see how we can protect ourselves but they cannot give us orders. Moreover Eritrea is a member of IGAD and a member of the African Union and we did not hear any dissent in the right fora when these decisions were being taken. We did not know that Eritrea supplies some of the people who are causing trouble in Somalia and our first approach is to appeal for reconciliation. If other things are to happen, that remains to be seen at some point.

Concerning compensation, I did explain in our debate that this is straightforward. Like in the case of our brother who has died, the family will receive US$ 50,000 and the process is already on going. The AU Secretariat has money and that payment is going to be effected. People who get injured will be compensated in case of permanent maiming. If someone gets a wound there and it heals and he or she is all right, they do not need compensation. But if my leg is hit and I end up walking with a limp then there is a scientific way of calculating the disability that they have got and compensation will be paid.

Finally, the way I see the equation is this. If the TFG can get more cohesive and remain flexible in attracting people who have been left outside, if we can give them capacity to form their own army and police and if the UN remains sympathetic to Somalia and to Africa, then this problem will be solved. 

As we speak now, Somalia has a population of about 10 million people. The population in Mogadishu is around 2 million, and the towns like Kismayo and Baidoa, have no problem.  The only problem now is the fighting we have been hearing about, and it is in about 20 to 30 percent of the area of Mogadishu. 

So, if our brothers take the course of reconciliation and remain broad based, and be serious in doing their work, we will help them to form an army and that problem will be solved. Of course, it would be better if our brothers from other African countries could also come and give help. I remain optimistic that this will soon be forthcoming. So, in the interest of time, Madam Speaker, that ends my response and we shall keep in touch.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister and honourable members of the House for this healthy exchange on issues of Somalia. 

Now honourable members, I want to appeal to you to assist us not to breach the Rules. We have a bill, which is going to committee stage. A five clause bill; I do not know whether we can handle it. The debate had concluded yesterday.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

8.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi):  Madam Speaker, although we were proceeding to the committee stage, subject to your guidance, and owing to the fact that the chairperson and I had not yet responded to what the Members had raised, I do not know whether you are -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I called you because I expect you to respond, provided you are very brief.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the good report. I would also like to thank the Members for their insensate comments on this very important Bill. The comments, which were actually raised, were appreciated and some of them have generated some proposals for amendments through consultations with the chairperson of the committee. 

For instance, hon. Safia Nalule – Madam Speaker, could I be protected from hon. Omara Atubo. This is a very important Bill. We either have time to debate it, or we call it off and go home. But it is so important that it is not a question of summarising. If you are tired, hon. Omara Atubo, you can go home. I need to be protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want to go home?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, let me seek your guidance on this matter. I am not very conversant with our Rules; do we have any Rule that stipulates that if we reach committee stage we cannot resume the debate at the next sitting of the House? Because, I can appreciate the position of the Attorney-General, he would like to give a sufficient response. But also from what I see, I do not know whether I can still concentrate, I am sitting here basically on allegiance that I cannot leave the Chair alone in the House, but my mind is really worked up. 

So, Madam Speaker could you please help us; if possible we could start this matter at the next sitting of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, if you are tired, I will not insist. It is a Bill – a very important Bill touching the community. So, please keep your reports, we shall resume on the 17 April 2007. The House is adjourned and I wish you a happy Easter.

(The House rose at 8.23 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 April 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)






