Wednesday, 04 April 2007 
 
Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I would like with a lot of pleasure to announce to you that the Parliamentary Commission will assume tenancy of Bauman House soon. The handover ceremony is on Tuesday 10 April 2007 at 11 a.m.  

Honourable members who have no offices will now be accommodated. The Speaker of Parliament will lead our delegation. The premises have 139 offices and one Committee Room but it will go a long way in easing the office accommodation problem, which we have been having. We invite you to be outside Bauman House at 11 a.m. on Tuesday, 10 April 2007.

Secondly, the Business Committee sat this morning and agreed that Parliament will break off for Easter recess tomorrow Thursday, 5 April 2007 and we reconvene on Thursday, 17 April 2007. So, we should try and accomplish business as much as possible between today and tomorrow. You can plan for your recess; you have a few days from the 5th April to 17 April 2007.

Thirdly, a few weeks ago, this House approved the appointment of a Select Committee to investigate Kampala City Council sale of plots in the Old Taxi Park at Kampala following a petition brought to this House. We did announce that the honourable members of the committee would be: Hon. Saleh Kamba as Chairperson; Hon. Akumu Mavenjina - member; Hon. Alex Byarugaba - member; Hon. Rebecca Lukwago - member, and Hon. Christopher Kibanzanga - member

The following are the terms of reference:

1.	To identify and study regulations and procedures, which are supposed to be followed in distributing, selling and leasing of land in the city of Kampala by Kampala City Council.

2.	To establish whether the said regulations and procedures were followed in the sell of the Old Taxi Park plots.

3.	To establish whether the selling of the plots of land in the Old Taxi Park took into account proper land use, promotion of orderly development and protection of the environment. 

4.	To establish whether the principle of equity and fairness, financial ability of allocatees that would not compromise standards, was taken into account in the said allocation.

•	To make such recommendations as the committee may consider appropriate in the public interest and report to Parliament within one month.

Honourable members, one month will take effect from the day they start sitting because we only gave them one month.  Those are the terms of reference for that committee.  Thank you.

3.03 
MR HENRY BAGIIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand up on a matter of national importance to this country. Madam Speaker, for those of us who read The Daily Monitor newspaper yesterday, we saw a picture of a shoreline of Lake Victoria that had vegetation that is growing but cannot be established and is not known to many people. As a scientist, I developed interest and I went to Kitubulu in Entebbe yesterday. The sight of the shoreline in that place was so unimaginable and so bad.  The water was green; it was viscous and smelly. There was an emulsion as if oil had been powered on the water. 

Madam Speaker, I am wondering what step has been taken by the Ministry of Natural Resources particularly the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of State for Fisheries, because even the fish that we are eating might be coming from that kind of water. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the minister in position to say something, the Minister for Water? 

THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Member. Madam Speaker, the reports I have on my desk as by this morning was first brought to my attention early in the morning yesterday by some media house that wanted me to comment on it. Because I had not read it, I had not contacted my people. I could not make an answer and I promised them I would carryout research. I contacted the Water Resources Management Unit in Entebbe and they told me they were carrying out research in their laboratory. 

This morning the only assurance I have been given is that the colour is not harmful, but they are trying to establish the various properties. National Water has got a laboratory in Industrial Area and Water Resources has got a laboratory in Entebbe. They are assuring me that by close of the day, whatever culture has been cultured would be able to determine exactly the extent of danger if any. But as of now they have not indicated of any danger in terms of poisoning. Of course, the colour is not good and the smell is not good and that means that Entebbe –(Interruption)

MR BALIKUDEMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable Minister for giving way. Honourable Minister, early today- that happens to be part of my constituency- I got information from the fishermen around and in that area, who told me that there is an effect of the green substance on the fish they catch from the lake. I believe that could be a humble submission in regard to what you have just said. She did intimate that the effect of the green substance was not affecting the fish in the lake but the fishermen this morning did ring me and tell me that there is a problem of the green substance that is coming from the lake -(Interjection)- it is killing the fish.
 
MR MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister because she is talking about investigating the harmful effects and at the same time she is implying that the substance is not dangerous. When research is still going on, how can she tell that the thing is not harmful? 

Secondly, clarification on the source: Where is the source of this? Is it pollution from untreated sewage from industries, or is it something deliberately poured in the lake? Are they living organisms we are dealing with? What are we dealing with exactly? Because the moment you say that they have no effect, when the hon. Member is saying that fish are being affected, and it is entering the chain reaction, which is the food, then it must have an effect. I am seeking clarification on those grounds.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you let her finish her submission?

MR ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday together with other Members of Parliament, I had the opportunity to visit the same place where the hon. Member who raised the question said he had gone. Yesterday, about 30 members of Parliament of the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on Social Services went to Moroto District. We had flown to Moroto to visit different primary schools and health units. 

On our way back, we decided to branch off to eat some fish. To our disgust, we were met by a very bad smell. Fishermen were standing at the shores; nobody was seated there. When we ventured to the shores with other members of Parliament, we saw dead fish. There was actually a very huge fish that was dead. Based on that, this green substance is not an innocent growth; it might have a source. It might be dangerous since we saw dead fish. Thank you -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow her to finish her statement? I think you are even anticipating what she is going to say. Ok, Leader of the Opposition.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was just intrigued by what the hon. Minister said. She said that it was only the colour of the substance and the smell, which were bad. The reports we get is that the colour of this thing is green -(Laughter) I was just seeking clarification from the hon. Minister why the green colour was considered bad –(Laughter)- remembering that at one time she belonged to a party with green colours -(Laughter)  

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was among the 30 or so MPs who visited the site. This morning I read in one of the dailies, an official from the Ministry of Water, saying just like they informed the Minister, that it is not a very dangerous thing and that in fact it happens every two months or so. It just happens that this time it could have been more than usual. 

Madam Speaker, I need clarification from the Minister, because this then must mean that it is a build up of something that has been growing or happening for a long time. If it has been happening every two months or so, the ministry did not do anything about it until it has grown to a level where the water is a dirty dark green colour, and it is actually heavy. It is thick and heavy, with a film above it. It is quite scary. 

My question to the Minister as she answers the question is, how long has this build up been taking place because the official from the ministry said it happens almost every two months but not to such a level? We might have consumed these dangerous things for a long time without knowing it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let the Minister tell us what she is going to do. Let us not debate this matter, please.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable Members for their concern. I am really intrigued by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Latigo, to try to insinuate, if he allows me to use that word, that because I was at one time in DP, I could have coloured the water green –(Laughter)- I want to assure him that we were in DP together. He is now wearing blue –(Laughter)- so, I hope he is not going to turn everything around him blue. 

Jokes aside, I just want to assure you that I came to know about this problem yesterday. In fact not even yesterday morning, it must have been midday when somebody rang me from the media, asking me “What do you have to say about this colour?” Immediately I had to ring the people in Water Resources Management. Of course they did not give me an answer, because I think the person I talked to was not competent enough. This morning, the reply I got before I went to Cabinet was that the substance is not harmful. As I got up to speak I was not aware of the dead fish. That one was not reported to me and the Ministry of Fisheries has not raised it with me. So, I hope it is not that bad. 

The first thing that would indicate that the substance is bad is that you would find fish floating on water. This would mean that the substance is poisonous but if fish are not floating, then we are trying to study this further- (Interruption)- If my colleague would just allow me to conclude. 

In matters of research, one thing you go in for is the immediate, the most dangerous. Once you have established that it is not that dangerous, then you can go into doing all other components of research. I hope by the time I will get to the ministry, I will have more revelations as to what exactly is happening. 

As to the cause, I’m yet to know and I want to promise, Madam Speaker, and this august House, that once I establish exactly what happened, what the source could be and how to control it, I will come back to this House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shall we eat fish during Easter?  (Laughter)– on what, on the fish? She is going to come back here and give us a statement about what is going on. What is the problem, hon. Kibanzanga? 

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam, the issue of Lake Victoria is bigger than the way we see it. There is a deliberate effort by some people I don’t know, to destroy the only fresh water in East and Central Africa. I propose that we involve other departments of government. I suggest that the Ministry of Defence get involved in investigating who really wants to deliberately destroy the only fresh water in Central and East Africa. Hon. Crispus Kiyonga should get interested in this matter. I thank you. (Laughter)

3:17
MR NATHAN NABETA (NRM, Jinja Municipality, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday when I was raising my concerns, I was requested to lay these papers on the Table, and I see the Minister is here. I would like to lay these papers on the Table for the Minister to give us feedback. 

I am laying on the Table, some of the license fees that other people have paid in different countries: From Kenya US$6.1 billion, $100 million in Saudi Arabia, in Nigeria, $285, and $ 737 in Algeria. I will lay them on the Table for the Minister to give us feedback. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister and I had an interaction. I have stated all the concerns one by one. The only issue was that in Uganda we had offered licenses and we were not charging money. We were actually just giving away money freely and I raised some of the examples of countries where people are paying a lot of money. However, the Minister said that he will give us an explanation on that. Therefore, am laying on Table-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister will do what?

MR NABETA: Will give feedback to Parliament on why in Uganda the practice is that they do not charge the license fees. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, lay them one by one and let it be entered in the Hansard. These are documents from Algeria, Kenya and Saudi Arabia. 

MR NABETA: Madam Speaker, this is the one from Algeria; this is from Kenya, and this other one from Saudi Arabia. The title just shows the bid licences, which country and how much. I picked up some of the countries and how much they were paying. In Egypt it is$2.9 billion and in Nigeria, $ 285 -(Interruption)

MR EMIGU: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. colleague, who is laying papers on Table, talking about licence from Kenya and Nigeria. We are actually not following what licence, and for what, and in which regard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter was raised yesterday. This is just to conclude his submission. It concerns telecommunication license fees. Honourable members- minister, are you going to say anything about this? Not today? Okay. I will ask the Committee on ICT, the Committee on Works, and the Committee on Finance to team up and examine those documents and let us know what to do about the licenses.

MR BANYENZAKI: When are they going to report back to the House, because this matter seems to be urgent and it is very serious; and we are losing a lot of millions of dollars, which would have constructed Bujagali. When are they coming back to the House? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At the end of the recess. Hon Lokii?

3:21
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to make a statement to Parliament, in regard to the press reports, The New Vision of 3rd April and 4 April 2007.

Hon. Speaker, as we may all know, a disarmament programme is on going in the Karamoja region since April 2006. There have been many complaints among the people on the exercise of the UPDF, some of which include but are not limited to bombing of cows, torture, lack of protection of lives and property of persons disarmed from other ethnic cattle rustlers, et cetera. Some of these have been resolved in recent meetings, including one held by the members of Parliament with the Minister of Defence and CDF in Kotido on 18 March 2007. 

Having had a lot of consultative meetings with the Minister of Defence and the Chief of Defence Forces, the members of the Karamoja Parliamentary Group with facilitation from Parliament, have been out for the disarmament mobilisation in our constituencies; this time for a period of 10 days in the month of February 2007. Our report will be ready for presentation to Parliament immediately after Easter.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I stand here to refute two allegations made against me by The New Vision, yesterday and today. First, The New Vision of Tuesday, 
3 April 2007 alleges that I have disowned the report of the killing of the 66 children in my constituency by the UPDF.

Secondly, today’s New Vision again alleges that I am advocating for UPDF to fight Karimojong using gun-ships. The New Vision on any of these two issues has never contacted me; and I hereby totally disassociate myself from such statements and allegations. 

The New Vision further alleges that I was in my constituency on 12 February 2007 when the UPDF attacked the Jie kraals at Kapoth. The truth of the matter is that most of the UPDF operations in Jie have been associated with killings. For instance, I have a report from Lokiterebo Parish of the killings of several children, adults, calves and cows. Children were shot at, stampeded over by armoured military vehicles and cows. 

I have a record of names of people who have reported the incident to me, some of whom were physically present in the kraal at the time of the attack. Recorded are also names of persons or children who were killed. I shared the report with the UPDF in a meeting I held with the Army in Lokiterebo Parish on 4 March 2007.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we MPs from Karamoja support disarmament fully. Disarmament is a national programme supported by this House, which at the same time strongly condemns any act of human rights abuse or killings irrespective of who commits them.

In conclusion, I therefore call upon the press not to make negative sensational statements that tend to breed more conflict rather than assist us to achieve the goal of bringing peace and development to this much neglected and undeveloped part of the country.

Secondly, I call on all the actors involved in this exercise, including UPDF and the media, to re-establish public confidence and trust in the disarmament programme, and promote more sustainable methods of resolving this historical problem. 

I appeal to the Army to continue to fight and stump out cattle rustling, which has been diversionary and has been a major challenge in the disarmament programme.

I also add my voice to that of the Minister of Defence, that an independent commission of inquiry be put in place to go and investigate the killings. Honourable members, Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister of Defence.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3:26
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague, the hon. MP for Jie, for the statement he has just given, and I thought for avoidance of doubt, I should just make a brief statement in reply. First, as the hon. colleague has just said –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Amuria.

MR AMURIA: Madam Speaker, it was not my intention to disrupt the Minister of Defence; but as far as I understand from my colleague, he was making a personal statement. He also did add that at an appropriate time, the Karamoja Parliamentary Group will come with a statement on the Floor of the House.  

Under our Rules, Madam Speaker, and correct me if I am wrong, personal statements shall not be debated. My understanding of what the Minister of Defence was trying to do is that he was reacting, and therefore effectively debating a personal statement, which contravenes our Rules of Procedure. I would like some guidance from you, on this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we did amend the Rules. There can be some comment for a very brief period of not more than 15 minutes. 

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker,. Unless it is at the discretion of the Chair, the amendment that the committee brought to this House was on ministerial statements, rather than personal statements. For personal statements, just for emphasis, I would like to read Rule 42 (i). It says: “A member may explain a matter of personal nature, but no controversial matter may be brought in the explanation nor may debate arise upon it.” Therefore, just for the sake of safe guarding our Rules, I think that should be put on the record really. This Rule was not amended. 

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw your attention to Rule 41 (2) that is in respect of statements by members. “Any statement by a Member shall be presented on Thursday, and maybe commented upon by other Members for a limited duration of time not exceeding fifteen minutes and shall be submitted to the Speaker in writing before 11. a.m. on the day on which it is to be made.” Part IX talks about statements by members and personal explanations- (Interruption)- Madam Speaker, I need your protection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order, which Rule are you talking about? 

MRS MWESIGYE: Rule 41(2) is very clear. The heading is “Statements by members and personal explanations.” Using that analogy, Madam Speaker, and your discretion, a member may comment on a personal explanation. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, Rule 41 says members can comment. Except today is not Thursday, but we are closing tomorrow. So, I used my discretion to allow you to present today. Honourable members, I used my discretion to allow him to present today, because we are closing the House tomorrow.  Yes, honourable minister.

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I thank you again, and I would like to ask my colleagues to bear with me, so that we take the statement made by our colleague from Jie, in the right context. First, it is true that Save the Children in Uganda, an NGO, has issued a document, alleging that UPDF killed 66 children. This statement has been released to the press, including the international press. 

When this came to my notice, I invited the Chief Executive of this Organisation to seek clarification. He regretted the fact that the press released this document before he had authorised them to do so. Although he had received these reports, he intended to share the information with government so that he can decide whether or not to put it out. First of all, he apologised for the fact that this information came out at the time it did.

Secondly, he did indicate he did not have firm and first evidence about the alleged killings, and he wanted cooperation with the government, if we could proceed to do a verification, to which we are agreeable, because as far as we are concerned, we do not think there was such an occurrence. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, we held a very good meeting in Kotido on 18th, attended by eight of our colleagues from Karamoja. Unfortunately, my colleague from Jie did not attend, and this meeting did not say anything about these alleged killings. In fact the meeting was very appreciative of the improvements that are taking place in Karamoja, as disarmament goes on. I am glad to hear that our colleagues from Karamoja are going to issue a statement in this House, and obviously we shall be there to respond to any issues raised. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Arumadri.

3:33
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker. Arising from your communication that the Parliamentary Commission has at long last managed to find accommodation office space for Members -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Procedure. Madam Speaker, you had ruled that we could make comments, so we are waiting to make a few comments. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us wait for Karamoja Parliamentary Group to bring their statement, then we can debate them together. We shall give them some short time.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Arising from your communication that the Parliamentary Commission has at long last managed to find accommodation office space for members -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, you had ruled that we can make comments, or are we waiting for a few comments?  But, honourable member –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us wait for the Karamoja Parliamentary Group to bring their statement, then we debate them together, and we shall give them sufficient time.

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, as a Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, we have also had interactions with the members of Parliament from Karamoja, local leadership in Karamoja, Minister of Defence and the Army leadership. We even went to Karamoja as a committee. I want to inform this House that we also have a report, which is ready, and shall be tabled any time. We are ready with the report handling all those issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Arumadri, what is biting you?

MR ARUMADRI:  Madam Speaker, I am reacting to the communication from the Chair. We appreciate that the Parliamentary Commission has at long last managed to find accommodation for members but I want to lament at the cost at which this is coming.  I am given to learn that we shall be paying up to Shs 1.8 billion per year to rent these offices.  This is a whopping amount of money, which is able to put up a new office.

 I am further given to learn that there is space on this building for further extension. Now that we are beginning the budget cycle, I would like us to consider seriously, developing our premises, rather than spending so much money on rent. I do not know how long we shall be doing this, but it is not helpful to the economy -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, with all due respect to my fellow party Member in FDC, we elected hon. Alice Alaso and the Leader of the Opposition, Prof. Latigo, to the Parliamentary Commission, and I think they ably represented us in that meeting which took place this morning. I do not know if it is procedurally right for us to assume the responsibility we delegated to people who represent us in that particular commission, and start questioning the details of facilities that have been duly considered in a meeting chaired by the Speaker of this Parliament. I want your guidance. Otherwise, if you are opening the Pandora’s box, then I also have other serious comments in relation to that office.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you came here you were complaining that you have nowhere to sit; nowhere to work from; you are congested; Shadow Ministers do not have offices, what do you want us to do? 

BILLS
FIRST READING

 THE PHARMACY PROFESSION AND PHARMACY PRACTICE BILL, 2006

3.38
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga):  Madam Speaker, and hon. members of Parliament, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill” 2006, be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded. Before you go on, do you have the certificate of financial implications?

DR MALINGA:  Yes, I have. Madam Speaker, and hon. members of Parliament as required by Section 10 of the Budget Act, I wish to lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications for the said Bill.
 
BILLS
FIRST READING

The Uganda National Health Research Organization Bill, 2006

3.38
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Research Organization Bill, 2006”, be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, as required by Section 10 of the Budget Act, I wish to lay on the Table, a certificate of financial implications for that Bill. 

MS ALASO: Point of clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  On laying of papers?

MS ALASO:  Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Both Bills are committed to the Committee on Social Services for perusal and return back -(Interruption)

MS ALASO:  The clarification I want to raise, Madam Speaker, is why the Bills are dated 2006 and yet they are being read for the first time. I thank you.  

DR MALLINGA:  Both Bills were submitted in the last Parliament, but time ran out.  The 7th Parliament came to an end and by the Rules we had to re-submit them a new and that is what we are doing now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think the date will be changed when debating the matter, what is important is the content.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

3.42   
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Madam Speaker, copies have been brought and they are here, they should have been distributed to Members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Since the papers are being distributed, I think you can proceed.

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that this august House considered the matter of the closure of NTV and recommended that NTV be put on air not later than 3 April 2007. 

As you are aware, honourable members, I was unable to present this report yesterday, because of unforeseen calamity that befell my own house when I lost my niece. I did not arrange it and actually when I was preparing to come here, I received the news and I had to rush there. 

So, I beg to apologise for that mishap and as a proof to that, I did communicate to the Speaker in the letter detailing what had happened to me, and I take this chance to lay that document, for record purposes, on the Table.

I understand that, Madam Speaker, you brought my communication to the attention of Parliament. However, this House did resolve that NTV should be put on air by midnight, last night. 

Let me take this opportunity to report to the House on the steps my ministry has taken to pursue the recommendations of this Parliament, since the passage of its resolution on the 20 March 2007.

Honourable members, you will recall that the Presidential Affairs Committee did recommend that all intending investors in the Broadcasting industry should observe all laws, rules and regulations governing the industry in the country. In this light, NTV had to fulfil all its licensing obligations to the satisfaction of the Uganda Communications Commission, and the Broadcasting Council. I have had a series of meetings with the three bodies namely, the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC), the Broadcasting Council, and NTV, and we did agree on the following course of action:

One, that NTV had undertaken to purchase the combiner required for UBC to be able to post NTV on a 200-metre Mast. NTV has put this undertaking in writing, and I beg to submit it here. The Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is working on the specifications of the materials required and their sources. UBC will finalise these proposals on Friday this week -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, maybe you should introduce the documents, tell us the date of the letter, who has written it and to whom, so that it can go on record.

MR KIVEJINJA: The first one was my letter to the Speaker, informing him of my inability to be in this House, because of what had befallen me. The next one is a letter from the NTV to the Acting Managing Director of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, dated 7 March 2006. 

Two, the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has, pursuant to Section 2(2) of the Electronic Media Act, undertaken the following tasks: The Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has already carried out the clean up exercise on the 150-metre Mast. 

Maybe let me just explain this to the Members, that because the 150-metre Mast was hosting quite a number of broadcasting stations, and were not properly coordinated and laid out according to proper methods, it was agreed that all those should be disconnected and a proper arrangement be put in place to allow in these transmitters to be fed properly in a way that is not likely to cause accidents. So, that has been done.

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has written to the Minister of Works and Transport requesting for a structural Engineer to assess the structural integrity of the short Mast, to carry extra weight that matches NTV antennas. The Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has also contacted Makerere University to provide a structural Engineer, to which they have agreed.

Three, all applicants for a Television license are required, by Law, to arrange for a pre and post installation inspection of their equipment by the Broadcasting Council as specified in Part B of the Application Form, in order to complete the formalities for the issuance a full license. NTV had not formerly requested the Broadcasting Council to carry out installation inspections. As a result of the recommendations of Parliament, I did write to the Council on the 29 March 2007 to carry out installation inspections, which work, Council started today -(Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the Uganda Broadcasting Council is ready to put NTV on air as soon as the above legal and procedural requirements have been complied with. 

Honourable colleagues, my role as a Minister of Information and National Guidance, under Section 9 of the Electronic Media Act, is to give policy guidance to the Council. I cannot, therefore, interfere with the regulatory operational mandate of any Statutory Body under my overall supervision. Thank you.

The other papers I am laying on the Table are the letter from the Managing Director of the Broadcasting Corporation and my letter to Victor. It is only on my insistence that I ordered the Broadcasting Council to go and cause inspection.

3.51
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to welcome back the hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister from the burial yesterday. This House was extremely sympathetic to what occurred, and we are very sorry for it. However, I want to assert that it is going to be a dangerous trend, if this House allows to be belittled, so to say. 

The Rt hon. Prime Minister yesterday promised that the Third Deputy Prime Minister was going to come and report to this House later. This House resolved that NTV be opened by midnight, last night. What we wanted to hear from the Minister was that he has opened and the circumstances were thus, and in fact he would have had free time to revise and bring a comprehensive report later as was promised by the Prime Minister. I therefore, propose that this House rejects this report, and we demand the reopening of NTV as we said yesterday. I thank you.

3.52
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for just attempting to explain a very hard issue on his table. I am a member of the committee, which investigated this matter, and I thought we were dealing with honest people. I also thought that in this matter we should rule out the politicking. Otherwise, I would have come here with our minority report but I did not. I wanted us to remove the politics from this debate. 

Our chairperson persuaded us that we give government 14 days to sort out the administrative issues. We are not the ones who invented the administrative issues. It is the Minister who said that these were simple matters; administrative matters which they were going to sort out. Now, he has come back to this House, today and he is bringing technical matters as reasons why NTV cannot be switched on. My question to the Minister is, “At what stage did the administrative matters turn into technical matters that you are giving us today?”-(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take that information? There is some information.

MR KIBANZANGA: I am not taking that information. I was a member of the group of members of Parliament that investigated this matter so I have enough information. I was saying that we cannot lead this country by being economical with the truth. Look at No.1 on page 2: the combiner. A combiner is the responsibility of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. You cannot ask your tenant -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from your committee. Hon. Muhanga.

MS MUHANGA: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. Indeed we were together as committee members but what he has said is not true. That is, that a combiner is the sole responsibility of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. What the people who came before this committee from Uganda Broadcasting Corporation and Uganda Communications Commission, told us, was that other people and individuals, who want to run TV stations in this country, can buy their own combiners on which other people can attach their antennas and transmit. Instead of paying to Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, they can pay to that investor who has bought a combiner. That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you.

MR KIBANZANGA: People are just being economical with the truth. Madam Speaker, UBC is the landlord of all TV stations. For you to have only one TV station buy a combiner, you are running into technical problems. That is because you are going to lend your mast to a person who has purchased a combiner. A combiner means you put it on your mast to have other televisions use that combiner. Therefore, they will be paying you. Which is which?  We want the Minister of Information to streamline this. 

 MR MWESIGE: Thank you Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Kibanzanga for giving way. The letter dated 7 March 2006, which the hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister laid on the Table, clearly indicates, at paragraph four, “Combiner for 200 metre mast: NTV has agreed to finance the project of the combiner, antenna system and feeder cable for the 200 metre mast.” This is a letter from NTV.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you for giving way. Much as the hon. Minister is quoting a letter, which was written by NTV agreeing that they will buy a combiner, it had conditions. I am going to read verbatim, a letter from NTV, dated 2 April 2007. I am also going to lay this letter on the Table. It is addressed to the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Information and National Guidance -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order Members!

MR BANYENZAKI: Members, how I got this letter, is how the Minister also got a letter that is addressed to the Minister of Information. The letter reads: 
“Opening of NTV. We acknowledge with thanks, the receipt of your letter dated 29 March 2007 and received this afternoon, contents of which we have noted. 

With the indulgence, we would like to clarify that the undertaking to facilitate the acquisition of a combiner with a view of shifting to the 200-metre mast is a long-term plan that will not take less than one year and not more than two years. This undertaking was communicated to UBC in our meeting with them. 

In the same meeting, it was confirmed that there is no technical impediment to our being hosted on the 150-metre mast as all parties are pursuing the long-term option. The understanding is that we shall be on air, as this is being considered further. A copy of our letter to UBC is enclosed. 

As regards inspection by the Broadcasting Council, they are welcome, so to do, and the undersigned has made arrangements with the Chairman Broadcasting Council in that respect. As a matter of fact, Uganda Communications Commission has completed its own inspection. Yours sincerely, General Manager.” 

The letter is copied to the Chairman Broadcasting Council, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the PPS to the President. I beg to lay it on the Table- (Interjection).

MR OTTO: I rise on a procedural issue. Is the Minister for National Guidance in receipt of the letter that hon. Banyenzaki has just read? If he is in receipt, he should inform this Parliament why he did not lay it on Table. If he is not in possession of that same letter, Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I would ask is as to whether the Minister for National Guidance is not withholding the necessary information this Parliament may need to make a concrete decision? I seek your procedural guidance.

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to that letter that is purported to have been dated when? –(Interjection)

DEPUTY SPEAKER: 2 April 2007

MR KIVEJINJA: Well, as I told you, yesterday was 3rd April, and I had left my office by 11 o’clock. Today I am here. And after all, if at all, it was in response to mine, it has yet to come to me. But the undertaking, which was given by NTV, was concluded. The rest are details- (Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, let me make my point and go. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, order please! 

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, allow me to make my last point and sit down.  You can see the communication. The country is being led by honesty and we cannot allow this. 

My second point is on page 2, paragraph 2b of the Minister’s Statement. The Minister says, “Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has written to the Ministry of Works and Transport requesting for a Structural Engineer to assess the structural integrity of the short mast to carry the extra weight that matches NTV antennas”. 

During our investigation, the Uganda Broadcasting Council came up with the Structural Engineering Assessment. That is what Eng. Mutabazi was waving to us and trying to convince us of the technical reasons why NTV was selectively, among other televisions, switched off. This report is called, the SenTech Assessment Report. 

Today the Minister is telling us that they have just written to the ministry to get the Structural Engineering Assessment. Which is which? If there are other reasons apart from this, I would be very comfortable if the Minister was brave enough to tell this House why this investor is being tossed left and right. This House really cannot buy this. Thank you very much.

4.05
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (NRM, Manjiya County, Manafwa): Rt. hon. Speaker and members of Parliament, I have heard the statement for the first time and I have tried to understand what has been going on. Paragraph 3, page 2 -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order Members! 

MR WAKIKONA: First of all, the contention is “Why was NTV switched off?” When I read paragraph 3, which says that the licence had not been issued, I just get puzzled. Why was NTV on, in the first place? You know very well that I have been involved in matters of certification of this type of work for a long time. I was a chief in this area. When you get a licence to install, there is what they call Inspection for Final Certification. This inspection assumes that you have been assigned a spectrum on which to transmit and after installation inspection, which is also called calibration; you go with the specialised equipment. 

Madam Speaker, you have been a Minister of Transport so I know that you follow what I am talking about. Therefore, honourable members, you should give all the support because I am giving very important and technical information, which can help all of us –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon. Members. What is going on? There is too much conversation.

MR WAKIKONA: After installation, the calibration is carried out by specialised equipment to make sure that the spectrum, which you were given at the beginning, does not interfere with other broadcasts within the region.  This was mandatory before a final license could be issued. If this was not done, I do not know why we are talking about closure because in the first place, it was illegal for NTV to broadcast anyway. 

Unless somebody comes here with a licence and says, “Look, NTV had been given a licence to operate by Uganda Broadcasting Council; not a provisional licence but a full licence.”  A provisional licence is like you going to drive and you are given that licence to learn how to drive. When they find you carrying passengers in a bus, are you really a qualified driver? We should look at this matter very seriously. 

MR KIBANZANGA: The information I want to give to the honourable minister is that NTV has a valid licence. Madam Speaker, we cannot run like that. We presented a report here and those who saw that report must have seen the licence. The Minister in charge of National Guidance knows very well how Nation Television got that licence. I do not understand what the Minister holding the Floor is talking about as regards the provisional licence.

MS MUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the licence was actually a provisional licence. NTV came before the committee, and hon. Kibanzanga remembers very well. They did concede that they went on air without permission and Mr Ngei said it was an oversight. They agreed that they went on air without permission. They agreed that they did not fill the forms that are being talked about in paragraph three. They only filled part of the form. We actually asked them, “Why didn’t you fill the form?” They said the pages were too many, about 40. So, we asked, “Why didn’t you fill them?” and they said, “No one fills them.” We said, “How did you get to know? People who fill them hand them over to the Broadcasting Council. How did you know that other broadcasters never filled the form to the end?” So, there was some issue, which surely can be cleared. But we need to clear it first before we move forward.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you minister for giving way. There is information I am giving. Once in a while I would attend the committee proceedings and as Members may be aware, on these committees that are very technical, we have legal experts to give wise legal counsel and information. 

From the report, I read verbatim the wise counselling of the legal expert, who is a staff of this Parliament, which we circulated in the committee. He says, “Uganda Broadcasting Council failed to follow the law in issuing the broadcasting licence to NTV. Whereas the Electronic Media Act in express terms provides for the procedure to be followed by the Council before issuing a broadcasting licence under Section 2 and Section 6, the Council decided to create its own procedure and refused to be bound by the mandatory provisions under the Act; Section 2(2b) of the Electronic Media Act. 

The Council is under mandatory duty before it can even think of issuing a license to establish that there are adequate technical facilities to enable the applicant to do the broadcasting. It further says: “If the Broadcasting Council had complied with section 2(2) of the Electronic Media Act, it would have sorted out whatever technical issues it had with NTV at the right stage envisaged by Parliament before issuing a broadcasting license to them”.  

So, Madam Speaker, the license issued to such a media house is final; there is no provisional or none provisional licence, it is one license and it was laid on the Table. What I am reading is the wise counsel given by our staff in Parliament –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, what you are reading is actually condemning the council for issuing a license without following the procedure; that is what you have read. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, if I could clarify this –(Interruption)

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very much, Madam speaker. We have been debating this issue since the last two weeks. And yesterday, we debated the same issue. Today, we are repeating the same issues. We have debated it for a very long time. We need to move to other items. I suggest that a question be put to the minister’s report so that it can be adopted. Otherwise, we shall debate one item the whole day and yet we are repeating the same things, which we have been debating ever since. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, whether we have talked about this matter many times, there are now new issues, which have arisen that in fact, it is the Council, which is at fault for issuing a license without following procedures. So, are we going to endorse that by adopting the report? 

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, the wise ruling that is being given by the Legal Counsel is saying that the Broadcasting Council had followed all the procedures, but it thereafter created its own guidelines to frustrate this very person. I have not read it all, but for emphasis, I will lay it on the Table. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Banyenzaki, I was listening when you were reading. Let us hear from The Attorney General 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from hon. Banyenzaki. I sincerely respect his submission, but I have a problem with his submission. He is quoting the Legal Council’s counsel or advise. But I want to ask him, of what legal effect is that opinion? Are you quoting a procedure, which has been passed? Yes, you are quoting a legal opinion, but we do not know whether it was accepted; we do not know how binding it is. Clarify to us please.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I am quoting our own lawyer, employed by the Parliamentary Commission to advise Parliament on such legal matters. As such, the people employed by the Parliamentary Commission, by the time they are given the appointment, they are convinced that they are competent in their field and very qualified. So, after studying their document - when we get interpretation from them, we consider them to be authoritative. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us hear from the chairperson of the committee. 

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, my understanding of the genesis of this statement is that some time back, Parliament received a report from a committee of this Parliament. After discussing that report, Parliament came up with a resolution directing the Executive to carryout certain functions by the 3rd April of this year. When the 3 April 2007 came to pass by yesterday, Parliament reinforced that very same resolution; we did not pass a new resolution. It was a reinforcement of that resolution that before today expires, this action should have taken place. 

My understanding of this statement, therefore, is that the minister has come to this Parliament to say that he was not able to carryout those functions because of matters he has raised. If that is the case, I must submit that this report should have come out before yesterday, 

Two, even if we were to accept this report today, taking into consideration a resolution of this House, the minister should have been courteous enough to tell us: “Look, we are doing our best and I think by such and such a date, this matter will have been handled”. I would have been happier with a tentative date. 

Madam Speaker, to say that he has asked for installation inspection, without saying how long it will take might put us in some problems. I am asking you on a matter of procedure that we do not reopen debate on this matter. All we need to know from the minister is, this Parliament has passed certain resolutions. Now if you say that you were not able to carry them out by yesterday, when do you think you will be able to carry them out? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude, hon. Wakikona.

MR WAKIKONA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, thank you for the information. But you realize that it all goes back to the same thing, until a license is produced here, it still remains that the government had illegally allowed this company to operate without a license. I thank you.

4.21
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. May I join hon. Kyanjo in expressing our condolences to our brother hon. Kirunda Kivejinja for having lost his niece yesterday. I would like to thank him also for the clear statement that he has made about this matter. 

Madam Speaker, the issue at hand –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, much as I have decided to sit behind and keep quiet, I do not have a clean conscience as far as the records of Hansard are concerned. Yesterday in your letter and in the Prime Minister’s communication, he made it abundantly clear to this House that the Third Deputy Prime Minister had lost his nephew. 

Today –(Interruption)– I am very certain of what I am saying. I don’t want us to mourn someone who is different from what is in the record -(Laughter)- It will even haunt the Third Deputy Prime Minister. We must be clear for the Hansard record

Today the statement is that he lost a niece. So, for the Hansard, and for the fact that our mourning should be directed to the right person, can we be clarified on whether it is a nephew, niece or both –(Laughter)- so that we can speak –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the person who died was the niece of the Third Deputy Prime Minister – a niece; twenty-two years old.

MR NUWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance in light of Rule 65 1(d) and 3 in respect of the point of procedure raised by hon. Ben, which required that you make a decision on a matter before any Member can proceed to debate.

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance as to whether we are procedurally right to debate before a decision is made on the point of procedure raised by hon. Ben? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Wacha, started by saying that it is a point of procedure, than he ended up by saying that he would have wanted the minister to make a response. So, I am waiting for the Government to respond to his request.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was beginning to make a point that clearly, the issue at hand is the issue of licensing. It is the issue of issuance of a licence to the NTV to operate as a television station in Uganda. And this expels that talk in this House and the media that there were other reasons, because there are no other reasons except what the minister has stated.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you my honourable colleague. You have made a very firm assertion on the issue at hand, which is the issue of issuing a licence. I have been sitting here following this debate and I have not made a single contribution here, and all through, I have not even seen that the issue at hand is the issue of issuing a licence.

If anybody followed - I really want us to handle this issue in a very honest way; if you follow the debate, the NTV was closed, that was the issue. Then you start scrambling for explanation, including giving us assurance that this is a simple administrative matter, which you would handle. 

The issue at hand, from our perspective is whether investors can trust us to handle their need. It doesn’t matter whether it is a licence, land or whatever. So, to the Opposition and I, the fundamental issue is, in doing what we are doing with NTV, are we sending the massage that we as a country are prepared to treat investors equally and to protect their interest? That is the issue at hand not the licence.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. There is an apparent admission by the frontbench that the issue is a question of licensing, and it is the Government of Uganda through the relevant ministry that should have ensured that guidelines, regulations and the law were adhered to.

Now that there is that admission, can they tell this country whether they are ready to pay up the bills in Court out of their negligence, because this is negligence? And you are going to drag the taxpayer to pay NTV out of your negligence. 

New that you have admitted, how are you going to sort out this mess? We are tired of being dragged to Court as Ugandan taxpayers and we pay all the time. So, before we pay NTV, government owes Ugandans an apology, assurance or something more than that.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the leader of the Opposition. Should we –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he is not on the Floor 

MRS MUGYENYI: Should we give the investor licences to operate even when they have not satisfied our regulations just because they are investors? Should we allow investors to take shortcuts, knowing that they can use Parliament to argue their cases, is that right? Shouldn’t we make sure that the laws that we put in place are followed so that this Parliament can continue to be useful?

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to insinuate that investors want to use Parliament, instead of going through the required guidelines? And if so, can she mention the investors who have used Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter was brought here by the members of Parliament after hearing that the station was off the air. But there is something that intrigued me, which I didn’t know last time, that there was a fault in the issuing of this licence. Are we endorsing an illegality? We want to understand, was that licensing process faulty? If so, then it should not have been given, and if it was not faulty then let us establish that.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You are aware that the Minister for Security was not in the House yesterday when one honourable member on the government side told this House that NTV was closed for fear of insecurity. Now that he is now here, he can clarify why exactly NTV was closed. We were told that NTV was closed for fear of insecurity. The member wanted to know if it is conducting activities with the LRA, ADF or any other new rebel group. Thank you very much. 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you very much, honourable colleagues, for all the information you have given me. I found it useful and I am informed now. 

I was very happy to see my honourable colleague and friend, the Leader of the Opposition, Prof. Latigo, coming up and expressing support for the idea of handling investors properly and in a systematic way, which is known by everybody. That is why logically, your conclusion, which you did not say but which I am happy to say for you, is that it is correct that this process of licensing be done in accordance with the law. 

Of course, I am happy with what hon. Ben Wacha said, which is what you are saying, which is the government position. The law is supreme. Whatever we do, we must do in accordance with the law. This lays to rest the accusations that have been flying around, that there are all sorts of reasons why NTV was off air, other than sticking or trying to comply with the law. 

Let me explain this licensing process very clearly. I have heard people say NTV was on air and it was closed, therefore implying that NTV was licensed and then it was switched off, maybe without following the proper procedure or revoking the licence. That is what I assume those who make that argument mean. However, the point being made here is on the procedure of licensing. When one applies to the relevant authority, which is the Broadcasting Council in Uganda, to operate –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, you had just made a statement that following hon. Ben Wacha’s procedural concern, we are waiting to hear a statement to that effect from Government, to cut the long story short. However, we are now going back to the lectures of how the licence is going to be issued. Do I get it from him that he has taken over the position of the Rt. Hon. Prof. Nsibambi, who would have issued that statement, and we go to another item on the Order Paper, or he has assumed the position of the Third Deputy Prime Minister? 

I think we need to cut this short and get a statement from the government side and we proceed. Is he right to give a lecture on how to issue licences now? Some of us have been where they issue licences and we know how it is done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know how the Prime Minister distributed his work today, but I imagine he has assigned everybody some responsibility. (Laughter)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As you know, I am democratic, and we work in a collective manner. My colleagues who have specialised knowledge are, therefore, assisting us to understand these things more deeply. (Laughter) I thank you. 

MR MBABAZI: I hope hon. Okupa has received that lecture well. Madam Speaker, I was saying that the process is like this -(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am well aware procedure takes precedence, but I rise on a point of order. This Parliament has capacity to organise even a million workshops for Members of Parliament to understand detailed issues like licensing, which the Minister of Security is about to begin to give a long lecture on. It seems we are all resting our case. Is it, therefore, in order for the Minister, not even in charge of what we are talking about, to rise up with all the zeal and morale and give unnecessary lectures on an issue which seems to be clear and procedurally ruled? Is he in order to give a lecture to those not willing to listen to that lecture? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know how to handle those who want to listen and those who do not want to listen. However, let us ask the government to tell us how they intend to proceed on this matter. However, it was also important to understand the culpability in all this.

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I understand some members of the Opposition do not wish me to speak and make my point –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, the issue of NTV was raised in this House and the appropriate committee was asked to handle it. This House resolved that Government should see to it that NTV is switched on. We have found out that the fault was Uganda Broadcasting Council, in the process of licensing, and as Parliament we have already stated our position very clearly that NTV should be switched on. Are we doing justice to this country to open up debate on what we have already resolved? 

I would like to be guided by you, Madam Speaker. How do we enforce the decisions of Parliament? I do not see any effect on what we decided as Parliament from this statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Malinga, I do not know whether you are asking this Parliament to say that notwithstanding the defects in issuing the licence, the government should just open it. Is that what you saying?

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, we have studied the effects. We have studied the report thoroughly and that is why this issue was given to the appropriate committee of this Parliament. My problem now is that we have already made a ruling twice, and now we are reopening debate. How do we enforce what we have decided as Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I want them to tell us. That is why the ministers are on the Floor. Please, let us close this matter.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, we were given information here that NTV was given a provisional licence. I was helped to understand what a provisional license is by the honourable Minister, Wakikona, when he demonstrated it using a driving permit. I have ever been given a provisional driving permit, but it had an expiry date. I want to know the expiry period of this provisional licence that was given to NTV. (Laughter) If this provisional licence is still running, then I will ask to be guided why they went ahead to switch it off. 

I would like to seek guidance on another issue. The honourable minister was here on 20th March. In paragraph three of his statement, he says that he wrote to the council on 29 March, yet yesterday he was supposed to appear. In other words, he wrote to them practically four days to the expiry time we had given him. He did not do anything in the first week, save for a few days towards the expiry time. Why do we have all these delays in an issue that is attracting national attention, where people are scared of losing their jobs?  – (Interruption)

MR NATHAN NABETA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give some piece of information and take us back a little bit. When NTV acquired this licence, it expired initially. The licences are for one year. When it expired in July, it took four months before it was renewed. It took the Minister to order the Broadcasting Council to renew that licence. It took them four months, and the issue never came to Parliament but it was resolved. The Minister is the one who actually made sure that NTV was licensed again on 1 November 2006. 

What happens is that once they give you the licence, you install the equipment and then they come and give you clearance to go ahead. Since the Minister has given us his word, and he has in the past made sure that NTV is licensed, we need him to stand here and tell us exactly when he will make sure that NTV is back on air. He also has an interest in making sure that NTV is on air –(Interruptions) 

MR BEN WACHA: Madam Speaker, I have known the Secretary General of NRM for a long long time. I have known his theatrical attributes, but is it in order for him to turn this august House into a theatre? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Minister of Security was overwhelmed by the amount of attention he is attracting. I think that is the problem.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the matter we have on the Floor is about the reopening of NTV following two parliamentary resolutions. Initially, the excuses they were giving were technical in nature. They claimed that the joints hosting the mast were bulging, so it could not afford another antenna. I am reliably informed that the antennas of NTV are still up. So, it is not that the joints really were bulging, but it is a matter that needs just switching on, which was already agreed upon by the UCC. Having passed that now, the issue that is arising is of a licence.

To clarify to my colleagues, here we have a matter where a concerned group of our society petitioned Parliament. Parliament went ahead to resolve on the matter, and I think they had all the time to present their concerns to a committee that was set up by this Parliament. Information, which is vital, was never divulged, right from the bulging of joints and now the licence. 

Madam Speaker, you have already made our position clear. Can those technicalities be handled administratively, because now it has risen from a technical point to an administrative point? What is the problem between the Front Bench and backbenchers? You know, as we are building institutions, it should be give and take. I would not like my Government to appear adamant and to change and shift goal posts all the time. I am really surprised. 

When hon. Wakikona was here presenting, he took us a bit back. He said this is the first time he is hearing about this. He was playing a Rip Van Winkle. Is it in order for us to be taken back and forth? Sincerely, we are hiding some truth. There is some bit of dishonesty. Can we move from here to say that we already have a parliamentary decision, which would have been contested much earlier on? The vital information that was withheld then cannot be brought now, unless there is a specific application, say from the Front Bench. They should do this rather than take us back to reopen the debate as if it is two weeks back.

Are we procedurally right to come back here and keep dilly dallying on a matter that is vital to this country, and be subjected to lectures and endless gesticulation? I suggest this is not the way to move. Let us decide to move forward. The matter is already before us. Assist us to save some face. How will you convince another aggrieved person or organisation in this country to petition Parliament again when Parliament this time round is being tossed here and there? Let institutions have mutual respect. Let us save each other’s faces. It is not too late to step down from the collision course that the Front Bench seems to be taking and dragging this House too. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Third Deputy Prime Minister, can you tell us, practically, what you are going to do and when? (Mr Mbabazi rose_) (Laughter)

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I am talking on behalf of Government -(Interjections)- I have the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the government tell us, practically, what is going to happen? 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, I move a motion under Rule 66 –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let the government tell us what they are going to do. I think that is what we want to hear. It does not matter who brings it; let us hear what they are going to do.

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, I was moving a motion for the Minister of Security not to be heard on this matter because we are just wasting our time. That is the motion I am moving, so that we allow the Minister of National Guidance to give us a concrete statement. I beg to move that motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, let him speak for the government.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you very much. You know, there is a point which I am sure is obvious to everyone, except maybe a few. This Parliament passed a resolution giving a directive on this matter. Government has come today to respond to that. So, for hon. Otto or anyone else to ask me to sit down is exhibition of lack of knowledge of how Government works. That is alright, however. We always have such people. 

Madam Speaker, what I was explaining is precisely what has been happening and what is going to happen according to the law. That is what I was telling the august House. I was trying to explain the laws regarding this question of licensing of electronic media. When someone applies, as NTV applied -(Interjections)- I am going to make this statement, Madam Speaker. I do not know why I cannot -(Interruption) 

MR KYANJO: I want to be guided, Madam Speaker.

MR MBABAZI: I did not interrupt hon. Kyanjo when he spoke. I hope he can let me make my point. As has been said, the licence that was given was a provisional one, to allow the investor bring in equipment. Once the equipment was brought in, the onus was on the investor to inform the authority that the equipment has arrived, and as is required by law, tell them to please come carry out a pre-(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Minister for the information he is delivering to this House. That information, honourable members, is very important in order for Parliament to act wisely. Unfortunately, this information has found us in a fix. We have stopped an investor from operating, and Parliament has committed itself and passed a resolution to re-open this station. 

I would like to be guided on whether it is procedurally right for us to continue blocking the operations of the station as we get educated on the workings of these things. I would prefer that we let the station open and then receive sufficient education on how these logistics work. It could go on even be up to three years, because education is important and that is why I am very grateful to the honourable minister.  

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Madam Speaker, I hope I got the honourable member right. I just want him to clarify. Has Parliament made a commitment to the investor? That is what he seems to imply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That what?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: He told us that this information is coming in too late because Parliament has made a commitment to the investor to have the station re-opened.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, a petition was brought to this House and it was considered by a committee of the House. That is how it arrived here. I do not think we committed ourselves on anything.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, we resolved that the station opens. We can be educated all the way as the station operates. Now we are stopping the station from operating and allowing unwilling ministers to explain at their leisure.

MR KIVEJINJA: Madam Speaker, I just rose to clarify one point, for purposes of our record. Parliament was not petitioned over NTV. This came as a result of my explanation here. It was decided that the explanation was not sufficient and should be given to the parliamentary committee for further investigation, so now we are here. Actually, I was the originator of the report and there was no petition from outside this Parliament. This is for matters of the record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you originate the report on your own accord or on the requirement of the House? Did you volunteer the report or you were asked by the House?

MR KIVEJINJA: Madam Speaker, I am the one who made a statement here regarding NTV when one Member of Parliament queried its closure. Therefore, there was no petition from outside.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So it was on the requirement of this House that you brought the statement. It was this House that asked you. You did not volunteer. Honourable members, can we come to a conclusion on this matter.

MR MBABAZI: I was saying that Government is responding to a decision of Parliament. It is Government that licenses, and the simple explanation I am giving is that there is a law. Obviously, you cannot license except in accordance with the law. It is very important that we all understand this if we expect action to be taken. 

Madam Speaker, some of these things I am responding to are actually issues which were raised on this Floor today. There is inspection of equipment before it is installed. After it has been installed -(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have wisely ruled that the government should tell us when NTV is getting on air. When is NTV getting on air, having gone through all these technicalities that the honourable minister is trying to explain?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members of the government, please let us get to the point. When is NTV going on air?

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, this is what I am explaining – (Interjections) - Allow me to explain to you in my words. I do not know what words you would use. It is important for us to understand the conclusion I am about to reach and to know these facts. There is something called pre-inspection and post-installation inspection, and these are a requirement of the law. Now, these have not been done. 

Pre-inspection can only be done at the invitation of the investor. The investor brings in the equipment and it is up to them to determine how long it takes to put up that equipment and then tell the Broadcasting Council that they are ready – (Interjections) - I am giving you the time frame.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give us a time frame.

MR MBABAZI: That is what I am giving you now. At the moment, as you heard from the Minister, the pre-inspection is being done. Once the pre-inspection has been completed and the Broadcasting Council is satisfied that the equipment is what it should be – (Interruption)

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, yesterday the minister in charge of this portfolio was not here. The Leader of Government Business told us that he is the one who has been involved in this issue and he had not delegated. Because he was away, nobody else would tell us what was happening. It is at this time that we are demanding Government to tell us the timeframe within which they will have worked on this issue. Now, we were not told yesterday that this minister was part of whatever was happening and was informed, but he is giving us a big preamble yet your question is so specific. (Mr Wambuzi rose_) Madam Speaker, I am raising a point of procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wambuzi, please, this is procedure.

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on whether this is procedurally right. We were informed by the Leader of Government Business that the Minister, who is well informed and in charge of this portfolio, could not delegate because, according to the Leader of Government Business, he was the only competent person. That is the word he used. Is it procedurally right to continue listening to somebody who is giving a long preamble inspite of your specific question about the duration?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have asked the government to tell us the timeframe. Please tell us. 

MR MBABAZI: I would like to inform those who do not know that I am a minister in this Government and I speak for the government. 

Madam Speaker, the next thing will be –(Interjections) - For the Broadcasting Council to do inspection, they must be invited by the investor. Therefore, it is impossible to give a precise time. What I can say is that on our part as the Executive, the Broadcasting Council is ready. As soon as the investor has done what the law requires him to do and invites the Broadcasting Council to inspect, they will inspect. If they meet the requirement of the law, obviously they will be licensed –(Interjections)- It is impossible to give a precise –(Interruptions) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hold on a bit. Hold your fire. Honourable members, it is a bit intriguing that NTV, which has been under siege for so long, could not have submitted. Is it possible that with all their problems, for all this time they could not have submitted a request for inspection? All this time! 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to provide this information to the House. This is a copy of the licence issued by the Broadcasting Council. It is Radio Television Licence, number BC14. It is faint because it is photocopied. It is to the African Broadcasting Council (U) Ltd. It says that NTV Uganda has been licensed to operate a television station in accordance with the Electronic Media Act, CAP 104 and other conditions stipulated by the Broadcasting Council. This licence was issued on the 1st November 2006 and expiring on the 31st October 2007. It is valid for one year. It is signed by the secretary, J. Kagole and the Chairman. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a photocopy of the Broadcasting Council licence that was given to NTV Uganda, licence number BC0146. Thank you. I beg to lay.

MRS OKURUT: I only want to give information, and I thank hon. Alaso for that letter, but the committee did –(Interjections)- Sorry! I said I am thanking her for laying it on Table. Honourable members, there is no need for hostility. We all want this TV station open. The committee brought that licence as part of our submission here, so there is nothing new. Thank you very much. I am not saying it is not important, but we did bring it. 

I just want to underline one point; the committee brought a report here which was extensively debated. It was adopted with an amendment by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, and the whole House took it on. So, I think we should just get the way forward. I am very sorry we are now moving round and re-debating the report. 

Madam Speaker, with all due respect, when they talk about this licensing, it is as if it is a new issue. It is actually in the committee’s report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us hear from the honourable member, and then I make a ruling.

5.09
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ham Mulira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with the previous honourable member who has just said that all of us would like NTV to be back on air. 

The hon. Alaso has just tabled a copy of the license, which she read. However, I would like to ask the House to refer to page 1 of the statement by the Third Deputy Prime Minister, specifically the last sentence in the third paragraph. He stated: “In this light, NTV had to fulfil all its licensing obligations to the satisfaction of Uganda Communications Commission and the Broadcasting Council.”  

Now, the licensing for TV stations is in two parts:  

One is as per the Electronic Media Statute, and the other as per the Communications Act. The Broadcasting Council comes in to issue a licence to an applicant to operate and run a TV station.  Uganda Communications Commission, on the other hand, issues a licence for the frequency. The two licences go together in order for a TV station to operate.  

The honourable Minister of Security was going through how licences are offered. I would just like to mention that the pre-inspection has to be done, which is, again, for the licence to operate. The post-inspection, regarding the use of the frequency, has to also be done. Indeed, the licence for frequency was allotted to NTV to be able to bring in their equipment. After installation, they are meant to invite the Uganda Communications Commission to look at the frequency aspects and then provide the licence for frequency. These two together form the authority for the TV station to operate. The post installation is what is also now going to be done – (Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, we have just heard the chairperson of the committee, who took the trouble alongside a distinguished committee to peruse through all that. Was that not part of the committee report?

DR MULIRA: The reason I brought it up, Madam Speaker, is that there was only one licence. The frequency licence was not tabled simply because it has not been issued yet.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members of the government, are you interested in this investment?  Why don’t you facilitate this? Why don’t you just say, “Within a week we shall call you to do a, b, c”?  

5.13
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, this debate has been on the Floor for a long time. I read a statement made by a very prominent American politician who one time said, “I will never keep quiet when injustice is being meted to my people.” When there is injustice of any nature, you must stand tall, protect and ensure that there is justice. I am standing here to give a way forward. 

There was a certain professor at a certain university. When they attacked the wheat farmers, that professor did not talk. He kept quiet because it did not concern him.  He said, “No, I am not a farmer, so I am not there”. When it went to the businessmen and women, he said, “I am neither a businessman nor a businesswoman.”  When all were done, it came to the lecturers at that university and there was nobody to speak for him and injustice was meted on him.  

Members of Parliament, this is our chance to ensure that there is justice in this country. I want to give a way forward. We heard from the chairperson of this very important committee, which took time to go through all this and brought a report to Parliament. With due respect to the Secretary General of NRM, when the report was brought, he was, unfortunately, not around and yet every detail of that report was there.  

I want to tell you what the injustice is. These people of NTV applied for the licence and they were told, “We have a moratorium on issuing of licences.” They were stopped. They were advised to get any licence, which was available, and they paid US $ 65,000 to acquire that licence. In January 2006, they applied for another licence. They waited up to June and there was no reply. Again, they wrote to the Minister that they did not get the licence but their programme was progressing.  (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the way forward.

MR OKOT OGONG: Having analysed the events, we want to inform members that there is nothing that can stop NTV from operating. They even informed us that we could just turn on the key and they would be on. 

I want to appeal to the members of the Cabinet, as a way forward, that let all of us calm down and we agree. This is Parliament and we have passed a resolution of Parliament. We now want to urge the Prime Minister - I now want to talk to the Prime Minister – that the way forward is for us to go and turn on NTV. (Laughter) 

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, having debated this issue for over two days now, and having heard your ruling that the Minister of Information gives us a way forward, and knowing that all of us want NTV to be switched on but are only varying on the timeframe, could we hear from the Minister of Information? He holds the portfolio of that ministry, and not any other minister. Unless the Prime Minister wants to speak, since he is the Leader of Government Business, we request the Minister of Information to give us the way forward so that we close this issue and move on. 

5.20
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I am actually amazed at what has happened this afternoon. Yesterday, hon. Ben Wacha read a statement to this House from one of the newspapers. It was a very depressing statement because Parliament was described as a noise-making institution. 

Madam Speaker, switching on NTV or keeping it closed is not the issue at the moment. I had thought this afternoon we would be dealing with the issue of the role of Parliament as an oversight institution and supreme organ in this country. The voice of Parliament and its position has already been made. What we had wanted the Executive to do was to come to us to acknowledge and appreciate our position as Parliament, and we forge the way forward. Parliament is supportive of the policies of Government. 

As of now, we are being told about the procedure of licensing, the technicalities, but if you read the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, which I believe you read, it was detailed enough. Even the licence, which has been laid on table today, was there. So, when we took a decision that NTV be switched on, we had all these facts with us. We knew that there was something, which this Parliament was not being told. We thought in the interest of this nation, we should honourably switch on NTV and let other matters be handled administratively without involving Parliament. 

For us to now beg the Executive is creating a precedent. The Executive has now been fully armed to defy any subsequent decisions and resolutions of Parliament. (Applause) This is a situation I want us to avoid. There was a time when there was a White Paper proposal to dissolve Parliament in times of disagreement. However, there was a general consensus that this country cannot be run without a Parliament. Today we have legislated, we have spoken loudly, that this Government can run without Parliament – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, it is not me shouting, it is the loud speaker. (Laughter) 

This is the issue at stake, and I want to know my fate. I want to know whether I can go back to my constituency and tell them that I am still their effective representative or that I am a rubber stamp? I want to be educated. That is why I kept standing, Madam Speaker, to seek guidance.  

You know, my humility has become my weak point, but it is good to be humble. I thank you because I caught your eye so now I have made this point. I want to be guided. Is the Executive going to comply by what Parliament has decided or is it going to circumvent and find another avenue to do what it wants and not what Parliament has decided on behalf of the 27 million people of Uganda? This is where I want to be guided, Madam Speaker, Thank you. 

5.25
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I move a motion under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, that the position adopted by this Parliament based on the report of the committee, which was mandated by this Parliament, still stands; that the statement of the Minister presented today on this matter be rejected; and that failure by the Minister to abide by the position of this House, Parliament evokes Article 118 and implements it appropriately. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to conclude this matter. First of all, it is true that our committee handled this matter. It gave a lengthy report and recommendations, which were debated. Parliament and the Executive agreed that we give the government two weeks to complete the process. Now the process has not been completed. However, as Parliament, we have done our part. I do not know whether we can execute more than we have. Let us restate our position that the television be re-opened and leave the rest to the Executive (Applause) Is that okay? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I amend the motion –(Interruption) 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the interest of hon. Ekanya to hold the Minister –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, you have ruled, and in as far as the Rules of Procedure of this House are concerned, your ruling is final. You have ably articulated, in your wisdom, that we had a resolution yesterday, we had earlier on made another resolution, and so Parliament has done its part. Now that you have ruled, let your ruling stand and let there be no debate on this matter anymore. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Actually, Madam Speaker, some of my colleagues may not have appreciated the tone of your statement. I sit and listen very keenly, and I got up not to challenge the ruling of the Rt. Hon. Speaker. I speak for the Opposition and I want to put it on record that we concur with the Speaker. My colleague on the Opposition had wanted to move a motion, but we believe that what the honourable Speaker summarised reflects the correct position of Parliament. It was important for me to let this be brought out so that there is no misunderstanding about our position. That is why I stood up, Madam Speaker.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, yesterday we were reminded by hon. Omach that this is a holy week. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 2006 be read for the second time. The Bill seeks to amend the Penal Code Act, Chapter 120 of the laws of Uganda as follows: 

The first clause abolishes formal corporal punishment and consequentially amends sections 125 to 129 and 205 on corporal punishment. It should be noted that clause 4 of the Bill also expressly repeals section 288 of the Penal Code Act, which provides for corporal punishment.

It should also be noted that corporal punishment is unconstitutional. It may be recalled that the Constitutional Court, in the case of Kyamanywa Simon v. Uganda, Constitutional reference No. 10 of 2000, in its ruling on reference from the Supreme Court decided that corporal punishment under section 274(a) of the Penal Code Act was inconsistent with Article 24 of the Constitution and therefore void under Article 2 of the Constitution as being cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment. 

Clause 2, Madam Speaker, deals with the alteration of the offence of defilement. Clause 2 of the Bill replaces section 129 of the Penal Code Act by redefining the offence of defilement of a person under the age of 18 years. Clause 2 also introduces a new section 129(a), which provides for payment of compensation to victims of defilement. The provisions in section 129(a) originate from proposals of the final report of a chain-linked project entitled, “Situation Analysis Concerning Defilement as a Criminal Offence in Uganda.” 

The Uganda Law Reform Commission was involved in the study. This was after the Uganda Law Reform Commission had issued a report of a study on rape, defilement and other sexual offences. The new section 129 defines a sexual act as one that can involve an offence both on a male and a female child. The offence of defilement is a felony punishable by life imprisonment and therefore triable and bailable by a Chief Magistrate’s Court.  

The Bill also introduces a new offence of aggravated defilement. The proposed section 129(3) and (4) create the offence of aggravated defilement, which is triable and bailable only by the High court. The offence of aggravated defilement is committed when certain circumstances obtain when the defilement occurs, for example, where the offender has reason to believe that he or she is infected with HIV/AIDS or where the offender is a parent, guardian or person in authority over the victim, or where the offence is committed by a serial offender. 

A serial offender is defined in the proposed section 129(6) as a person who has a previous conviction for the offence of defilement or aggravated defilement. As far as the penalty for aggravated defilement is concerned, the Bill proposes that a person who commits the same commits a felony and is liable on conviction by the High Court to suffer death. 

Clause 3 carries an amendment to the offence of aggravated robbery. It amends section 286(2) of the Penal Code Act dealing with aggravated robbery and section 319 relating to smuggling. It alters the definition of “deadly weapon” so that proof of a deadly weapon does not - as it is now according to the judgements of the courts - require that the weapon should be fired at the scene of the crime, or must be recovered and test fired to prove that it is capable of firing. 

The definition of “deadly weapon” is being changed to include any instrument which, when used, is capable of inducing fear in a person, that is likely to cause death or grievous harm, including an imitation instrument. This follows a complaint from the DPP. The judgements in question that came from the DPP’s office are Wasajja v. Uganda of 1975, East African Law Reports, page 181; and Sergeant Shaban Birumba and Longi Robert, Criminal Appeal No. 32 of 1989, the Supreme Court. 

As far as the transitional provisions are concerned, clause 6 of the Bill provides for transitional provisions relating to the new jurisdiction conferred on magistrates’ courts in relation to defilement under section 129, which was previously exercisable by the High Court. Thus, according to clause 6, the pending proceedings shall be transferred to the appropriate courts presided over by the Chief Magistrate, if the hearing of the case in the trial has not commenced or if the DPP so directs. 

Madam Speaker, we have interacted with the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee with whom we have shared comments from interested parties and our own responses. The committee also made comments on the Bill, to which we responded. Throughout this exercise, we have attempted to harmonise the positions of the different parties. We have, as a result of this exercise, proposed some amendments to the Bill that shall be moved at an appropriate time. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be now read the second time.

5.39
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Peter Nyombi): This is the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. The Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was tabled to Parliament on 5th December 2006. The committee considered the Bill in accordance with Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee held a retreat on 19th to 21st December at which the Bill was discussed with Uganda Law Reform Commission and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, apparently I do not see any member with a copy of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, they were distributed.

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, these reports were circulated long time ago.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am aware that they were distributed because I have been carrying mine for some days, and it is a small report.

MR NYOMBI: The committee also met and received views from the following: 

•	The Uganda Law Society 
•	The Uganda Judicial Officers Association 
•	The DPP 
•	The Coalition of Civil Society Organisations, comprising of various organisations. 
•	The Uganda Network on Law, Ethics and HIV/AIDS.

The committee made reference to the principal law and other relevant laws. The committee also carried out extensive discussions and deliberations on the Bill. 

The Object of the Bill

The Bill seeks to amend the Penal Code Act, Chapter 120 as follows:

1. 	Abolition of Corporal Punishment

Clause 1 formally abolishes corporal punishment and consequentially amends section 125, section 129(2) and section 205 of the Penal Code Act by the repeal of references to corporal punishment.

2. 	Alteration of Offence of Defilement

Clause 2 of the Bill replaces section 129 of the Penal Code Act by redefining the offence of defilement of a person under the age of 18 years. Clause 2 also introduces a new section 129, which provides for compensation for victims of defilement. 

3. 	Aggravated Defilement

The proposed section 129 (3) and (4) create the new offence of aggravated defilement, which is triable and bailable only by the High Court. The offence of aggravated defilement is committed when certain circumstances obtain when the defilement occurs, that is, where the offence is committed against a person below the age of 14 years, where the offender to his or her knowledge is infected with HIV/AIDS, where the offender is a parent, or guardian or a person in authority over the victim, or the offence is committed by a serial offender.

4. 	Aggravated Robbery

Clause 3 seeks to amend section 286 (2) of the Penal Code Act to provide that mere possession of a deadly weapon at the time of, or immediately before or after the time of, robbery is sufficient to constitute robbery punishable by death. 

Clause 3 also amends section 286 (3) to alter the definition of “deadly weapon” to include any instrument, which when used is capable of inducing fear in a person, or that is likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm, including an imitation of such instrument. 

Clause 5 intends to amend section 319 of the Penal Code Act, to alter the definition of “deadly weapon” in a manner similar to the definition in clause 3 of the Bill.

5. 	Transitional Provisions

Clause 6 of the Bill provides for transitional provisions relating to the new jurisdiction conferred on magistrates’ courts in relation to defilement under section 129, which was previously exercisable only by the High Court. Thus, according to clause 6, the pending proceedings shall be transferred to the appropriate courts presided over by a Chief Magistrate, if the hearing of the case in the trial has not commenced or if the DPP so directs. 

Observations

1. 	Corporal Punishment 

The Constitutional Court decided in the case of Kyamanywa Simon v. Uganda, in its ruling on a reference from the Supreme Court, that corporal punishment was inconsistent with Article 24 of the Constitution and therefore void under Article 2 of the Constitution as being cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment. Clause 4 expressly repeals section 288 of the Penal Code Act and provides for corporal punishment.

2. 	Defilement

a) The proposed amendment on section 129 defines a sexual act to involve an offence on either a male or a female child. The offence of defilement is a felony and an offence punishable by life imprisonment, and therefore, trial and bail should be by the Chief Magistrate. The amendment intends to punish persons for sexual acts committed against all children, both male and female.

b) The definition of defilement under the amendment would create practical difficulties of implementation in cases where a boy and girl below the age of 18 years engage in a sexual act. They are criminally responsible by virtue of their age. Each of them could be said to have committed the offence of defilement against the other, as each of them falls within the meaning of “any person” according to the new definition. The question here would be; who of the two children should be treated as the offender and who should be treated as the victim?

	The committee proposes that another sub-section be inserted under section 129 to provide that where the offender or both are children, they should be dealt with under Part V of the Children’s Act, which makes provision for protection of children, rather than try and punish them in a formal criminal justice system. 

c) 	The Bill introduces payment of compensation to victims of defilement provided under section 129 A.

3. 	Aggravated Defilement

The committee proposes that the age of a child should not be a factor for consideration under aggravated defilement as proposed in clause 2, section 129(4)(a). Determining age in a situation where there is no proper registration of births could be abused. 

4. 	Aggravated Robbery

The definition of “deadly weapon” is being changed to include any instrument which, when used, is capable of inducing fear in a person that is likely to cause death or grievous harm, including an imitation of such an instrument. 

5. 	Transitional Provisions

It was observed that there could be confusion or loss of files during the transfer of cases. The committee proposes that section 6(b) be deleted so that cases that have already commenced are handled in courts where they started. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that subject to the proposed amendments, the Bill be passed into law. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Members are free to contribute.

5.50
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD Female Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I note that there is a proposal to add a section to provide for aggravated defilement, and under the offence of aggravated defilement there are circumstances which should be obtain as and when it occurs. I beg that this House considers the condition of disability to be among the circumstances to be considered under aggravated defilement.

In the case of a person with a physical disability, the offender practically knows that this person cannot fight back. In the case of a person with a hearing problem or who is profoundly deaf, this person cannot even raise an alarm for protection. In the case of visual impairment, somebody can even be seated near you, undressing himself, but you cannot see what is going to happen to you. In the case of a person with a mental disability, even when that person is above 18 years, that person may not be able to reason out what is going to happen to him or her. So, I beg that this House considers disability as one of the circumstances.

Madam Speaker, when you look at section 130 of the Penal Code Act, chapter 120 defines defilement of idiots and/or imbeciles. When I look at the definition of these words in the dictionary, I think that these words are trying to define a person with a disability. At that time the positive language about disability was not pertinent. So, I beg that if my proposal is accepted, let there be a consequential amendment of section 130, chapter 120 of the Penal Code Act. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.53
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also support the recommendation by the committee. Removing corporal punishment is in line with Article 24 of the Constitution and in regard to Article 44 on being non-derogatory. Most importantly, reducing the sentence will in a way reduce the backlog.

Madam Speaker, since 1990, there has not been any death sentence in court, including Muwanga who defiled a three month old baby. Nevertheless, I have a few concerns. One is on aggravated defilement. I really support that aspect, particularly when somebody is HIV positive. However, my concern is, how will courts infer knowledge by the offender? How will courts know that this person knew that he was HIV positive? So, much as I support it, the lawyers can get a way of rephrasing it, otherwise, court will have a problem in determining whether this person knew or not.

On the aspect of imbeciles, the Bill has changed section 129 but section 30, which is in regard to gender, refers to “any person”, which means male or female. On imbeciles, it still says that commission of the offence is on a woman or girl. Does that mean that there are no male imbeciles? I am seeking clarification on that. 

Still on section 131 of the Penal Code Act; in as far as procuring defilement is concerned, my understanding was that all sections that have a connection with defilement should be consequentially amended when considering the aspect of gender. However, sections 131, 132 and 133 have all not been consequentially amended to include that aspect of a person instead of a woman or a girl.

Madam Speaker, to me, both rape and defilement are grave. They are both felonies. Why has defilement been singled out and rape has not been on record? I am not a lawyer, but in a layperson’s understanding, they are both felonies. I would imagine that they should go hand in hand. Once one can rape, then he can also defile. I am just seeking clarification on these issues. Thank you so much.

5.57
MRS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee and the ministry for bringing these amendments. This has been long over due, especially in regard to the Sexual Offences Bill. I am glad that at least some bits of it are being brought in this amendment of the Penal Code Act. I hope that as soon as we finish this, we shall embark on the bulk of the Sexual Offences Bill, which would help women, in particular, to be in the proper positions that they deserve as citizens of this country.

I would like to support the committee, especially on retaining the age, because it has been quite disturbing. Many times, you hear people saying that it should be reduced because of some religious and cultural beliefs. I am very glad that at least the committee has realised that because of the nature of a woman, 18 years is ideal and not anything less than that. If anything, it could also have been put higher, but I think 18 years is good enough. It is in line with our Constitution and with the Children’s Act.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for raising some of the areas, which are considered aggravated. In this regard, I think it is very important that we realise that serial offenders need to be punished. This is because they are quite a nuisance to the well-being of women, girls and boys that need to be protected. 

I would also like to thank the Minister for raising this issue on aggravated defilement, but in the committee’s report it did not come out clearly. I would like to request that when we come to the second reading, we are allowed time to amend accordingly. The Minister raised it in his communication, but the chair of the committee did not raise it. The Minister’s Bill says: “Where the offender, to his or her knowledge, is infected with Human Immune Deficiency Virus (HIV)/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)” 

We do not have a policy that compels everybody to be tested so that each one’s health status is known. I think it is important that the issue the Minister raised be inserted at the appropriate time, so that it reads: “Where the offender, to his or her knowledge and with reason to believe, is infected with HIV/AIDS.” This is the only way you can be sure that one is not going to say “I did not know”. This is because we do not have any compulsory testing policy in this country. Therefore, I really beg the indulgence of the chair of the committee to make sure that this is inserted at the appropriate time.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the committee for bringing in the issue of a person who attempts to perform a sexual act. My complaint, and also on behalf of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association members, is that it is not well defined. The attempt to perform a sexual act should be well defined so that it includes the fondling of a child’s private parts - breasts, anus and the like. 

Madam Speaker, with the help of the Minister and his team, we were referred to the Penal Code Act definition of “attempts”. We are comfortable that if we use that one, which is already in the parent law, it is much wider and covers all these different things. It is just that it is written in such a language that most lawyers do understand, but has not been demystified to be understood by the majority. These things have not been taken seriously. However, it is good that it is coming up. 

The attempt to perform sexual acts has been raised in this Bill, and therefore, it is incumbent upon us to explain to the population that even these practices that many people take to be cultural are not allowed. They should not take place. They should not be entertained by anybody.


Madam Speaker, my other concern was on the compensation. If a person has already been put in prison and it is going to be life imprisonment, we were wondering how practical it is for this defiler to get the money to pay the victim, especially when that very person will not be present and in most cases the people that suffer most are those that are in rural areas where the defilers may not even have enough property to pay the victim. We do appreciate the issue of compensation because it is important. 

However, I think on the other hand, if a compensation fund was established by government so that this money is got and paid to the person who has suffered this kind of scourge, it would be supplementing or covering the compensation. It is not encouraging them, but maybe you could put it as another alternative that where this offender has been even sentenced to death, how do we expect to get this money? If that person is going to be in prison –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I would like the honourable member to clarify what would happen in a situation where some greedy parent or guardian or somebody sets up a situation where a child is defiled for monetary gain. Don’t you think the Government putting up a fund to compensate people will incite some schemers to set situations so that they can be paid? What would happen in that situation?

MR NUWAGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Masiko, for giving way. If you raised the issue of a compensation fund by the Government, how do you look at the issue of punishments generally and especially on individuals taking responsibility for their crimes, vis-à-vis the taxpayers’ money to compensate victims who have got those injuries as a result of particular individuals’ criminal responsibility?

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving way. It is common knowledge that when somebody is defiled, it is a capital offence. Government takes over. It is that person against government. The problem has always been that after the Government has taken over, the victim is abandoned. It is you to take your kid for treatment. It is you to do all this kind of thing and that kind of issues. That is where my concern is. If government takes over, then what happens?  

MRS TUMA: I am equally concerned because if the offender is to compensate, it is a formal punishment and if the Government puts up the fund, it means the Government is rewarding the offender for defiling the kid. Isn’t this a contradiction? Why are we putting this penal code in place?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our concern as women parliamentarians is so much about the victim. We are concerned that this child is defiled at the age of 16, and is traumatised for a lifetime. There is no provision for the rehabilitation of this child. We do not want to emphasise so much the question of a compensation fund but our emphasis to government is to look towards arrangements that help the victims to pick up life after defilement, after rape. In this country, those arrangements are very much lacking.  

If you look at the documentation that has been provided by the ICC on the aspects of defilement victims, victims of war in Northern Uganda, in Kasese, wherever, you have a wealth of information to do with the trauma, the need for rehabilitation, the need for psycho-social support and it is clearly lacking. These victims are, at the end of the day, really abandoned. That is the problem that the Uganda Women Parliamentarians Associations was trying to figure out as to how government could be brought in to help. Thank you.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much and thank you for all those comments. Maybe the compensation is a bit misleading in a sense that it is the money to be given to a person. We could think of some other fund but the fund we are thinking about is the rehabilitation fund, the fund to help this victim to be reintegrated in the society. The person who has already defiled is not available, he is in prison for life, or he is serving a death sentence as we have already said. 

Remember that even this other person might have been infected with HIV/AIDS or that child is put in a situation, as you know the dangers of being raped, the psycho-social trauma that an individual goes through. Those are the issues that we are talking about. So we are wondering, after defilement and you have put the other person on death row, what will happen to this child? So I would like to request the chairperson of the committee, and the minister, to help us put something in place that can be a second option if all others have failed and I think that will really be useful.

On the other hand, it would help government to make sure that its structures are responsible to track down all these people that do evil and discourage the habit of defilement. If it is going to find that the fund is increasing at a fast speed, then the Government itself will make sure that they stop this habit. It is also a deterrent issue, other than helping out the victim. I think if that issue was considered it would really be good other than just looking at the compensation of the victim by the offender.  

Otherwise, I would like to thank the committee. I am sure if those few observations are considered it would make your Bill quite attractive and very useful to the girl child and to all of us especially women and men, the fathers and mothers of these children who are defiled. Imagine a 70-year-old man defiling a three months old child! This is an issue that we thank the Government for looking into it and considering it seriously. However, if you amended it further with these observations, we would really be grateful. I thank you.

6.12
MR BENSON OBUA (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in saluting the Attorney-General and the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the Bill that they have read in this Parliament for the second time. Most especially I would like to salute them for the amendment of Section 129 of the Penal Code, which is on defilement.

On 04 January 2007, I paid a visit to Lira Central Prison. Two days afterwards, I travelled to Gulu and had the opportunity to meet with the officer in charge of Gulu Central Prison. While in Gulu, I got in touch on phone with the officer in charge of Arua Central Prisons. While in Lira and while meeting with the inmates at Lira Central Prisons, I observed quite a number of issues and pertinent problems that the prison itself and the inmates who under our law are considered suspects, are facing.  

I observed that the inmates are kept for so long on remand. In fact when I was in Lira, I even came across about three cases of those who have been on remand for over four years. Whereas the law provides for a mandatory period of one year, they are taken over four years on remand. We were told that before the elapse of the mandatory one-year period, some of them were committed for trial in the High Court but of course we are aware, like in the North the High Court sessions have been very scarce. In fact when you talk of the mid-North we have one resident Judge in Gulu and one resident Judge in Soroti. Therefore, for the backlog of cases of defilement in Lira, Apac, Pader, we could wait maybe until the Judge in Soroti is not all that tied up, or the one in Gulu. There has been that backlog of cases. Whereas the law provides for one year on remand, some of these friends of ours have taken over one year on remand. Some prisoners have taken over one year on remand. 

One critical observation that I made is that the majority of these people on remand on defilement are young people. These are youth. In fact while in Lira I did a sample as they were seated in front of me I asked them, “What are you accused of?” Out of ten, eight were on defilement, one on murder and the other one on simple robbery. So you can really see the nature and the gravity of the offence that necessitated amendment of the law. 

I would like even to state that the prison authorities themselves are overwhelmed by the number of people on remand. Lira Central Prison was constructed and meant to keep about 250 inmates. However, as I speak, they are over 500 inmates on remand not yet tried. They have been committed to the High Court for trial but they are not yet tried. These are people who are still innocent. They are suspects and they should either be proven guilty or released, but they are still on remand. 

I would like to say that reducing the jurisdiction of handling defilement cases from the High Court to the Chief Magistrates Court will really go a long way in handling the backlog of cases that we have in this country. In fact if the Judiciary could institute Chief Magistrates Courts like in all districts in Uganda, I think justice would prevail timely. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that justice delayed is justice denied. By taking long on demand, you are being denied justice. If the law says one year and you have taken over one year, what if at the end of the day you are tried and found not guilty, you are acquitted after four years on remand. You can imagine!

There is also the issue of categorising the offence of defilement and even bringing on board aggravated defilement. This will go a long way in helping us in ensuring that appropriate punishment is given depending on the gravity. While in Lira and Gulu I found out from the prison authorities that most of the cases that they have are broken marriages, defilement by a boy of 18 of a girl of 16 - really if that comes before a lenient judge definitely – but when it is categorised somebody of 30 defiling a girl of three months that one definitely if I am the sitting judge you will be in prison for more than ten years. However, if a boy of 18 defiles a girl of 16, there be will some lenience. Therefore, categorising is very important. 

Another critical concern that I would like to raise is whereas defilement, murder and robbery and all other cases are considered capital offences, one thing that I have observed is that all these people while on remand are kept together. If Obua has committed the offence of defilement and he is arrested, he will be put together with somebody who killed people. He will be put together with somebody who might have participated in aggravated robbery using a gun. At the end of the day, when I am tried and possibly acquitted and I am out, I have already acquired skills from those who are on remand on aggravated robbery. I have already acquired skills of murder. That is one critical concern, which I really observed –(Interruption)

MS HASHAKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to inform hon. Obua that defilement is as bad a crime as murder. Hon. Masiko gave an example of where the offender has HIV/AIDS and he defiles a kid whom he infects. There is not yet medicine for this disease. Therefore, you cannot convince me that when you put a defiler with a murderer in the same room, the former is any better than the latter. That is the information I wanted to give. They are all murderers.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, it relates to the aggravated defilement and amendment to section 129. Article 21(2) of the Constitution says, “A person shall not be discriminated against on grounds of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, religion, social or economic standing.” In my opinion, HIV/AIDS is more of a social standing in a society and I am glad the Attorney-General is listening. I do not know if the spirit of the amendment of 129 will not offend the Constitution, which does not demand for discrimination against anyone whether he is sick or not. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, hon. Obua conclude.

MR OBUA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think my point was very clear on categorization. I brought that as an observation that I made. In 2002, while a student at Law Development Centre, I did research on defilement and that is what I found within Lira Municipality. I found out that those arrested for aggravated robbery within the municipality are former prisoners that had been jailed for defilement. But when it is categorised and now we are treating defilement according to the gravity - imagine a situation where I am 18 and I defile a girl of 16. I am jailed for three years after which I come out as a killer, because while in prison, I was put together with those on aggravated robbery! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Obua, are you suggesting that the defilers should be in their own section, the murderers in theirs and - is that what you are suggesting?

MR OBUA: If we are categorising, Madam Speaker, we should look at the gravity of the offence. If we have now introduced the aspect of aggravated defilement, why do we mix those on aggravated defilement - because a 35 year old man defiling a girl of three months is definitely different from –(Interruption)

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much for giving way. I just want to clarify this and maybe to give you a piece of information. Children below 18 are all children and our Constitution puts it out clearly that they are children. If you look at what the Bill is trying to cure, it is trying to remove those issues of categorising and putting it clear that all those below 18 are children. That is the spirit we should treat children in until they are above 18, then they can be considered to do anything they want but below 18, they have no capacity to make decisions that are useful to them and I think that one should be appreciated. 

Another issue is on HIV/AIDS and the moral stand; hon. Otto, we are not talking about a love affair of somebody who is above 18. That one is welcome and you can do it. But we are talking about a child. So when somebody knowingly has HIV/AIDS - or even knows because many people will have all the symptoms - and you really go out of your way to kill a child who has no say; who has no capacity to determine which direction he or she would like to go; it is a case that we should even not be debating about. It is criminal and it should be treated like that. 

We have heard cases of sugar mummies who take up boys of 14 or 15 years and they make them husbands. Some of those women are infected with HIV. Why should we keep quiet about it? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: The spirit I am bringing is in the same way hon. Masiko has just told hon. Obua that defilement is defilement as long as a child is 18 years and below; it is already a child. Why do we not bring the same spirit that whether you are over 20, HIV negative or positive, you have already committed an offence other than giving a very tedious task to court because in court, the judge will have to prove whether someone knew he had AIDS? Some people even do not know. By the way, the category of people who defile may not even know their HIV status. So, I really think the law should be made whether someone is HIV positive or negative or whatever.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to provide information to the effect that we have provisions in our policies in this country that provide for remand for juvenile offenders. Here we are not talking about taking those children to prisons where we keep hard core criminals. We are not talking about that. We are saying for any juvenile offender, there should be a remand home. Probably government will come and tell us whether the remand homes are still functional and whether the juvenile offenders are there and what is being done about their rehabilitation. 

When we talk about these hard core people whom we want to categorise, we mean grown up adults who are above 18; who know what they are doing and they should be held accountable for what they have decided to do. But for our children in this country, everyone of us would wish that if they commit an offence, they are taken to a remand home; they are duly rehabilitated and brought back to fit into the community normally.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, because I thought I brought that observation, which I had seen personally in good faith and I know it can be handled under mitigating factors when the two sides are submitting in court. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by urging the Attorney-General and the committee to expedite the process and we ensure that this law is amended and we have justice taking place as timely as possible such that the backlog of cases that we have are dealt with by the Chief Magistrates Court. And if it is possible, let us have magistrates courts instituted in almost all districts of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.27
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Attorney-General for the amendment of the Penal Code and also thank the committee for coming up with a recommendation.   

First of all, I want to state and put it clear and also urge this august House never to be tempted to lower the age of consent. I am happy about the amendment of having jurisdiction of defilement by the magistrates courts, but I suggest that the proceedings when prosecuting defilement cases should be heard in closed sessions, especially when the victims are giving their evidence. You know that for one to be liable of defilement, the prosecution and also the defence lawyers must adduce evidence either way. 

There is one day when I was in a court session where a young girl was appearing and the lawyer was asking her, “How did you feel? What happened?” Even if I were the victim, I cannot adduce such evidence. I, therefore, urge the Attorney-General to enclose a section for this magistrate’s court to try these cases in closed hearing. 

I also agree with the committee to stand on the issue of the transition that there are cases that have taken off in the High Court. If we take these cases to the magistrates’ courts, there are many things that are going to happen like the loss of files and the evidence may not relate to the current proceedings. I agree with the committee that all the cases that have taken off in the High Court be dealt with and then we start with a new arrangement of having jurisdiction of the magistrates’ courts over the cases of defilement.

Madam Speaker, I also agree with the Member representing the Persons with Disabilities, that disability be a factor while adducing evidence on defilement or aggravated defilement. This is because when the victim is deaf, a lawyer will ask, “What did the person say to you?” Or, if the person was not seeing and the lawyer is asking, “How was he dressed?” So the factor of disability should be key in adducing evidence. For as long as the victim is disabled, then you do not have to go into the details of how he was dressed and what he said.

When we talk about rape and defilement, we cannot take these acts as the same because the ingredients in defilement are not the same as those of rape. So when we are dealing with defilement, it is defilement because one can rape a woman of 40, but you cannot defile a woman of 40. These are different cases to consider.

As I conclude, I urge the Members of this august House to support the amendment to the Penal Code but consider the key issues in the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs’ report. I also urge us not to put this compensation because in a way, it is going to be abused by the defilers. We know that the community does not receive this information on time and sometimes it is delivered differently. Some people may think that someone who defiles a child can compensate and go free with it. I do not agree with this thing of compensation by the defiler. And if we are setting up a fund, it should only deal with rehabilitation but not monetary compensation or so. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.34
MS REBECCA OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Attorney-General and the committee for having come out with this issue, especially on defilement. I disagree with compensation because for a long time the issue of people making defilement cases commercial is the one, which has made the number of defilement cases go up. I would like to propose that the issue of compensation be deleted and we look at the issue of rehabilitation of the victim. Therefore, I would say the area of remand homes in different districts should be taken care of. The law has always talked about remand homes in several meetings, but I do not know how seriously it is being handled so that we separate the children from other offenders. 

I want to support the issue of trying especially the children in a friendly environment. Right from the time of investigation at the police, sometimes they bring the men to investigate the cases for the girl children and they get intimidated. That is when they say it was not true. So I feel that the environment should be made friendly. I, therefore, would propose they should be tried in a closed session. 

I want to bring something, which could be controversial. We know about the children’s rights but we also know about the responsibility of the children, the parents and then the guardians. I want us to see a situation where parents have been negligent so that children commit these offences because they have been left just to go. What do we do with such parents? In most cases they end up gaining from the child by trading off defilement cases with cash. Could we get a clause to deal with the parents who have been found to be negligent in our law?  

Where the Attorney-General says that the DPP will use his prerogative to transfer cases; I think for now as we are beginning, these cases are too many. In Lira Central Prison, out of over 500 prisoners, about two thirds are cases of defilement. So if the DPP is to use his prerogative and is not guided - maybe let us direct that these cases now be transferred. Recently I was in Lira and only 20 were being put in the High Court. The age should be retained and I agree with that. 

The adult offenders - I want us to protect both the girl and the boy child - I would like to appreciate that. But where a man of 45 years wants to go with a school girl of 12 years, I want that to be called aggravated defilement and then also where some of the parents also defile children. I think you mentioned it but it should be stronger than that. I want to thank you for having brought out this. Thank you so much.

6.36
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Permit me to worry aloud because I understand we are amending the Penal Code; we are looking into matters of defilement and aloud, I would like to worry about our grandmothers who cannot be included in this defilement bracket. I have read many times of people pouncing on those old women in our villages who can barely walk; barely make an alarm; who can barely run and somebody forces an old woman of 90 or 70 to have sex. 

I know that we are amending provisions to do with defilement but I am really forced to worry aloud and ask the Attorney-General, are we making inclusions to provisions to cater for people with disabilities? Can we make some provision in the Penal Code that will include the special protection for those elderly women that we keep reading about in our newspapers? They are as vulnerable as children. Some of them live alone; the children are grown up and have left the home; the son has built his home a hut that is 100 metres away. This old woman is by herself, somebody opens the door and does whatever they want to do - this evil is being committed. I would like to ask the Attorney-General to think about this.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I do not know why hon. Alaso is so worried when we have not moved the amendments. When you look at this Bill, there is where hon. Alaso can move an amendment to include even the very old women. I would like to inform hon. Alaso that all is not lost and there is time for her to include it in the amendment. Thank you.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Alaso for giving way. The information I want to give hon. Alaso is that what she has described of an elderly woman amounts to forceful sex, which is catered for in the Penal Code, and that is rape. There is no way you would provide for any other thing apart from rape. It is forceful without consent and that is rape and, therefore, the elderly can be taken care of under rape.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe she wanted to create something like aggravated rape.

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, rape carries a maximum punishment of death; it is a death penalty. So even if it is aggravated, I do not think there is any other punishment, which is more than death. If it is there then we can maybe think about it.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Alaso is right because if we had got a comprehensive Bill, the sexual offences most of which we think are missing would have been answered comprehensively rather than bringing it piece meal, which at the end of the day will not be able to measure whether it has answered the concerns of the old women, the disabled and people like that. If maybe the honourable minister could look at that as a serious issue that has come up during this debate, I am sure the Sexual Offences Bill that is left behind would be tabled at the earliest opportunity.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, hon. Alaso’s description was very graphic and really to the heart.  But you can also imagine even a young woman of 35 or 40 who is being raped by a man of 300 kilograms; it could also be a problem.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues for that information. I want to express my worries aloud and for me this is a very serious concern. You can talk about rape, and try to prove that you resisted when you are able to do it. But this old woman - I worry about my grandmother, I do not know about some of you but when I read about people breaking into old women’s houses, I seriously worry about my grandmother and all the grandmothers in this country.  

I would like to express my worry about the extent to which defilement cases in this country have been logically concluded. We have the information that offenders sometimes get out of police custody; they get freedom anyhow and my concern is that it is not so much that people do not know about the law, it is about the enforcement. I would like to ask that mechanisms that can ensure the enforcement of laws be put in our communities. We have so many laws in this country but offenders go free left and right. How they do it, nobody understands!  Because I have been to parts of my constituency and you hear people telling you, “That man defiled and was arrested by the Police but he has come back.” So we do not know where to go. That level of desperation is not about the non-existence of the law, it is about enforcement.

Finally, Madam Speaker -(Interruptions)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable member for giving way. I just want to inform the honourable member particularly on the issue of the laws being in place and not following them, and in regard to defilement. There are cases where parents connive with the offenders in the villages and conceal the information. They protect the offender and the offender goes away scot-free because there is no law enforcement.  

In 2004, in a sub-county called Butuntumula, there is a parent who married off a 16-year-old girl as a third wife. They were quoting the Mohammedans Act, which according to Article 31 of the Constitution of Uganda, I find irrelevant. Senior citizens of this country like the late Abu Mayanja who was a professional lawyer stood up and defended it very seriously. I am just informing the honourable colleague that these are issues that are really coming up and the Attorney-General should get a way of handling them.

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, I also saw a scenario where a girl of 14 years was married off to a rich man. The girl got pregnant and delivered. This rich man was reported to Police and arrested. As he was still in Police custody, the girl run away and again got married to a young boy. They realised that the very parent who had taken this rich man to Police went again in the vicinity in a neighbouring village and arrested the young boy. That one was taken straight to a remand prison because he was not rich enough. As he was still there that very girl again went to an auntie’s place and got married off again. Within one month, she had had three husbands. Madam Speaker, the problem was that the Police got puzzled because they were arresting one man or boy after another.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I want to understand from you, what then constitutes marriage? If the girl is 14 years, she is not married. Even if it is customary our law makes it illegal for anyone less than 18 years to marry or get married. So you should clear what you are trying to tell us.  

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much. Of course hon. Otto knows, we are making a law and I want this law to take care of all the happenings in the society. Madam Speaker, in such a scenario, what happens -(Interruptions)

MRS OKURUT: Thank you very much for giving way. I would like to inform you that if you ever tried to sleep with a girl or boy below 18, that is defilement. It does not mean that my sexuality should be abused when I am around. It does not mean that you should marry me; I am supposed to be protected. So if you ever made that mistake, then you should suffer the consequences of the law. Otherwise, I have the right to live as a woman without being abused when I am below 18.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I was trying to restrain myself from requesting for this procedural matter. With due respect to my chairperson, hon. Namayanja, I heard the reference she made to the late hon. Abu Mayanja, who was a distinguished citizen who served in this government, but unfortunately he is dead. He can neither deny this fact nor accept it and he cannot defend himself. I think it would have reflected quite badly on this Parliament if we procedurally went on referring to dead people over issues that they cannot defend themselves against. I am asking whether it is procedurally right to proceed and refer to people who cannot be able to defend themselves. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I believe the honourable member was present when this event was occurring; she was a witness to it.  

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, it was reported in the press, this was an article written by the same person. It was not like a case reported that he said it somewhere but he wrote himself and it was half a page in the New Vision newspaper, vehemently supporting the opposition.  

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would not like to delve so much into that but I am also wondering whether given the laws we have in this country on defilement, murder, et cetera it is quite out of the ordinary for a lawyer in this country to defend anybody until that person is proven guilty? I do not know; but I want to continue with my submission.  

I had said I wanted to say one final thing until hon. Ochieng got up and talked about repetitive defilement. Repetitive defilement is a common excuse you get when you go to the community, they say, “The man was freed because that was not the first time that that child was defiled; that child was defiled by so and so’s child and another one’s child and another. So, why do you arrest the third offender when there were the first four or five offenders who defiled the same child?” It should come out clearly that whether you are the first or fifth defiler, it is defilement.  

I want to thank the Attorney-General for the amendments to the Penal Code, which have revived our urge for the Domestic Relations Bill and the Sexual Offences Bill. However, we remain with a number of issues that we would like to be captured in law and be addressed by the laws of Uganda, which now cannot be brought in here. I can appreciate the argument of some people that we need to bring in the Domestic Relations Bill’s concerns and put them in the Penal Code. However, I would like to urge the Attorney-General to bring to this House both the Sexual Offences Bill and the Domestic Relations Bill because they will comprehensively address the concerns that cannot be handled in the Penal Code amendment. Thank you.

6.53
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  It is pleasing to sit in Parliament dealing with the amendment of the Penal Code and hearing the majority of our colleagues who have taken the Floor focusing on HIV/AIDS. HIV/AIDS remains a serious problem in our country and it is good that leaders continue to take that seriously. 

In contributing, therefore, to this debate I want to start with this aspect of HIV/AIDS. Hon. Attorney-General, this may earlier have passed my eye but when you look at page 2, (b)(iv), we have used both HIV and AIDS but I think what we want to mean here is HIV. The infecting agent is HIV and AIDS is the subsequent outcome. So we are talking about the infection but what we should stop is HIV.

Colleagues have asked a question, “How shall we know that this particular individual has HIV/AIDS?”  I think this is a good question and I do hope that as we finalise the law we shall expand on this section so that courts will be assisted. 

Many people either by going to the health workers or by suspicion of the symptoms they have, or having lost a partner who had the disease, do have fair knowledge that they have this problem. Many of them will react either by saying, “I will not die alone,” or they will really deliberately go out to infect other people to the extent that they will shift accommodation. They shift from let us say Kasese to another district and become sex workers or even behave in such a way that they eventually get married in the new communities. Even those who come out publicly and admit that they are having the problem - there are cases where even those outside their admission do have sex with people who are not aware of their status. 

So we will need to help the courts and require people to have tests where there is a suspicion. My line would be that where there is suspicion that a child has been defiled and we suspect that man “Y” who defiled this child has HIV/AIDS, they should be tested. Why should we talk about confidentiality when we are just spreading the problem more and more? (Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank my brother for giving way. Why do we not improve it like this: if you have raped, you automatically go for a test? Not that we have a suspicion but the moment you have raped and defiled we should give an automatic test to you so that we are safe.

DR KIYONGA: I would completely go with what hon. Kibanzanga has suggested. This will even make the process easier because we do not have to wait for suspicion. This is particularly more critical because when we look at the prevalence of the problem in our country, we still have the opportunity that incidences of the disease among younger people is much lower than in the older age group. So if these people are more protected, it gives us hope that this disease would come down with time. So I agree with what hon. Kibanzanga has said.  

Colleagues have talked about counselling - dealing with the psychology of the girl or boy who has been defiled. Perhaps the time has come for us to require that if a child has been defiled they, together with the offender, should not only be tested but be given treatment. In the current management of HIV/AIDS, if an individual thinks they have a contact, which is suspicious, then they should start on treatment. There is a chance of not getting infected. So this knowledge should be used in the interest of the younger people who are falling victim. 

Perhaps I would propose to colleagues that we should not only deal with HIV/AIDS but anybody who has a sexually transmitted disease and has defiled a child should also be brought in the net. People have Gonorrhoea and other diseases but they just continue with this problem. 

On the issue of compensation, I would support compensation as an additional punishment to imprisonment. Take a child who has been defiled and as a result has contracted HIV. The life of such a child is dramatically altered for life both physiologically and also their life expectancy is much shorter than if they had not been infected. 

So the provision for compensation would help to be able to lighten up the life of this child who has been defiled and in the process infected. This should be punitive so that it helps the victim and also sends a message to other people that when you go and defile a child, not only do you suffer a long sentence but you will also have to pay some money. So I think we should include this compensation as well, not as an alternative but as an additional punishment to the offender. Let me leave this area of HIV/AIDS but I am very happy that colleagues have given it adequate attention. 

Hon. Nalule needs to be supported in what she said so that it is not forgotten. She has made a very good argument for people living with disabilities and who become victims of the problem that we are discussing. I support her and I hope that as we finalise, our amendments will take this on as well.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, for avoidance of doubt I want to underscore this question of use of imitation instruments. We have on record people who have been robbed at sham roadblocks by people using toy guns and other instruments that by themselves perhaps would not kill but because the victim is not aware that this is a toy or a sham instrument he becomes helpless, his pockets are emptied and he is undressed and sometimes brutally beaten. So I welcome this inclusion that even if it were a toy gun, you would be treated like someone who actually had the actual instrument. 

I thank the Attorney-General and the chairperson of the committee for this very progressive legislation. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members –(Interruption)- yes, be very brief because we want to conclude the debate. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, sharing an aside here I had wanted hon. Kiyonga to make a point about the presence of counsellors or social workers in the proceedings when they are handling these victims. You need the presence of a counsellor even if it is in camera to handle those who are emotionally distressed. Professionals should be present to advise all the way in the process of rehabilitation as well as in handling the case in court.

7.03
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Allow me to thank the Attorney-General and the chairperson of the committee. I entirely agree with them on one of the key issues that have been prevailing in my district. You find that there are cases where teenage girls have been following up boys. They end up enjoying the game and afterwards you find that it is the boy being terrorized for that. So in this amendment it is good that both boys and girls are held responsible. I feel that boys also have a plight in this country.

Secondly, we need to have a timeframe of when evidence and proof should be brought. Madam Speaker, we have a district councillor in Iganga now who is behind bars. Parents connived with him and they gave him a 17-year old girl. They produced a child but after developing misunderstandings on the issue of provision of basic needs somewhere along the way, the parents of the girl turned around and they said he had defiled the girl and took him to court. As we talk, he is on remand in Iganga Prison. 

Madam Speaker, last month I visited Kirinya Prisons and out of the 634 inmates in Kirinya Maximum Prison Remand, 429 are on defilement charges. However, according to the interview we carried out most of them are charged on malicious grounds. Politics at times crosses to domestic issues. 

One time we had a case in Nakalama, one of my sub-counties, where one parent supported the current LC V chairman while another supported the one who failed to go through. Afterwards the parent whose candidate had lost said, “They have won you but I will show him”. That parent decided to send her daughter to the hut of the other one’s son. They forced the girl to enter that hut. The girl said, “To do what?” The parent answered, “Please, I am talking as your parent, could you enter?” All of a sudden the chairman LC I and police constables went with that parent and arrested the boy. He was taken on defilement charges and as we talk, investigations are still going on. 

However, if the evidence had been brought in time, this boy would be saved. That is why I think that we should have a timeframe of maybe three months to a year so that if somebody is innocent they can be released after a year. This boy is now suffering innocently. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

7.07
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Madam Speaker, I thank the committee. There is an observation the committee made that when it comes to defilement and one of the victims is say 17 years, they are to be handled by the Children’s Statute. Personally I oppose that because this is defilement and it is a grave offence. A boy of say 16 years who has defiled a girl of 17 or 18 years should be tried instead of taking him to a rehabilitation centre because we have instances where a boy of 15 defiles a girl of 16, and the boy is arrested. 

I am happy that this amendment has come because there have been complaints by boys that they are being victimised and the girls are going off scot-free. Indeed in my constituency there are parents who willingly induce young girls to go and enter the huts of boys, like hon. Muwuma has said, for purposes of getting some kind of fine. 

I would like to mention that let us make it an offence for somebody to bait like the case that hon. Muwuma has given. Whoever is seen to induce somebody maliciously should also be subjected to this law because we have had instances where parents and the community have ended up conniving and then saying, “Let us settle it out of court”. 

I would like to add concerning defilement that we should also outlaw any measures where people say that matters be settled out of court because we have had instances where a mother says, “Okay, give me Shs 20,000 or a goat”, and we end up losing this young girl who could have been very useful. Therefore, we should outlaw settling matters of defilement out of court especially where you have the local community getting involved in the same.

We talked about corporal punishment and I am wondering about this because I am a teacher by profession and I know that corporal punishment has some positive attributes because when we were being trained in the teaching profession psychologically they said that some punishments can have some positive attributes. So I am wondering whether this is going to include corporal punishments at school where somebody has done something wrong. That is just food for thought.

The other one is about -(Interruption)- -(Mrs Winifred Masiko rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You have some information? 

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I am not allowing any information because of time.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: It is good.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Masiko.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much for giving way. I do appreciate your concern about the corporal punishment, honourable member but I think you could have argued your case when they were making the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda because this is just in line with the constitutional provision.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the first cane is painful and the second cane is less painful than the first. By the time you get to a thousand the person is stationary and the body is taking it all in. The impact in the end is that the person is hardened and never cures. This is psychological information. Corporal punishment does not achieve results.

MS WONEKHA: Thank you honourable member for allowing my information. It is well known in this country that children have been beaten until they have become unconscious. They have also been beaten until they have sustained such injuries as to become disabled and I know that the honourable member has been in this Parliament when these reports have been in the media. Thank you.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I think Pandora’s box has been opened so I will leave it at that. The other issue is that we have had instances where defilement has occurred and either a parent or the boyfriend coaches a child. They say, “We know you are 17 years but say that you are 19”. We have had instances where a parent has gone to pursue the case only for the girl to be taken to court and she says, “For me I am 19”, simply because she wants to actually have a good time with this man. 

This is a problem that we have nationally and I think this one goes to our Minister of ICT. Let us have proper records to avoid cases of over declaring or under declaring one’s age -(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: There is a case in my village of a girl that has been causing problems similar to what hon. Mawuma is saying. She has been 18 years now for about ten years. (Laughter) This shows the gravity of the matter that the Minister of ICT should try and rectify.

MR MUWUMA: So Minister of ICT that is something that should be attended to. 

Madam Speaker, I appreciate the role played by the Attorney-General. As we are looking at the law on defilement BUT there is another scenario that we have really glossed over. We should also put in place a law that protects children and that has something to do with child sacrifice. This one should not be amalgamated with this kind of Penal Code amendment. Something must be done because we have had cases of child sacrifice and the Police have no law in place to enforce this. So I would like to urge the Attorney-General to let us have something done in as far as child sacrifice is concerned. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

7.14
MR TOSKIN JOHNSON BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Attorney-General and the chairperson of the committee for this Bill. 

I want to strengthen what the hon. Member for Bunya East has just put across concerning the issue of children or those below 18 years. Madam Speaker, the biggest problem that I actually witnessed in his constituency, in Mayuge District and Busoga in general is a lot of defilement taking place between youngsters. Young boys are defiling young girls and a lot of pregnancies have taken place within this age bracket. Therefore, it is important that as we amend this Penal Code we take stock of this issue. 

Many parents, as well as other people who want to defend boys who have defiled girls, have struggled to bring down the ages of the boys and quite often you find that even the Police admit additional statements just to bring down the age of the boy so that the case of defilement is nullified. This is a matter that I think is a national problem and should be taken care of here. I was not here at the time of presentation of the paper but I think this should be made very clear so that these cases of defilement amongst the young children can be sorted out.

The other matter that I am bit worried about is the definition of the sexual act. Here they say sexual act means, “Penetration of the virgin mouth or anus, however slight, of any person by a sexual organ or the use of any object or organ by a person on another person’s sexual organ”. My worry here is about our various cultures. In the constituency where I come from and amongst my people the Sabiny, I think honourable members are aware that there is female circumcision and during the time of preparation of the candidate for circumcision there are acts that come before that that involve a lot of foundling of the sexual organ using hands. Here it says, “…using any organ” and an organ here can be the hand or the finger. So I am –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I had initially wanted to give information until I saw the persistence in hon. Toskin. Let me revert to information and tell hon. Toskin that the Constitution of this Republic outlaws all those cultural practices that are not in conformity with the 1995 Constitution and in making these provisions in the Penal Code we are only upholding the provisions of our Constitution.  

I do not see how this Parliament can make an exception of female genital mutilation, a customary practice, which is repugnant in terms of the constitutional provisions that provide for equality and dignity of the Ugandan woman alongside the Ugandan man; I do not see how!  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, when I listened to the honourable member talking about the practice, I was worried and I would like to be recorded in this House, in the analysis of Uganda and history. I call upon hon. Toskin to join the crusade against the attack on women in that area of Uganda and in any other part of this country where this culture is practiced. It must come to an end soonest, because it is inhuman, it is against women and it is unfair even to men. (Applause)

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, we make laws in this country and we know very well that genital mutilation is a very bad thing. But at the same time, it is deeply rooted in the cultures and traditions of people. As we outlaw it here, how are we going to enforce it? In fact I was in Kapchorwa over the weekend - if you make this a law right now and you want to enforce it, you will have to arrest each and everyone in Kapchorwa, including Members of Parliaments. (Laughter)

MR BARTILLE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not think that in my statement I said that I supported female genital mutilation. I was only trying to draw some concern about the definition of sexual act. Actually, I am one of those who are on the forefront trying to bring down or to fight against this female genital mutilation. 

I am also surprised that Members are saying that female genital mutilation is outlawed. When was it? The practice is still going on. It went on last season; in 2006 over 2,000 females were circumcised in Kapchorwa District. Where was the law and who was arrested?  

I agree of course that the general feeling –(Interruptions)

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, we have the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and we were given a copy as we entered this Chamber and we swore by it; so we are under oath. That Constitution outlaws all repugnant cultures and practices that cause harm to any citizen of this country. Is it in order for a Member of Parliament to even start thinking of when genital mutilation was outlawed in this country, yet he was given that Constitution; is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not act in a way that continues to promote these repugnant customs. We should denounce them now and just get them out of the way. I know that a law is coming.    

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, if you read the definition of “sexual act” I find it a little bit vague. We need more clarification because after saying, “Sexual act means penetration of the vagina, mouth or anus, however slight, of any person by a sexual organ.” It goes ahead to say, “Or the use of any object or organ by a person on another person’s sexual organ.”  

Here it appears to the House that the issue of female genital mutilation is unacceptable but following this, you will find that it has a problem also with the circumcision of men.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Circumcision is not a sexual act.  

MR OCHIENG: But when you follow it, it says, “The use of any object or organ by a person on another person’s sexual organ.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the mover of the Bill.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I and the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee have agreed on an amendment, which we shall be moving at Committee Stage to protect the –(Interruptions)

MR ODONGA OTTO: With all due respect and to my voters of Aruu County, the clarification I want to seek is, irrespective of the amendments you are bringing, I do not know if the objects that hon. Ochieng has just read in the law would be able to qualify the use of condoms; because it may be having wider implications. I think condoms would fall in the exact definition of “any other object”. The Attorney-General should be aware that much as the amendment is coming, we should consider this concern, which I have just read because it may criminalise almost everyone including those who practice recommended health standards.  

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I think it would be important at this point in the debate that the Attorney-General assures us of that proposed amendment because I have got the impression that he was going to safeguard circumcision so that this House is not derailed, or lose out on the proposed gains that we want from that provision.

MR RUHINDI: Unfortunately, as I was leaving, my spectacles fell down but we have agreed - there are two components of that. The second part is really to emphasize the fact that it is the unlawful use of an object. We are going to insert in the expression, “unlawful”. Certainly, if circumcision is lawful, then it is fine. If a culture is lawful then it is fine. If it is prescribed or prohibited by the Constitution, then it is prohibited; but as long as something is lawful, it will be protected.  

MR BARTILLE: Madam Speaker, I really want the Attorney-General - I expected him to come out and quote to me the relevant section which specifically spells out the issue of female genital mutilation; this should be mentioned. Otherwise, we who have been fighting against this act will not support the law fully. Since we have those who are championing it here, we should work together and come out with a clearer law. As of now, the people who practice it do not see it as unlawful, they think it is lawful - a culture. And it is not only in the community where I come from; this is generally an African problem.  

This also would go with a practice, which I understand is in Buganda and in the West, of pulling the sexual organ of the girl. If you go by this definition then actually this is an offence -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the African hair is curly but styles have come and the hair is straightened. There are different styles of hair. When people have it longer than others there is no problem. It is only when you damage the skin and affect the head in the process of cutting hair that is a wrong practice. 

MR BARTILLE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for –(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way. Pulling is added value rather than destroying the whole thing. 

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I stand on a motion seeking this House to adjourn –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let me conclude my meeting.

MR BARTILLE: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I just want to inform the Minister that some want to have their hair elongated, some want to have it shaolin.  Apart from that, I would also like to comment on the issue of compensation of the victims. Our people have been taking on compensation other than taking the matter to court. Many times our people have persuaded the parents of the offenders to take compensation. I am happy that the amendment is talking about compensating the victim because the compensation actually has been going to the parents of the victims and the poor victim does not get anything at all. 

We still want to get something to cater for the disabled people. This worries me. There are disabled people who are defiled, made pregnant and left to suffer. You find them on the streets, some cannot even walk. They are actually severely crippled. However, people take advantage of them by defiling and making them pregnant. This should be considered in the aggravated defilement. I think this will come in during Committee Stage. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.34
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I have only two issues that I would like the Attorney-General to clarify. On abolishment of corporal punishment, we have done it in the Armed Forces. How is my brother going to handle these soldiers especially during training? Corporal punishment is part and parcel of the training so what do we do? (Dr Kiyonga rose_) Honourable minister, let me first finish.  

One of the effects of rape is being infected with HIV/AIDS and getting other diseases. There is also pregnancy as the honourable member already said. For instance, if my daughter were raped, I would not love to have a grandchild who is a result of rape. This child is going to be a constant reminder to my daughter that once she was raped. Attorney-General, what do we do? Why don’t we in special circumstances legalise abortion? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not debate abortion now. Let us stick to defilement.

MR KIBANZANGA: My third point - anyway, we are running away from the reality. 

Thirdly, about the deadly weapons, I have seen the mafia using not even toys but their hands. You just point these fingers behind someone and you tell them to surrender everything they have. The target will think it is a gun. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have had sufficient debate. Let us stop here and tomorrow the committee and the minister can respond, after which we go to the Committee Stage. I thank you for your patience. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.36 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 05 April 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)


