Wednesday 7th April, 1999.       

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair).

(The House was called to order).

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE INTO THE AFFAIRS OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, yesterday we went as far as item 3 on page 2 - that is resolution No. 3. Now, on Resolution No. 3, we have had two Motions for amendment. The first one was by the hon. Dick Nyai for the deletion of the entire item 3 and then we had a second resolution which was a motion by the hon. Okulo Epak.  That second amendment, we will pronounce ourselves on it.  Now, we move to the first amendment namely, the deletion of item No. 3.

MR. DICK NYAI (Ayivu County, Arua):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to refresh the memories of my Colleagues as to the reasons I adduced as to why Parliament should not make itself the organ to determine for His Excellency the President how to organise his Executive and it is in that light, Mr. Speaker, that it is only reasonable that we allow His Excellency his leverage and leeway and that this Parliament being very responsible, will be responsible for the things under our ambit and not other duties which are excessive to our responsibilities and I am praying, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. Members see this point and they will agree unanimously that this is not our matter, it is a matter for His Excellency and the Executive.  I thank you and that they will vote to delete it.

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, the Committee would like to accept the amendment of hon. Dick Nyai and hope that they will be able to follow this administratively with the Executive outside Parliament.

THE SPEAKER:  The Committee has no objection to the amendment. I put the question on the amendment - (Interjection).

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, if we are talking about No. 3, yesterday hon. Okulo Epak did move a motion and that motion was into two bits.  One that we delete and two, that after deleting, we substitute. Now, both were defeated by vote. Has this been brought back for reconsideration or are we not violating our - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, hon. Ongom, the procedure is that we start off with the furthest amendment, that is the amendment by hon. Okulo Epak. We have disposed of it.  We now come to the next one which is the first amendment and we deal with it.  That is the order. Hon. Dick Nyai has refreshed your memories and the chairperson of the Committee has no objection to the amendment. Now, I put the question.
             
	  (Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Now, it means that item 3 has been deleted. 
Resolution 4.

Item (4)
MRS. MPANGA:   Resolution 4, Mr. Speaker, the Committee met this morning and would like to add the following amendment.  Turn to page 3, third line after "abuse of office", insert the following words: "by political leaders and civil servants that led to financial loss."  If I can read the whole thing, it will read: "That Parliament deplores the manner in which the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries executed projects, especially the LSP and the Poverty Eradication (Seeds) Project and calls upon the Executive to follow up specific cases of abuse of office by political leaders and civil servants that led to financial loss mentioned in the report, with a view of prosecuting and/or recovering those monies from the persons responsible in accordance with Article 164 (2) of the Constitution." 

MR. NYAI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If we go backwards, in our earlier resolution yesterday, we agreed that Government undertakes further investigations into the Livestock Services Project and the Poverty Eradication (Seeds) Project.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that states the generality.  What I am now seeing in the amendment being brought by the Select Committee to that resolution is the particularity.   One would have assumed, Mr. Speaker, that when Government institutes further investigations, it is not purely for an academic exercise.  What guidance I am seeking from you, Mr. Speaker, is once the generality has been stated and resolved on, is it really necessary for this House to dot the "i"s and cross the "t"s, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dick Nyai, you may wish to assist me. Which is the general provision you are referring to?  The one that we have passed already?

MR. NYAI:  Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we passed it after moving resolution No. (1) from the main to the peroration and then in the same way, commanded His Excellency the President. Then the second resolution we passed yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was that this House resolves that Government undertakes further investigations which is the old (2) but duly amended by hon. Kaggwa, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Chairperson, I hope that you got the submission.  The submission is that, here in (4) you are particularising and yet you had given Government a blank check in (2) to carry out or undertake investigations.  In other words, do you still wish to retain (4)?

MRS. MPANGA:  We still wish to retain (4) because (2) was a promise of Government to further investigate but we would like to make sure that whatever the outcome, those people who may have led to this financial loss will definitely make it good by Article 164 (2) of the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER:  Now, that is an amendment moved by - is it seconded?

DR. NKUUHE:  I would like to second the amendment if it has not been seconded.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, I see no contributors. I will put the question on the amendment proposed by the chairperson.          
	
(Question put and agreed to)

Item (5)

MRS. MPANGA:  Item 5, hon. Speaker, there is no change. It stands as it is and the intention is that all officers of the Ministry who may have caused financial loss -  there are some who are already interdicted, there are a few others who are still working.  We hope it will be a thorough combing that all of them who are involved should follow the normal procedure of the Public Service to interdict them; investigate them and if found guilty,  be dismissed.  

	(Question put and agreed to)
Item (6)

MRS. MPANGA:  Resolution 6 is asking this Parliament to establish a standing Committee on agriculture just like we have a standing Committee on the Economy so that we can have a constant body of people looking and supervising the sector of agriculture and Animal Industry because that is where our mainstay in this country is.  90 per cent of the people of Uganda get their income from agriculture and agriculture related industries, yet the Committee on Economy is concentrating mainly on the industries and parastatals.  So, we are suggesting that we establish a standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and one of the jobs they will do first is to follow up the 55 projects which we did not look at.  

Mr. Speaker, when you gave us 90 days, we looked at all the 57 projects that there were.  We found that there were many things that were either wrong or needed encouragement or needed to be picked up. Some money has been left in Bank of Uganda untouched because nobody touched the project properly.  There are projects like KR 2, the Japanese grant, there is Agriculture Extension Project, there is Cotton sub-sector Development Programme, there is the Olweny Rice Scheme, Soroti Agricultural Implement Manufacturing Company and so on which need zeroing on, looking at and seeing how we can put them straight.  There is a lot of  work pending.  We would like this Standing Committee, when we form it, to look at it and we would like also to put a stress on the private sector in agriculture and in animal industry and also to periodically report to Parliament like all Standing Committees do.  The Committee very much hopes that Parliament will support us so that we do not leave this very important sector of our national life unsupervised.  Thank you.

MR. KITYO MUTEBI  (Mawokota South, Mpigi):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I support the chairman on the first part of Resolution 6 but I would like to add on an amendment whereby we  have a full commission of inquiry into the Ministry because the Livestock Services Project is just a tip of the iceberg and there are many other projects - very big projects like the Palm Oil Project worth US $33 which is being manned by the same man who was manning SWARP in Western Uganda and I do not know! It is up to those who come from Western Uganda to tell us what SWARP did for Western Uganda.  Now he is in charge of a very big project, the Palm Oil project. So, I wanted the resolution to read as follows: "That Parliament urgently considers establishing a Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to probe the performance of the remaining 55 projects to closely supervise the sector and ensure implementation of the resolution of Parliament and urge the Minister of Agriculture to establish a full Commission of Inquiry into the Ministry and be brought to Parliament." 

THE SPEAKER:  I hope you appreciate the two scenarios you are proposing.  The first one is, of course, what is already the resolution. What you are asking is that there must be a fully fledged commission of inquiry.  Commissions of inquiry are appointed under the Commission of Inquiry Act.  You want the Minister to go that far?  After these investigations, the probing which is being recommended and people to be prosecuted and so on, then you also want a commission of inquiry to go all the way?  Is that your desire? 

MR. KITYO MUTEBI:  Mr. Speaker, as I have said, what we have now, what Parliament has is just a mere tip of the iceberg.  I do not know what machinery we can use to know what exactly is happening in that Ministry because this Select Committee only probed the Livestock Services Project which was 24/= million but there are other projects which are even bigger than 24/= million where personally I suspect that there is misuse of funds.  I do not know what method we can use but that Ministry needs to be stripped naked and we see what is inside there.  
MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, what hon. Kityo is raising is his grave concern for non implementation of projects or otherwise well meant money invested.  Yesterday, the chairman informed us in her winding up remarks that since 1986, Government has spent or has sunk 700/= billion in the sector of Agriculture.  In comparison, people have got nothing and I believe, if this resolution is carried that the Standing Committee is there to look after Agriculture, it will probe those 55 other projects other than LSP and water and the seeds and bring to light what went wrong and also suggest the way forward.  I would think that there would be no need for a commission of inquiry, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence in this matter because I am holding our Rules of this Parliament.  On page 112, part 116 describes Standing Committees and Sessional Committees.  These were established and adopted by this House and according to Rule 117: "The Standing Committees shall be the following_ 
The Public Accounts Committee; Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline; The Business and Welfare Committee; Committee on the National Economy; The Committee on Appointments; The Committee on Government Assurances and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises."  

118 then designates Sessional Committees.  Now what I am getting worried about is, can we amend our Rules through a Select Committee on Agriculture's Resolution?  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, what is worrying me is the following; that in that Resolution alone, the Committee is saying that Sectoral Committees do not work, that it can only be Standing Committees which work.  

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, once the Standing Committees have investigated the 55 projects, what happens to it after that? I think, Mr. Speaker, let us amend our Rules of Procedure with the Regulations within the Rules of Procedure.  I thank you.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr. Speaker, I did not like to start this new portfolio by opposing some proposals but I thought we were going too far in breaching the rules which we made ourselves as a supplementary to which the hon. Member has submitted.  It also states in our Constitution, Article 90 that: (1) "Parliament shall appoint Standing Committees and other Committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions. (2) The following shall apply with respect to the composition and Committees of Parliament_"  And it goes on but it also states that this can only be done in the First Session of the Parliament.  As far as I understand this is 92(2).

MISS BABIHUGA:  Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister of Agriculture in order to misguide this House with what he is quoting when we are very well aware that during this Session of Parliament, we even had to reconstitute our Committees and it was definitely not within our First Sitting?  Is it in order for him to allude that this Parliament cannot change the composition of Committees?

THE SPEAKER:  The hon. Member who has just been on the Floor on a point of order, in your intervention from the order, I would like you to cite the provisions of the Constitution which you think are being misquoted.

MISS BABIHUGA:  Mr. Speaker, Article 90 of the Constitution of Uganda says: "Parliament shall appoint Standing Committees and other Committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its function." Period. It does not give a limit on when these Committees should be appointed and the restriction on a time frame is about the membership of the Committees.  Is it, therefore, in order for him to mislead this House?	

THE SPEAKER:  I think he is not in order to cite those provisions and go as far as saying that the provisions stipulate that the setting up of the Committees should be on the First Sitting of Parliament.  That is the Constitution.  You cite it.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr. Speaker, I was just trying to explain that (2)(a) reads that: "The Members of Standing Committees shall be elected from among Members of Parliament during the First Session of Parliament."  And as far as I am concerned, I thought we are not in the First Session.

THE SPEAKER: Read it again. It is referring to the Members of the Committees, not the setting up of the Committees, if you have read it correctly. That is my understanding.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: "The Members of the Standing Committees shall be elected from among Members of Parliament during the First Session of Parliament."  So, if you create a Committee as stipulated above, my understanding is that we have to get those Members in the First Session of that Parliament.  You must have envisaged in the First Session of the Parliament to have created those Standing Committees for which you have to elect the Members in the First Session.  That was my submission.  

I was also going further to say - because that had already gone anyway - I was saying that besides that, to create a standing Committee and then institute a commission of inquiry as proposed by hon. Kityo will demand so much from the departments in the Ministry because they will need more or less the same documents, more or less at the same time.  Also, this is costly. A Standing Committee and then a full time Commission I believe is very costly, plus the very fact that there is now political restructuring in the Ministry, it needs to be given a free hand to start afresh so that we collaborate with the Sessional Committee and we see how far we can go.  I was only trying to say that look, this setting up of a standing Committee and then a commission of inquiry will drain deep in the Budget of the Government.  

THE SPEAKER:  Now, I want to take you back because I was supposed to guide, clarify and some of you just fired.  Let me start from where the hon. Dick Nyai started, whether by this recommendation which is being proposed, we are amending our Rules of Procedure.  I think there is always a specific and a deliberate step to amend our Rules of Procedure.  We cannot, therefore, sit here and start amending Rules of Procedure but that is not to say that we cannot make a recommendation for such an amendment.  That is the clarification the hon. Dick Nyai was seeking and that is how I clarify it.  

Now, as to whether the Minister was in order to have cited the Constitution and gone as far as saying that according to the provision, there is no way you can set up or recommend the setting up of Standing Committees, I think the Minister would be out of order if he went as far as saying so because, again here, this House can make a recommendation that another Standing Committee be created but when that is to be created is a different matter and when the Members are to be elected, as he rightly points out - at the beginning of the first sitting - is also another matter but what we are talking about is a Standing Committee.  Should we have a Standing Committee for Agriculture?  I think that is clear.

MRS. MPANGA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that clarification. First of all, let me draw your attention to the fact that the nation is standing at a crisis.  90 percent of our people depend on the Ministry of Agriculture.  The amalgamation of Agriculture and Animal Industry is a result of a restructuring that has never come to this Parliament for observation and scrutiny. We are beginning to see that this amalgamation created a giant that is not producing results to us.  We have also observed, while we were investigating these two - I told you we only took two because we thought if we cover all, we shall be so superficial that you will not be able to get the direction, but we have detected that there are many difficulties in other projects that we did not go into.  

I would like to ask the new Minister of Agriculture, let us clean the house for you so that you start anew and we are trying to have a Standing Committee not only to look at the 55 projects, but to also remain standing to supervise the sector of Agriculture on which we live.  The poorest of the poor, that man and woman in the rural area or in the peri-urban depends on agriculture.  The richest also need agriculture for food security and existence.  Our economy largely depends on agriculture, but we have neglected it.  This is why we are urging this Parliament to consider it necessary to establish a new Standing Committee.  It will be a Standing as the Committee on Economy, it is not only for a short while.  The commission of inquiry, that is another amendment which, to me, if we have the Standing Committee and if it is established quickly, probably will not be necessary.  

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to get clarification from the Committee as to whether when we establish a Standing Committee on the Ministry of Agriculture, then we shall still also need a Sessional Committee for the same Ministry or will the same Standing Committee also do the work of a Sessional Committee?  Before I decide whether to support it or not, I would like to have this clarification.

THE SPEAKER:  I think, just in case there is another point of clarification, then the Chairperson will speak later.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am sorry to have taken long to come to the microphone.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Chairperson of the Committee.  What is wrong with continuing or with extending the life of the Select Committee to complete the work?  Let us have the Select Committee complete its work and later on, we can set up a serious commission of inquiry to look into the performance of the Ministry of Agriculture.  Right now we are splitting hairs trying to set up a Standing Committee in the middle of a probe.  We are just getting enmeshed in a different matter altogether.  We can extend the life of this Select Committee to complete the work. It is simpler.

DR. NKUUHE:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we had this recommendation, I think our main interest was to put a bit of order into the Ministry and to help.  I am glad we have a new team because we started with so many projects and reading through those many projects and also visiting the various communities and stake holders, we found a lot of things that were wrong.  So, our question is, how can we do this?  And then, do we extend the life of the probe?  Because we said, well, we cannot do that ourselves, that is up to Parliament but we thought, well, suppose we come to the end of this Session, does it not elapse?  You know, we did not get proper guidance. 
So, for a permanent solution because we thought the Ministry of Agriculture was so vital to the economy and to the life of this country that we should have something that provides some sort of continuity, because sessional Committees last from one year to another, and the Membership of those sessional Committees normally change so that they lose focus from time to time.  In fact, every time we go, we find Ministers complaining that we told you this last year, now why are you asking the same thing? This is because the people on those sessional Committees usually change.  So, we thought a permanent Standing Committee would be a way forward.  If we can find a way, as long as we find a solution, we would be very, very happy.  

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr. Speaker, it is my interest to ensure that a viable and cordial relationship which does not prevent working is established between my Ministry and the Sessional Committee on this sector.  It is in the interest of those in that Sessional Committee to continue with the work they have so far done and to remain in the same Sessional Committee.  It is also under our provisions that we can keep the same Sessional Committee to continue in another Session but also, I do not like, on behalf of Government, to pass something which we cannot implement because of legalities. 

As you can see on the Order Paper, Mr. Speaker, this is the Third Session of the Sixth Parliament.  Why do we create a Committee to wait for another Parliament to elect Members in their First Session unless we are willing to breach the Constitution?  The Standing Committees must be created at the beginning of the Session, and the Members can only be elected in the First Session.  This is what it says here and this is the Third Session.   So why do we go in for a Standing Committee on that sector which we cannot implement,  when there is a Sessional Committee which has already gone a long way and whose Members we can even retain, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  Now, hon. Members, I think we should not go on as if we are opening a general debate.  We have had three weeks of intensive debate, let us confine our contributions this time.  Should we or should we not have a Standing Committee?  Right.  Now, let me read out what a Standing Committee is supposed to do. According to our Rules of Procedure, the functions of - these are of course based on the provisions of the Constitution: 
"The functions of Standing Committees shall include the following_ 
(a)  to discuss and make recommendations on all Bills laid before      Parliament; 
(b)  to initiate any Bill within their respective areas of           competence; 
(c)  to assess and evaluate activities of Government and other       bodies.
(d)  to carry out relevant research in their respective fields;       and 
(e)  to report to Parliament on their functions." 

Now, Sessional Committees: These shall have the following functions:
(a) to examine and comment on policy matters affecting the          Ministries covered by them;
(b) to initiate or evaluate action programmes of those ministries      and to make appropriate recommendations on them;  
(c) to examine critically, Bills brought before the House before      they are debated.
(d) to examine critically, Government recurrent and capital         budget estimates and to make recommendations on them for the      general debate in the House;
(e) to monitor the performance of ministries; and
(f) to ensure Government compliance."
Now, it would appear that in this particular case, the relevant Sessional Committee maybe monitored the performance of the Ministry of Agriculture and detected some problems.  When these recommendations came to the House to be debated, this House agreed that, no, I think we need more probe.  Then what the Sessional Committee may have done in this process of monitoring, hence, the appointment of the Select Committee, the Select Committee has delved into details to come up with a detailed Report on the basis of which you are now pronouncing yourselves on recommendations made by the Select Committee.  Now, it is being proposed or recommended by the Select Committee that, just like the Committee on the Economy, Statutory Corporations and others, we also need a Standing Committee.  That Standing Committee is to do just what I have read with regards to Standing Committees.  

Other people are saying, no, let us not stop there, let us even set up a commission of inquiry and at the same time, you are adopting certain recommendations here that Government undertakes to do thorough investigations, and that those who are found wanting or guilty should be punished.  Now, we are ending up investigating that - I think we are getting lost. So, let us confine ourselves.  Do we, as recommended by the Select Committee, need a Standing Committee for Agriculture?  So, confine yourselves to that.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion for an amendment on item No.6 to read as follows: "That Parliament extends the life of the Select Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to completely probe on the performance of the remaining 55 projects."

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, I had asked for clarification which I have not yet been given and I thought that would help me to make up my mind whether to support this or not.  

MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Speaker, hon. Ongom asked whether it is necessary to have a Sessional Committee. The Select Committee is recommending a Standing Committee, not that the Sessional Committee should go away. The Sessional Committee will still carry on its work. The difference is that every year, membership of Sessional Committees change.  You float around and you will lose continuity.  If you have a Standing Committee, they build up an expertise that will easily help to iron out whatever comes out.  For example, I have always been in Social Services Committee, for the first time I am entering Agriculture.  I cannot compare myself to somebody who has been in Agriculture all the time.  So, we are asking, can we agree to form or establish the Standing Committee?  Its job will be like that of the Standing Committee on Economy to watch carefully and see the growth of that sector on which most of our people depend for the quality of life.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If that is the case that we have both the Standing Committee and a Sessional Committee on the same Ministry, Mr. Speaker, I will not support it because we are really over-loading that Ministry with inquiries.  I would also like to draw your attention to another recommendation of the Committee No.12 which says that  an Agricultural Commission be set up.  Now, that is another Commission in the Ministry that will probably be doing the same thing that Parliament can ask the Committee to do.  Let us not be taken away by some feelings that it is only Parliament that will do any proper inquiries.  Surely, if we have an Agricultural Commission, which I support, established, why can Parliament or somebody not ask them also to inquire in the same thing rather than overloading this Ministry with so many Committees and so many Commissions that the staff will be doing nothing but answering query after query?  So, Mr. Speaker, I will be reluctant to support the idea of a permanent Committee if we are also going to be having a Sessional Committee at the same time and also going to have an Agricultural Commission.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As far as I am concerned, there is no amendment to Item 6.  So, I will put the question that Parliament urgently considers establishing a Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to probe the performance of the remaining 55 projects, to closely supervise the sector and ensure implementation of Resolutions of Parliament.

(Question put and negatived)

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I may have been overtaken by events, but I wanted to move that we have another motion as a substitute for the one we have just defeated.

Item (7)

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, I have reservations on Item 7. I am not a veterinary officer, nor a cattle keeper, but we are told here that there is a problem of the Mad Cow Disease and that you cannot detect this disease from the semen.  My worry, Mr. Speaker, is that if you import this semen, we might be importing HIV of the cows.  So really, I want to be clarified whether semens do not carry the Mad Cow Disease before I support this item.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am not going to contradict the position of Government because I still belong to the Back Bench but I would like to give some scientific clarification.  Mr. Speaker, as many Members would know, semen that is used in insemination is as old as 15 to 20 years.  Semen is collected from bulls, frozen and kept in liquid nitrogen at more than -200 degrees centigrade.  Liquid nitrogen - if you deep your finger  in it, you will get out nothing; it will instantly burn it off but somehow semen is able to survive that.  Secondly, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the method that they go through to release semen on, especially the European and American markets, we should realise that you start with as many as 2,000 bulls and over the course of time, you end up using semen from only one bull out of 2,000.  The screening methods are very very rigorous. 

We also know, Sir, that if Mad Cow Disease could, by any remotest of imagination, be transmitted by semen, then we would already know for sure that the virus is transmissible  through semen and even in Europe, people would be taking necessary care to prevent bulls from Mad Cow Disease areas being used to inseminate cattle in free areas.  So, Sir, my contribution is that unless we have incontrovertible scientific proof that this virus is transmissible via semen and that two, semen that was collected more than 15 years ago is likely to be infected by the Mad Cow virus, I would strongly support the lifting of the ban on importation of semen.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. AJEANI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to add my voice from the scientific field to that one of Prof. Kagonyera.  Prof. Kagonyera correctly said that semen which is being used is either 15 to 20 years old but the Russians have proved that semen can comfortably be kept for 35 years - it is on record.  We are talking about the semen, we are talking about the virus and it is true as Prof. Kagonyera has said, unless there is scientific evidence that this virus can be carried and ride on the back of sperm and over, we may be speculating even dangerously beyond our capacity because the semen is so small, the virus is very small.  Small as the virus is, it could cut off the tail of the semen, the semen will not be worn at all because it is not fertilised.  So, I think instead of continuing with this ban of imported germ plasma from outside, we should concentrate on devising methods of screening the semen that we get from outside.  In other words, I submit and conquer with Prof. Kagonyera's view.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have got some scientific guidelines.  Do we still have to dwell on this?

HON. MEMBERS: No!

DR. KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to inform the House so that we do not have to labour too much on this that, already a decision has been taken to lift this ban selectively and already, Cabinet is approving that, I think, next week if possible and the ban is going to be lifted for semen to come in.  

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but until it is lifted, I think your recommendation stands.  So, I put the question that Government considers lifting the ban on semen importation. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Item (8)

MR. KARUHANGA: I wanted the Minister for Finance or the Prime Minister to clarify to me on No.8 where it says that the Ministry revitalises the project for seed multiplication and distribution down to sub-county level for the benefit of Ugandans.  I think earlier on it had been up to parish level.  Now, what I want to know is, there was something like 300 and above million shillings which was confiscated by Treasury and frozen because of the mismanagement of 1.6 billion shillings in the Ministry of Agriculture over these seeds.  I am standing to get clarification - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: From the Chairperson?

MR. KARUHANGA: No, Mr. Speaker. With your permission, the Chairperson cannot clarify this because it is about money having been frozen. Whether this money is frozen forever like the Kagonyera semen or it can be - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, you should make me understand your intervention so that I can help you on how to proceed.  I have just called in Item 8.  Now you are seeking clarification on what?  Can you make yourself clear?

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, there was money which was frozen.  I wanted to know whether -(Interruptions)

MR. WAMBEDE: Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Karuhanga to refer to the semen which we are discussing as "the Kagonyera semen" when Kagonyera's semen is used instantly?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order!

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I withdraw my statement and I cannot quarrel with doctors who eat their patients. The Prime Minister could help me to tell me where this money will now be available or it is frozen forever so that we can be able to know how to go on.

THE SPEAKER: Which money?  How does it relate to item 8?

DR. AJEANI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Is hon. Karuhanga in order to refer to animals scientists and veterinarians as "Doctors who eat their patients"? Is he in order? These are people performing honourable and reputable  professions and these are people who are respected in society.  Is it in order for hon. Karuhanga to stand up and call these people cannibals?  Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: He is not in order.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like you to assist me to find out if it is possible to get the money which was frozen by the Ministry of Finance for the seed project which was close to 360 million shillings; whether than money can be released while we look for more money.  I would like to know whether that money is frozen for ever or it can be released, and I would like the Prime Minister or whoever in government has this information to let me know.

THE  SPEAKER: First of all, hon. chairperson, if you are aware since you have ben investigating this matter, please can you respond.

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Chairman, hon. Karuhanga is right.  The Ministry was given 2 billion shillings but because they did not account for the first release, some money was frozen by the Ministry of Finance, it has not been disbursed to them.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification on item 8 because item 8 pre-supposes that there was a project for seed multiplication and yet the report of the Committee says that there was money availed to provide seeds up to sub county level.  If it is a project, could the Minister clarify as to how this project would operate based on the fact that 1.6 billion shillings was provided and the money did not multiply a single seed which was meant to reach sub-county, parish and up to village level?  I seek clarification.

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, there is that money that was frozen by Ministry of Finance because of lack of accountability but money from this project - there was a project written by the Ministry of Planning and what have you but when it came to implementation, it was wrong for the Ministry of Planning to implement a seed multiplication project, so it was passed on to the Ministry of Agriculture.  Ministry of Agriculture instead of spending all the money on the seed, that is beans and maize as it was intended, divided the money. Some went to passion fruit, some to silk worm, some to mangoes, and so on. Now, all that we are saying is that this was a very important project in poverty eradication. We would like the Ministry to revitalize this project and implement it down to the sub-county level as it was intended so that we can benefit from it.  It was going to go on for two years and after the eighth planting season, we had expected we would have good planting materials, high yielding seeds which would save us from poverty.  

MISS. BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to contribute on No.8 of the resolution, but before I do that, Mr. Speaker, let me use this opportunity to congratulate those who are moving on to the Front Bench, and welcome those who are joining us on the Back Bench.  Mr. Speaker, in particular, I welcome my newest neighbour here, very close to me, hon. Sam Kutesa -(Laughter). Mr. Speaker, our very active corner has been greatly enriched by his choice of seat here, we welcome him.  

Resolution Number 8, Mr. Speaker, the seed project is, for me personally, the most scandalizing part of the report and I find that in the whole resolution, I do see, for example, that part (4) states that Parliament deplores the manner in which the Ministry executed the livestock services project but I do not see any statement reflecting my anger and the anger of many Members of Parliament at the manner in which the seed project was handled.  I would have like to see No.8 also expressing the feeling of Parliament about the diversion of those funds to other activities other than the objectives of the emergency seed project.

DR.KASIRIVU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in our report we did state that we did not conclude investigations on this project.  For example, we did not highlight much on the bull scheme, on the bull stud, on the elite herd, all of these used money which was diverted from this project.  So, since we did not complete investigations, it was very hard for us to make serious recommendations on the seed project.  However, that is why the Committee says, since the intentions of this project were good, can the Government revitalize it as we go ahead with the investigations?  Thank you.

MISS. BYANYIMA:  I thank hon. Kasirivu for that information, and I appreciate it but I think the action of diverting money from that project which many of us had seen as a very good project, conceived and formulated in the Ministry of Planning meant to attack poverty at the grassroots by taking the high breed seeds right down to the lowest level and multiplying these seeds so that they are spread out through every Gombolola, was a novel and very developmental idea, we do not see in the report any strong or even in the responses any strong justification for diverting that money to the elite, the bull stud, or to wherever.  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, let me say this again.  We have spent three weeks on a general debate on this matter.  We have expressed ourselves, I think, in the best possible way we could.  I think let us now direct our energies and our attention to really approving these recommendations.  Otherwise, we will spend another -

MISS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I take your advice. So,  I would, therefore, propose that we amend it so that it reads that Parliament registers its disappointment at the diversion of funds meant for the emergency seed project to other purposes, and request the Ministry to identify resources to implement the project within the coming financial year.  Something like that or, Mr. Speaker, to that effect so that on the one hand, it registers our disappointment at the diversion - we are not saying that where it went it was not used well, but the initial objectives were not met so we register disappointment at that diversion, and then we also commit the Ministry to putting money aside in the next financial year so that that project is implemented so that our farmers do actually begin to get these seeds and begin to improve farming.  That is my proposal, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Is your amendment seconded?

MR. LOKWII:  Seconded, Mr. Speaker.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, I would like to clarify that once funds are frozen in circumstances where we are running a cash flow budget, they are not frozen like semen that they will remain there. They might be utilized elsewhere. But what is in this resolution is to urge the Government or the Ministry to revitalize this project up to sub-county level.  What is required of me or my Ministry, is to look into the possibilities when this is passed, and I will come back here and report or work closely with the sessional Committee to know to what extent we can be able to implement it up to this requirement.

Regarding the motion on the Floor, on Tuesday, probably the hon. Member missed it, there was a sitting during which the Right hon. Prime Minister read the response of the Government. The Parliament has expressed dissatisfaction to such an extent that the Government in its response promised that they are going to ask the Auditor General - that the Prime Minister is going to ask the Auditor General to audit this specific project.  So, what is I think required of us - (Interruption)

MR. PINTO: I seek clarification, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the new Minister for Agriculture has got tendencies, or is already exhibiting tendencies of misleading this House.  Now, I seek clarification, Mr. Speaker.  He has come with a statement that money frozen in Bank of Uganda is not like semen frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Now, if there was a project administered by the Bank of Uganda, and some money of that was released, some other money was kept frozen, does he want to imply that this money was used?  That is all he is saying, that money is not frozen and kept.  Could he tell this House whether he is speaking with knowledge that this money is no longer there?   Because, Mr. Speaker, Ministry of Agriculture has got many, many, many projects with question marks.  I will give one example, the Teso Commission: 

There was money that was meant to import some 3,000 cows. I believe only a portion of that was brought.  Some other money was frozen and if I understand him correctly, for so many years that money is still in the Bank of Uganda.  The only difference is, if the Dollar was worth 60 shillings, if they were to release that money, they would like to use the 60 shillings worth. I think this Committee and the House would want that, if the Teso Commission money was to be given, it is given in dollars.  Now, if the Minister wants to give us the impression that this balance no longer exists, then he is causing us to worry more.  Our understanding is, this money was released to Bank of Uganda.  The cash budget he is talking about is not a matter that Government goes to borrow money that is project funds kept there.  Otherwise, he is opening a whole new ball game.  Would the Minister please clarify because I am getting worried and maybe a few other questions - about ten - that I can put to him right now connect with money that we think is kept in reserve for projects, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, let us not waste time. There is an amendment on the Floor by hon. Winnie Byanyima. Let me read it. Correct me if it is not properly captured.  You are amending Resolution 8, and this is what we have captured:  "That Parliament registers its disappointment for the diversion of funds meant for the seed multiplication project and requests MAAIF to earmark some funds to revitalize the project in the next financial year."  That is the amendment.  

MR. KARUHANGA: I am informing the House, if it is not painful to you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I think really we are spending - this is not now a general debate. Is it to this particular item and amendment?  Okay give the information.

MR. KARUHANGA: I am very grateful to you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to inform hon. Byanyima that her efforts will not succeed because privatisation has already taken over the seed project from the Ministry of Agriculture and as we speak, and as the Committee was going on, the seed project is dead and it is not functioning and the people who were working there have no money; the consultant who was there has already left and there is no provision in the budget for that.

MR.KITYO: Mr. Speaker, personally, I am a seed grower under the seed multiplication scheme and early this season, I collected 60 tons from my constituency to plant, and I am sure many Members of Parliament have picked seeds from Kawanda to grow.  Is it in order for the hon. Member of Parliament to mislead this House that the seed project is dead when it is actually functioning? Its only problem is money.  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER:  Well, I am really in difficulties because I do not know who is right, who is wrong.  If indeed the seed project is very much alive and it is kicking except that it is starved somewhere by diversion of funds, then hon. Karuhanga is out of order.  Now -(Interjections)-  Hon. Members, there is an amendment on the Floor, let us not talk about the information, let us direct our minds to the amendment.  Now I will put the question on the amendment. 

I now put the question that Parliament registers its disappointment for diversion of funds meant for the seed multiplication project, and requests the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to earmark some funds to revitalize the project in the next financial year.

(Question put and agreed to)

Item (9)  
MRS. MPANGA:  Item 9, Mr. Speaker, we would like to change it. Cross out "and provide water for livestock in" because we deal with it in Resolution 10 that is coming.  It will now read: "That a special programme to restock Pallisa, Teso, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja and other northern  areas plus Luwero Triangle be put in place."  

Mr. Speaker, let me explain before they come in.  We crossed out "provide water for livestock"  because we are dealing with it in Resolution 10. We put in Pallisa because it has the same problem as Teso;  we put in other northern areas because they were there before plus Luwero Triangle.  We are talking about restocking of animals of livestock lost not only through cattle rustling - others were lost through cattle rustling, others were lost through diseases, others were lost through the war and we cannot see the difference because the important thing is that they need the livestock and they do not have it.  So we are asking for this to cover all those areas.

MR. GOBBA:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  I really do not know whether to support this or not.  Why am I saying this?  Mr. Speaker, people Lango as a whole used to be a cattle keepers and their cattle was rustled by many forces, and Government promised to restock Lango.  I remember in the President's manifesto, he went telling the Langi that if they voted him in as President, he was going to restock Lango.  Up to now, Mr. Speaker, Lango has not received even one animal.  I remember in 1990/1991 -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member, I think let me help you -(Interruption)

MR. GOBBA:  Please, protect me.

THE SPEAKER: I will help you, but I get the impression that you want to include Lango in this list -(Interjection)- it is already there.

MR. GOBBA: No, mine is different, Mr. Speaker, I am saying that it is now so many years since government promised Lango that it was going to restock the animals and up to now, nothing has been done.  Teso has been restocked - at least I know some animals were sent to Teso and I participated in keeping those animals.  I know recently Kitgum received more than 200 animals, Lango has received nothing.  So, in this case, I would like to say that I do not support this because it will tantamount to air supply to Lango - (Interruption)

DR. KASIRIVI ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to inform hon. Gobba that if he read today's Vision, some heifers donated by the President - 40 to be precise -  are in Dokolo county which is in Lango.

MR. GOBBA: Mr. Speaker, if we are to talk about -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, I want to repeat that the general debate is over; we are looking at these items. If you do not like it, say "I do not like it, it should be deleted".  If you like it, then you support it. If you want an amendment, then you propose and we proceed.

MR. GOBBA:  Mr. Speaker, I do not support this because this would mean air supply to Lango. We can even remove Lango.  I would like to respond to what my other College talked about that 40 heifers were sent to Lango recently. These heifers were actually sent to a group of people who participated in presidential campaigns.  Thank you very much.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I could see that there are some people who are not familiar with geography and the diverse production from Mbale District were smiling when they sought the Floor.  I am seeking, Sir, to amend the list set out there by adding Buramburi country of Mbale District and Kapchorwa District.  Those areas were heavily rustled by our neighbours and it is necessary that it is restocked. I know the Member from Katakwi is worried that if I do not say specifically who, he may also be considered to have rustled but I am not going into details.  The cattle were taken and plenty of cattle were taken.  The only thing is that we have a few guns so this year, they have not come to take a few more but we need to restock and, therefore, we would like to add Buramburi county of Mbale District and Kapchorwa District.

MR. GIRULI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to give further amendment to this resolution that reads as follows: "That a special programme to restock all areas affected by war, cattle rustling and any other disasters as shall be established by Government be set up because if -(Interjection)- yes! I am trying to support the amendment.  The reason is that, if you are going to just list places, you may find it may be very difficult.  For instance, you would not reach Pallisa if it is a war area or if it is a cattle rustling area without passing through the areas which has been mentioned by hon. Wapakhabulo.  You would not exclude areas like Kisoro whose cattle were eaten up by war mongers during the RPF and other wars.  So, I propose that Members support that amendment.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, in order to avoid listing all the areas we represent on this motion, let us think seriously about this most recent amendment so that we can proceed.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Mr. Speaker, my problem with that formulation  is that if we restock every area where there has been either war or cattle raids, it means that we shall have to try to restock the cattle raided from Matheniko county by the Bokora and the raiding from Pokot - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, surely I do not know why this thing is causing us this problem. Do you want to list all those areas?  If it is, just come up and say add this, add that and we proceed.

MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Speaker, while I will accept Burambuli county of Mbale and Kapchorwa, I would not like to accept the others.  When we brought the Entandikwa Programme, it was intended to rehabilitate Luwero Triangle but because in this same way it was spread all over the country, nobody has really felt the impact and Luwero Triangle has remained with its problem about 15 years after the war ended. It does not become a special programme if it covers the whole country. Let us take it that those who suffering more should receive a little bit more attention and after that, maybe others will also get attention. But, when you spread it all over, you are spoiling our resolution and you are spoiling the effect of what it would have meant to those areas.

THE SPEAKER: Now, this is an amendment on the Floor that on that list, we add Buramburi county of Mbale and Kapchorwa - (Interjection). It is an amendment I am just drawing your attention to. Was it supported?

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it was seconded.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know that in our African culture, most of our communities value cattle however few they have and whether a community or a particular family is rich or not will depend on the number of the animals.  For example, in Terego, if I have five animals, I am very rich and Mr. Speaker, as this country knows, for about 10 years this area of West Nile has been having war and my five cows have been looted.  Therefore, my suggestion and the further amendment I am making is to cover all these areas where cattle in whatever number was valued to be included.  And the  amendment reads as follows: "That a special programme to restock and provide water for livestock in north-western Uganda and northern-eastern Uganda be put in place." I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mpanga, the Member is proceeding to amend the original text of Resolution 9 but I thought you came in with some other. I would like hon. Obiga Kania to clarify this.  The Chairperson was talking of removing the water aspect from this because it is already reflected over the page.  Now, your amendment is referring to the water component. There may be a confusion over there.  

MRS. MPANGA: The water component will be dealt with in resolution 10. This is only restocking.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Speaker, I have no problem if the water element has been taken care of already, but my emphasis is on the restocking and providing for as many areas as has been affected in this sector and the question of numbers should not be the criteria used.  

THE SPEAKER: Is that amendment seconded?

AN HON. MEMBER: Seconded!

THE SPEAKER: Now, let us stick to this. Let us not come with many more amendments to reflect all the areas that we represent but let us look at the amendments on the Floor.  The first amendment was the one by the hon. Wapakhabulo that the county of Burambuli and Kapchorwa be added on the list.  But then there is an amendment which is of a general nature which will avoid listing.  Now, I would like that one to be read also so that you are aware of the various amendments so that we pronounce ourselves on.  Hon. Giruli, do you still maintain your amendment in the light of what hon. Obiga Kania is proposing?

MR. GIRULI: I think it reflects the same feeling of -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, which one of you is withdrawing?

MR. GIRULI:  I am not withdrawing I was just saying if hon. Obiga Kania's amendment supports mine in a way of including all areas that were affected by either war or cattle rustling, then I have no problem.

THE SPEAKER: Then you withdraw yours?

MR. GIRULI: I then do so -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Listen to him first.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Speaker, my amendment will read that "A special programme to restock livestock in north-west and norther-eastern Uganda be put in place"

THE SPEAKER: Alright, are you happy with that one?

MR. GIRULI: I think, Mr. Speaker, when we begin again mentioning north-east, Western and so forth, then we begin losing the trend of what the real argument is. The argument is that there are areas which were seriously affected by either war or by cattle rustling.

THE SPEAKER: All areas?

MR. GIRULI: All areas that were affected.

THE SPEAKER: Let me do this: I think the two of you can synchronize your amendment so that we shall have your amendment and the one of hon. Wapakhabulo - (Interjection) -  Now, when I am speaking, you do not stand up to say order, you do not want me to talk?  -(Interjection)-  No! I was still guiding and you call me to order!  Hon. Obiga Kania, I think your amendments are really close to each other, can you not synchronize?  Now, let us do this: While you are synchronizing, can we proceed to the next item because we are really losing time.  

MRS. MPANGA:  I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, I did not hear how  you finished number 9.  

THE SPEAKER: Number 9, those people who have moved the amendments are synchronizing their amendments so that we do not waste too much time - (Interruption) 

MRS. MPANGA:  So, we are have not finished it?

THE SPEAKER: We have not finished, we are proceeding to number 10. Number 10 moves as follows -(Interruption)

MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Speaker Number 10: "That construction of small -not "smaller".  Cross out "er" and at the end of it, add "especially in the cattle corridor".  So, number 10 will read:  "That construction of small valley dams and tanks spread throughout the country to reduce nomadism and control the spread of livestock disease be embarked on, especially in the cattle corridor." 

MR. EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to seek clarification from the Chairperson and a Member of Parliament from Karamoja. We were told that small valley dams were dug in Karamoja and all of them dried up, therefore to resolve that we have small valley dams along the cattle corridor loses meaning because those valley dams are supposed to serve during dry seasons and if they cannot serve during the dry seasons, then what is the use?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What clarification are you seeking. That this recommendation will serve no purpose?

MR. EKANYA: Yes, Mr. Speaker. The clarification is that, can the small valley dams serve in areas like Karamoja or Pallisa if they dry up during dry seasons?

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, we are not speaking about such small dams that will dry up immediately you have a dry season but we are saying, let us not go in for very big costly dams.  These will be small, maybe that is why we had used "smaller" before.  They will be small but they will be a size that contains water for a long time so that they can spread, maybe one in each Parish so that you do not have to walk long distances for water.  

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have always heard about this expression "special cattle corridor" but I have never understood what this area covers.  Can I be clarified today as to what is this cattle corridor in this country, where is it and where does it start and end?

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, the cattle corridor refers to that area where people raise cattle which is mostly dry.  It extends from Ntungamo, Bushenyi, Mbarara, parts of Masaka, Sembabule, Mubende, Kiboga, Luwero, Nakasongola, the whole of Lango, the whole of Teso, the whole of Karamoja and the Northern areas which are very dry of Acholi and also West Nile.  So, that is the cattle corridor.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, let us not waste too much time on this.  Really, we had a long general debate.  If you do not accept this resolution, say so. Either you change it by deletion, addition and so on. We are spending too much time.  

MISS. AKELLO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to propose an amendment to that which goes as follows:  "The construction of smaller dams and tanks and - that is the amendment, Sir -  the de-silting of existing valley dams be embarked upon throughout the country in order to reduce nomadism et cetera."

THE SPEAKER:  Seconded?  It is seconded.  I put the question on that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Item 11.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, I am proposing an amendment to Item 11 to add the following words between  "projects" and  "be" on the first line to read as follows: "That funds meant for projects in Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries where applicable be decentralised to districts for effective management and supervision of the projects as in accordance with the policy of decentralisation." 

THE SPEAKER:  Is the amendment seconded?  It is not seconded.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Can I read the amendment, Sir?

THE SPEAKER:  I will give you another opportunity.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, my amendment is meant to take into account projects -

THE SPEAKER:  Read it.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  It reads as follows: "That funds meant for projects - and after "projects", I am adding the following words - in Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, where applicable, be decentralised to districts for effective management and supervision of projects in accordance with the policy of decentralisation."  I am saying so because projects on, for instance fisheries - if in a given area fisheries does not apply naturally, a person will not go to that district.  So, funds will go to districts based on projects which are applicable in those districts.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Seconded?  It is seconded.  I put the question on hon. Okumu Ringa's amendment.

	(Question put and agreed to)

Item 12.

MISS. BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to oppose item 12, Mr. Speaker  - (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER:  She is speaking on Item 12,  not so?.

MISS. BYANYIMA:  That is what you called, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Correct.  He was wondering what we are talking about. 

MISS. BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am rising to oppose it because, Mr. Speaker, I have noticed in this country, ever since I came to the Constituent Assembly and now to Parliament, that every time there is a problem, we seem to find a solution in establishing yet another structure.  Now, we have reached a point where we have got so many structures that overlap and that are so costly to the tax payer and that end up spending more time fighting territorial battles than solving problems for grassroots people.  Mr. Speaker, we have set up independent commissions in the Constitution, they are there. I am not inclined to accept that Parliament also starts establishing more and more Commissions.  The problems in Agriculture should be resolved by reforming the Ministry of Agriculture by passing responsibilities to the districts and strengthening the monitoring and evaluation aspect at the centre.  I am completely opposed to another structure that will be a burden to the tax payer. There is enough burden.  So, I propose that we delete 12, Mr. Speaker.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Seconded?  It is seconded.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I stand to support the proposal of the Committee for I remember very well when we were in the Constituent Assembly, a motion was moved by a delegate, at that time hon. Kezimbira and he wanted to create an Agricultural Commission along the lines of the Health Commission, the Education Commission and at that time there was another Commission that  was - the Human Rights Commission  but there was a very heated debate that when we voted, the Commission on Agriculture lost.  Now, the matter has come up again and indeed it was in the Odoki recommendation. The matter has come up again and here we are now with some Members feeling that it should happen because it is creating more organs and all this.  But let us face it, this Committee - and I have had the chance to discuss this question with hon. Mpanga Joyce now leading the discussion and she convinced and she showed me the value of Commissions, especially when she was a Minister in the Ministry of Education, what these Commission actually help to achieve in these specialised sectors.  

To me, I find Agriculture is a backbone of our economy.  I find that sometimes and since 1986, we have had problems in that Ministry and it is possible that even now, by trying to create a Standing Committee of Parliament to monitor and not succeeding, there is something that is lacking in Agriculture that we probably might find in this Commission because I think here we are going to look for people who are specialised in this area. If we can find a Commission for Health and yet we have a Minister of Health and we have the whole team of doctors and all that and yet in the Constitution, we have that, why do we not create this Commission?   Why do we simply delete it so quickly that we are adding an extra - I think the matter should not just be dismissed offhand.  I would like to hear the Committee and the movers of this motion tell us why they moved but still, I would like to appeal to Members to give it more serious thought before we just dismiss it.  
MISS.KIYINGI NAMUSOKE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to oppose this motion - this No. 12.  Mr. Speaker, I would want to say that I support hon. Winnie Byanyima, that what normally comes out of these Commissions is structures and Pajeros to quarrel over, but there is never anything that is really constructive out of these Commissions. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the proposed resolution which says it is supposed to recommend to Government  ways and means of providing a balanced agricultural development and an equitable nationwide bra, bra  Mr. Speaker, this is the job of the Ministry of Agriculture.  If Ministry of Agriculture cannot do its job, then something should be done.  Fortunately, we have a very vibrant Parliament and these problems can be dealt with - (Interruption) 

MRS. MPANGA: I would like to inform the House as to what we mean in No. 12.  We are talking about an Agricultural Commission and we gave you the example of the Odoki Constitutional Commission, a kind of Commission that is not permanent.  

In the field of education, every ten years beginning with 1925, we had Ferostopes Commission; 1938 we had the Law Commission, 1952 we had the Debansen Commission. During Amin's time, we had a Kajubi Commission whose results never saw the light of the day and recently when NRM was in power, we set up a Kajubi Commission.  That Commission's purpose is to go round the country collecting ideas from people as to how they would like agriculture to grow.  

As we were going around the 20 districts, we found development was so uneven: Some districts have got DFIs, others do not have; some districts have got seed projects others do not have and we looked at the way we were doing modernisation of agriculture by the top Ministry of Agriculture descending down on to let us in Mubende call LC leaders and Councillors and telling them this is how we are going to organise in the hope that those ideas will sink down.  We thought -(Interruption) - why do you not let me clarify and then you can oppose knowing exactly what we wanted?  Then when we looked at the Constitution and saw in Article 172 (3) that the President can set up a Commission to do a specific job.  This would be a special task force, if you like, but once it is given the mandate, it will help us to find how we can balance development, how we can equitably develop agriculture and give us ideas on what the people themselves expect from this Ministry.  

THE SPEAKER:  I think what seems to emerge is that what the Committee is recommending is not a Statutory Commission or a Constitutional Commission. 

MISS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate what the chairperson is saying and the references that she has made, but then, normally when these Commissions are set up, whatever comes out does not seem to make an impact.  Moreover, for those provisions of those Commissions that the chairperson has quoted, whereas they may have had an impact, we are now in a different period where we are exercising decentralisation and, therefore, if the decentralisation system applies even in agriculture, we are bound to get better results, find out what district needs what, as she says, and all these needs can be taken care of without necessarily setting up a different structure.  We have seen the former Minister of Agriculture travelling from district to district but tell me, what is the result?  We do not need another structure.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OTAGE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I would like to make a clarification on this issue of the Commission.  At the moment, Uganda needs a focus in the agricultural sector and you cannot focus on the agricultural sector based on ad hoc policies.  I would like to draw the House's attention to the policy of land consolidation in Kenya in 1945 to determine the priorities and way forward for agricultural development in that country and I think you can see the difference in agricultural approach between Kenya and Uganda.  This is what we are looking at. 

Uganda is adopting a policy of modernisation and modernisation means you must have a focus, you must have priority, you must have a setting that will attract resources so that you can have, more or less, a ten year programme determined and I think that is what we need.  We cannot sing about modernisation of agriculture just because we are passing an annual budget and I think this will be far from it.  So, the intention of the Select Committee here is to put up a commission, not on a permanent basis but a commission to determine the priorities to determine the major policies which can be articulated by Government. And I think this will be a way of strengthening the policy of agricultural modernisation in this country and without it, we shall continue to practice subsistence agriculture in this country.  We must make a start and this start must be the setting up of an institution which will coordinate these policies.  We have to remember that the Constitution has provided for the setting up of a National Planning Authority.  That one is not in place yet.  Are we going to wait for the setting up of the National Planning Authority before we can modernise agriculture? I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr. Speaker, all what is being said is in good spirit to improve the agricultural sector, except that we  really have constitutional organs which have not been put in place and the hon. Member has put it correctly that the Planning Authority has not been put in place, the decentralisation process is also going on and now you want to create a Commission!  It was defeated during the CA simply because we thought, and we are still thinking, that if we have a planning authority, the National Planning Authority overall will definitely cater - (Interruption)

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thanks to the Minister for allowing me to seek this clarification. The Minister referred to the commission that was rejected in the Constituent Assembly which hon. Karuhanga also drew our attention to but what I want to know is, what you discussed in the Constituent Assembly, was it to do with this temporary commission or was it a permanent commission which you actually discussed and rejected?

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  The focus and the functions were to do the same, to focus on the sector, but we decided to have a National Planning Authority which will have a national focus on all these sectors.  Now, the process of establishing the National Planning Authority is at a very advanced stage. Next session, you will be here to discuss its details.  Why do we not allow that course to take place while at the same time we are using the Sessional Committee and examining this?   Why do we deplete the Parliament of its work?  The Sessional Committee is doing very well, it has unearthed all this and we are back on track. Why do we not use the Sessional Committees and other existing organs to focus on this sector?

MISS. BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It seems that some Members do not understand the point that we are making.  Mr. Speaker, if we recall, the hon. Minister of Agriculture - the previous one - did come to this House in her defence and spent a long time showing us that actually, steps have been taken to put in place a most appropriate policy to address the agricultural needs of this country. So, it is not the lack of knowledge of which direction we should be taking that has landed us in the problems that we are in. We know where we should be going. A good policy is in place. On top of that, Mr. Speaker, an extensive public reform exercise has just been taking place.  Again, many studies were made about how to streamline Government and put in place the necessary departments to address the problem of the day.  So, it is not as if we need yet another structure because we have just been through a process of putting in place the appropriate structures.  Thirdly, Mr. Speaker - (Interruption) - I am winding up.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, let us not get diverted.  I would like to hear what hon. Winnie says but we may be on false ground.  Really, if I asked you a question today about a policy that is so close to people's hearts, agriculture and food security, can anybody stand up here and say, yes, we have a policy on food security and it is here or is it in those good words that with our goodwill, we are supposed to have good policies?  My understanding is that we do not have any need, therefore, for  this kind of Commission.

MISS. BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Actually, I would not even debate whether or not there is a good policy in place.  I am not even an agricultural expert but I do know that the mandate of policy formulation is clearly within the Ministry.  We are not going to shift it to another structure, Mr. Speaker. That will not solve the problem.  
I want to wind up like this: We know that the problem that has been highlighted by the report is that of mismanagement, inadequate political supervision, corruption and embezzlement in the Public Service.  These are not problems that a new Commission will solve at all.  If anything, a new structure will compound them.  Why will it compound them?  Because it will try to speak like it has an authority with new solutions while the political supervisors in the Ministry will also be trying to impose their own solutions.  In other words, you are going to cause conflict because you are going to cause overlapping - (Interjection) -  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Tumwiine is persistent about informing me.

THE SPEAKER:  I thought you are winding up?

MISS. BYANYIMA:  Yes I am.

THE SPEAKER:  I think you wind up.

MISS BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am in your hands.

THE SPEAKER:  Wind up, you are protected.

MISS BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let us be honest with ourselves.  What is it that our people want at the grassroots?  It is a service.  Who is to provide it?  It is those nearest to them, the people in the local governments.  That is why we decentralised.  Now, for us we have continued to concentrate structures and resources at the top and not to empower the bottom and this is yet another attempt to concentrate resources - human and financial - at the top and to further marginalise the bottom.  

The national purse is not elastic beyond the point of elasticity.  It has a limit!  If you want that structure, you must take money from somewhere.  Where will that money come from?  It will come from where it should go at the bottom.  Putting up another structure is depriving the local governments the capacity to deliver to the farmer.  That action is meant to dis-empower the local governments from giving  service to the farmer.  

So, Mr. Speaker, for those reasons, I ask those who want a commission to focus on providing effective and capable leadership within the Ministry and within the local governments.  Let them talk about strengthening local government capacity, let them talk about strengthening the evaluation and monitoring and planning capacity in the Ministry of Agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that we delete number 12.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question that Item or Resolution Number 12 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  So, it means Item 12 is gone.  Item 13, this sounds straight forward.

MRS. MPANGA:  Item 13, Mr. Speaker, we leave it as it is up to the words "recovered with fine";  put in "a" between "with" and "fine"  then add another sentence:  "All other local consultants who caused financial loss in the Livestock Service Project and evaded tax should be dealt with in accordance with the law."  Mr. Speaker, the original Resolution Number 13 had focused on Mr. Jeremiah Fatokun who is not a Ugandan.

THE SPEAKER:  But you had just included others.

MRS. MPANGA:  No, we have not taken it out but we want to be able to cover all those local consultants. They are about three or four who are not covered in the Civil Service, they are not covered under resolutions (5) and (6).  They are not civil servants.  One is a financial controller, the others are doing other different bits.  So we would like to add them so that we also catch them.  "All other local consultants who caused financial loss in Livestock Service Project and evaded tax should be dealt with in accordance with the law."

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to get a clarification from the Chairperson.  The first sentence of that Resolution appears so conclusive.  If you read it, it says this gentleman who misled MAAIF and escalated the prices for the dams be prosecuted and all contracts which he has instituted nullified.  The clarification I am seeking from her or the Chairperson is, what if the legal experts who are going to execute this Resolution - because in executing this Resolution, our legal arm of Government will have to look at the legality of the contract, so, what if actually the blame for the contracts does not lie with this gentlemen, but elsewhere?  What will be the effect of this Resolution?  Will it not be an empty one which we will not be able to fulfil?

MRS. MPANGA:  Well, if the lawyers find they cannot execute him, they will not do so but the Select Committee found that this gentleman graduated as a Grade II teacher, obtained his School Certificate, did an MISSC in Agriculture, went to Netherlands for MISSC in Irrigation but he calls himself an engineer.  And he did not only design, select and decide who to pay and when to pay, he handled almost single handedly most of the decisions in this project.  In addition, he has not paid Pay-As-You Earn because he calls himself an international consultant whereas he was called by his friends to come and take it on.  And all that World Bank did was to say, if that is the one you want, we have no objection.  We hope that those who will look at it will be able to decide but we would not like him to go scot-free when our nationals who have caused loss have also paid for it.  When this man out of our money has built a big school in Mbarara from which he is going to draw a lot of money.  

THE SPEAKER:  I think I will put the question.  

MR. WANJUSI WASIEBA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think the way this Article is drafted is going to put this Government in trouble by paying a lot of money to this Mr. Fatokun.  The area which I wanted to advise the Chairperson to think about before we approve this is where the hon. Member had indicated that the engineer misled MAAIF and escalated prices.  Mr. Speaker, you can be two consultants, design a building and each consultant can come out with a different figure with the same area.  So, I do not want to be part and parcel of this House passing this Article which will bring problems to Government.  

Secondly, you cannot nullify the contracts including the dams which had been executed on the approved documents. Yesterday I came across some documents about the valuation of this project  and it confirms that in one way or the other, Central Tender Board was involved and if it was, it becomes a legal document.  So for me, Mr. Speaker, I still request the Chairperson of the Committee that she re-drafts this paragraph assisted by the lawyers because to me as a lay person, I would say that this matter should be referred to the right authority.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon.  Member let me help you.  I see the point you are trying to make.  You want to be a bit conscious. When you say that these contracts executed should be nullified or things like that, I think you want to take a conscious position.  Now, why can you not amend it straight away?

MR. WANJUSI WASIEBA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am not a lawyer, but I thought I should just give that guidance so that -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  You can say for example - it is not me - you can say the circumstances under which this gentleman is alleged to have misled the Ministry of Agriculture be investigated with a view to prosecuting him or with a view to reviewing the contracts and so on.

MR. WANJUSI WASIEBA:  Precisely, Mr. Speaker. Maybe I can attempt or somebody else could help me -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Obiga Kania seems to have a text for that.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that Resolution 13 be amended to read as follows: "That the Government re-examines the contracts which were made with Mr. Jeremiah with a view to nullifying those contracts where it was found he misled MAAIF and public funds paid to him therein be recovered."  That will be the first sentence.

THE SPEAKER:  Chairperson, have you captured that?

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  "with a view to nullifying the contracts where it is found that he misled MAAIF and/or escalated the prices for the dams."

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, you have not included the recovery of public funds.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  No, recovery is after you have examined the contracts. When you find that actually the gentleman misled Government and therefore he is at fault, then recovery will be a subsequent process for having examined them.

THE SPEAKER:  Have you captured it, Chairperson?

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, can I ask hon. Obiga Kania in his amendment to take care of the fact that he was doubly paid.  Like you are paid as a consultant, you are given night allowance whenever you go out, you are given a car and fuel.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, those are details.  The important thing is, the matter be reviewed, the contracts examined and if something is found guilty, appropriate action should be taken.

MRS. MPANGA:  Because I am sure this double payment will not be in the contract.  That is what I want to stress.

THE SPEAKER:  Now let us do this: Can hon. Obiga Kania and the Chairperson synchronise this Article including hon. Okumu Ringa?

MR. DICK NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The clarification I am seeking, Mr. Speaker, is, if those contracts have already expired, what are we going to nullify?

THE SPEAKER:   It is correct.  So can you look at that.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In view of this amendment, to me I think we are only looking at whether the contract was faulty and defrauding but my interest was to go further than that to look at the immigration status of this Fatokun because I believe he paraded himself as an expatriate but which is turning out that he deceived.  Now, should it be found out that he deceived, he was not qualified, I would move an amendment that even his immigration status be investigated and that he even be prosecuted for it.

THE SPEAKER:  No, I think we are really introducing too many things in what should be a straight forward inquiry into the status of this man and the circumstances under which he executed his contract, period.  I think let us get the Chairperson, hon. Obiga Kania, hon. Wambede and hon. Okumu to synchronise this simple matter and we proceed.  In the meantime, I propose that we move to the next item.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Let me read this one, Mr. Speaker. We are saying 13 could be simplified to read: "That Government examine the contracts with - I am abbreviating his name to J.O. - and take appropriate action where J.O. is found to be at fault."  Now, the appropriate action would include recovery but if you so wish, you can include the ordinary fine, the contracts, or even prosecution.

THE SPEAKER:  "...appropriate action including prosecution and recovery of any monies improperly paid to him."

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  We accept that.

MRS. MPANGA:  But in that amendment we should not forget the local consultants.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, it is just an amendment.  "All local consultants who caused financial loss to the Livestock Service Project and evaded tax shall be dealt with in accordance with the law."  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)
 
Item 14

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, in Resolution 14, we crossed out Permanent Secretary. At the time when we first made the Resolution, we did not know we shall have a new leadership, so we were putting the onus on the Permanent Secretary to make the changes but it should be that the Minister MAAIF makes a follow-up of the Livestock Service Project with a view to making it attain its original objectives and the rest of it as it stands.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded?  It is seconded.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Item 15.

MRS. MPANGA:  There are no changes in 15, it stands as it is.

THE SPEAKER:  "That the Attorney General reviews the contracts signed with Basangira Building Contractors (1977) Ltd and Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (Uganda) Ltd with a view to recovering the money fraudulently paid to them and prosecution of officials of the companies for possible offenses committed."  I now put the question.
 
(Question put and agreed to)

Item 16.

MRS. MPANGA: Item 16, Mr. Speaker, there is no change. It reads as it is.  This 4.169 billion shillings is money that the Ministry diverted from LSP and used for their other budgetary expenditure.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

	(Question put and agreed to)

Item 17.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I am proposing that you add the article "the" between "that" and "Executive."

THE SPEAKER: Is the amendment first of all seconded?  It is not seconded.  I now put the question that the Executive reports to the House action taken in respect of the above within two months of the adoption of the Report.  "In respect of the above", what is the above?  
MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Speaker, we are talking about all the Resolutions we have made, we are recommending to the Executive.  So, we can say Resolutions, then. "... in respect of the Resolutions above within two months of the adoption of the Report."

THE SPEAKER: Is the amendment seconded?  Can you read out the amendment because I see the Rt. hon. Prime Minister looking curious.

MRS. MPANGA: Resolution 17 will read: "That the Executive reports to the House action taken in respect of these Resolutions above within two months of the adoption of this Report".

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  One of the reasons why people do not implement things efficaciously is that we do not take into account the time frame required to carry out routine work in addition to vital assignments given to Government.  I would like to ask that in order to do our work properly, we be given three months - not two months.

MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Speaker, that is reasonable, we accept but I have another 18 that you do not have.  

THE SPEAKER: Read the amendment No.17 again.

MRS. MPANGA: No.17 will read: "That the Executive reports to the House, action taken in respect of these Resolutions above within three months of the adoption of this Report".

THE SPEAKER: I am still not comfortable, I think it is poorly drafted.  The idea of putting "these Resolutions" is to get rid of "the above".  Can you read it out again?

MRS. MPANGA: "That the Executive reports to the House action taken in respect of these Resolutions within three months of the adoption of this Report."

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

	(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, we deferred decision on Resolution 9.  I would like us to go there first.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Speaker, we harmonised our positions with hon. Wambi Kibaale and came up with the following wording: "That a special programme to restock areas affected by either wars and/or cattle rustling be put in place by Government".

THE SPEAKER: According to my copy here, you have missed the word, "livestock".  This is how mine reads: "That a special programme to restock livestock in all areas affected by either wars and/or cattle rustling be put in place by Government".  Are you not bothered about other disasters, you are limiting it to wars or cattle rustling?

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Speaker, we are open to any factor which can be brought but mine was more on the areas of wars and cattle rustling because of the nature of the debate which continues on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: I am proposing:  "That a special programme to restock livestock in all areas affected by wars, cattle rustling or other disasters be put in place by Government".  Is that okay?

MR. WAMBI KIBAALE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move the following amendment for Resolution 9: " That a special programme to restock livestock in all areas affected by wars, cattle rustling and other disasters be put in place by Government".  I beg to move.   

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR. OBIGA KANIA: It is seconded.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose an amendment to provide for a time factor to this Resolution because this is so open-ended. When will it be done?  In ten years time, five years time?  Can I give the amendment, Mr. Speaker?  I would like to add to that amendment to read: "...be provided in the next financial year to implement the programme".  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is that amendment seconded?

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE SPEAKER: It is not seconded, therefore, we go to the next one. 

MR. BAKU: Mr. Speaker, I wanted to improve on the amendment by hon. Wambi where there is a provision that a special programme to restock livestock - I would like to propose that livestock is already implied in restocking.  So, the word "livestock" should be deleted so that we restock the areas which are affected by those factors.

THE SPEAKER: So, you amendment is, we should delete "livestock", is that amendment supported?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: I put the question on that.

(Question put and agreed to)

MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Speaker, the last amendment, Resolution No.18 reads: "The life of the Select Committee on MAAIF be extended to probe into the performance of the remaining 55 projects in MAAIF.  

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?

AN HON. MEMBER: The motion is seconded.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the Chairperson.  My understanding is that the Select Committee is set for a specific function when you have spotted a problem which you want to investigate further.  But in this case, she is asking for a blanket extension to cover all the 55 projects.  That is the implication that I get from the Resolution that she is seeking Parliament to pass.  My view is that this is likely to affect the full operations within the Ministry.  Could she clarify to me whether there are some specific problem areas related to some particular projects?  Otherwise, I am very uncomfortable that we should give a blanket cheque to a Select Committee to take over the running of the Ministry and its projects.

MR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier on, we want to establish a viable working relationship with the Sessional Committee on this sector. When the circumstance has arisen where it is necessary to probe, we shall come and create that probe.  What we are looking for is how can we make the Sessional Committee survive; extent its life from this Session to the next Session. I was looking for a relevant part but I have not seen it.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the Minister that in our presentation of the Report of the Select Committee to the House, within our terms of reference, we were limited by time and we were not able to exhaustively probe into the critical areas namely, the Seed Project and the Bull Stud Project and related activities.  

It would have been the wish of the Select Committee to establish either a Standing Committee or a Commission to make this probe of which two proposals have not been adopted by the House.  Therefore, it would have been the wish of the Committee to conclusively probe these areas in order for the Committee to make the appropriate recommendations to the House, and the Committee will, in no way, take itself to be the Sessional Committee on Agriculture.  I thank you.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for that information but I want to state that the problem since we started this House, Sessional Committees have been working mainly focusing on the Budget when Ministers have presented Policy Statements.  It is high time Sessional Committees worked hand in hand with the Ministries throughout the whole year .  It is this which I am looking forward to with the Sessional Committee on my sector, but not to rest until I present my Policy Statement for Budget and then they start and then we delay, and then we find ourselves working on a postmortem basis as we have done in this financial year.  

I beg hon. Members to give me a free hand and I work with the Sessional Committee on a daily basis. Let us examine those specifics instead of looking at the whole spectrum.  If the Seed Project is the problem, why do we not start with that next week?  Why is the Sessional Committee going on leave?  We can still have them, I need them around.  So, the only thing I am begging is that we should use our provisions where we can have this Sessional Committee survive the lapse of the Session.  

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr. Speaker, I am also a bit uncomfortable  with extending the time of the Committee.  Mr. Speaker, to investigate 55 projects, we require skills and expertise which may not be readily available within the present Select Committee.  Maybe we shall have to set various Select Committees from time to time.  Mr. Speaker, to investigate 55 projects, it may take us, at the present speed, more than ten years.  So, I think the proposal actually should not pass.

THE SPEAKER: Now, let me read out to you our Rule of Procedure regarding Select Committees.  "The House may, at any time, upon a motion made after notice given, appoint a Select Committee to be nominated by the Speaker on the consideration of such matters as the House may refer to the Committee and to report any such matter to the House".  Now, this really means that first of all, there must be a notice, alright?  It is a very important thing for Parliament to undertake an investigation through a Select Committee.  That is why they are saying, when any Mover is about to move Parliament to take such a decision, then due notice is required, and then the select Committee is supposed to investigate a matter.  We are talking about - is it 50 something projects?   I am just explaining this to you.  We are talking  of  52 projects, and these projects have not been mentioned.  So, I would like you to take this into account when you are debating this issue.

MR. TOSKIN:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think the request of the Committee is actually hitting on the previous report. In the previous report, they had actually mentioned that they did not have enough time to look into some aspects of the projects.  And now, to me, that is already enough notice. The House has been notified that work has been done but not completed.  So, I think what they are now requesting in this amendment is that this Committee be given yet an extension of time so that they can handle - they may not handle all the 55 but I am sure they will pick out those areas which they found out to be problematic in the Ministry.  That is the clarification. I do not know  whether I am really within it.

MR. KITYO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise to oppose the 18th resolution because, I think the life of this select Committee has come to an end with this resolution we are about to pronounce ourselves on.  The Select Committee originated from the report which was made by the Sessional Committee on Agriculture which had found gross mistakes, gross mismanagement in the livestock service project.  Now, let us hand back the work to the Sessional Committee, it continues to do its job, and if it finds other projects which need strong attention of Parliament, they will come to Parliament and ask for another Select Committee.  I do not think we need an extension of the term of this Select Committee - (Interruption).

MISS. AKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Kityo for giving way.  I wanted to say sincerely from the bottom of my heart that while I appreciate the requirement that their term should be extended for another period of time, I think that what the Select Committee has done is to highlight for us the discrepancies within the Ministry of Agriculture which discrepancies we have now noted and the next job which should be done should be a follow-up by the relevant Committee of Parliament which should work hand in had with the Minister.  I think that it is only fair that we should give the new Minister the chance to prove to us that there can be a difference made by change.

MR. KITYO:  Thank you very much. You have enriched my argument.  Mr. Speaker, I am a member of the Agriculture Sessional Committee.  Why we have had a problem with the Ministry was because of the bad working relationship between the Committee and the Ministry which I do not think is going to exist with a new Minister. So, I think let us leave the Sessional Committee on Agriculture to complete its work.  I thank you.

MR. BAKU: Mr. Speaker, I also want to reiterate that a select Committee is set for a particular purpose and it must achieve that purpose and expire so that ordinary organs can take their course. It will be bad precedence for us to institute here in Parliament, select Committees which come with unfinished business, we debate for three weeks then they ask for more time to complete their business.  I think if a select Committee finds it necessary to extend its life, it must extend it before submitting a report to Parliament so that it is given a time to complete its work and we discuss a full report, not discussing a half-full report, and then extend the time and it discusses another half after having adopted resolutions like the ones we have already passed today.  So, I think they did a very good job, we should thank them and refer the matter back to the Sessional Committee.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Resolution 18 as introduced by the chairperson agreed to)

MR.KITYO:  Mr. Speaker, before we pronounce ourselves on these resolutions -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  We have already done so.

MR. KITYO:  But I thought we are to adopt the Resolutions!

THE SPEAKER:  Already it is finished.

MR. KITYO:  I thought we were going to proclaim ourselves -(Interruption)

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, that is what I was going to ask you, to adopt our report.

THE SPEAKER: In my opinion it adds very little but we can go through the motion.

MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Speaker, while thanking everybody for their participation and for the reception our report has had, I would like to move that Parliament adopts the report of the Select Committee on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and the resolutions as amended.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I would like to thank you for the time you have put in. It has been three whole weeks of hard debate but I think, considering the importance of agriculture to us as individuals as well as a country, the time spent is worth it.  I would like to urge you to continue with this spirit in the next days or years or months to come.  Thank you very much.  

I will, therefore, adjourn the House to tomorrow, Thursday at 2.00 O'Clock.  

(The House rose and adjourned to Thursday, 8th April, 1999, at 2.00 O'Clock)
