Tuesday, 5 April 2005

(Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you; I hope you had a good weekend. 

Honourable members, as you all know, we heard the sad news of the demise of His Holiness the Pope in Rome. I have received the following communication addressed to you as Parliament from the Apostolic Enunciate in Uganda, No.89005, and it reads as follows:

“The Apostolic Enunciate in Uganda presents its compliments to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and has the sad duty to inform of the death, on the evening of Saturday, 2nd April 2005, of His Holiness, Pope John Paul II. A book of condolences will be opened at the Apostolic Enunciate on Mbuya Hill on Tuesday, 5th April 2005 and Wednesday, 6th April 2005 from 10.00 to 15.00 hours. 

The Apostolic Enunciate informs also that the people of Kampala will celebrate a mass for the Late John Paul II in Lubaga Catholic Cathedral on Monday, 4th April 2005 at 16.30 hours. The Members of Parliament are cordially invited. 

The Apostolic Enunciate in Uganda availed itself of the opportunity to renew to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda the assurances of its highest consideration.”  

This communication is dated 3rd April 2005, signed by Christoph Pierre, Apostolic Enunciate. That is the message I have received from the Papal Nuncio.

2.34
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I apologise I have a bad flu, but please bear with me.  On Saturday night, I learnt of the passing on of His Holiness the Pope and immediately, as Minister of Foreign Affairs, I rang the Papal Nuncio to pass on my condolences. Immediately after, I also rang His Excellency, the President, to inform him about the passing on of His Holiness, Pope John Paul II.

The following day, His Excellency, the President, wrote his condolence letter and message through the Papal Nuncio to the Secretary of State at the Vatican. He also ordered the hoisting of the national flags in Uganda at half-mast until the end of the mourning period, and then subsequently rang the Cardinal to express his condolence about the passing on of His Holiness the Pope.

Yesterday, as honourable members may be aware, there was a requiem mass at Rubaga Cathedral conducted by the Papal Nuncio and other Bishops because the Cardinal had to leave for Rome to join his fellow Cardinals to make the programme of the burial of His Holiness the Pope, and eventually participate in the election of another Pope. 

His Excellency, the President, with the First Lady, the Vice-President and his wife, Rt. hon. Speaker, Second Deputy Prime Minister and many ministers and Members of Parliament did attend yesterday’s requiem mass. This showed solidarity, not only with the church here, but also internationally.  Tonight, His Excellency, the Vice President, is leading a delegation to go to Rome to attend the burial of His Holiness, Pope John Paul II.

Mr Speaker, it is no secret to anybody what a great man His Holiness, Pope John Paul II was. Not only was he a religious leader of immense qualities, but he was also, along with a few other people, a big fighter for social justice in his home country Poland, and indeed in the whole of Eastern Europe and for the rest of mankind. It is on record that his role in the changing of the course and the political landscape in Europe was eminent. 

The Pope, as you all know, has been espousing causes like those of the oppressed, of the young children, and all these are causes that have been dear to him, and he has indeed distinguished himself in espousing such causes.  

I would like to join honourable members here, the Government and the people of Uganda, in extending our condolences to His Eminence, Cardinal Wamala and the Papal Nuncio here in Uganda, and to the church in Uganda and indeed the Catholic Church worldwide, for the demise and departure of such a truly phenomenon Pope, and we all join them in mourning him.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.38
MS ANNETTE MUKABERA (Woman Representative, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance to move a motion without notice under Rule 40(b) to pay tribute to His Holiness the Pope.

Mr Speaker, a motion for a resolution of parliament to pay tribute to His Holiness Pope John Paul II.

WHEREAS Parliament notes with deep sorrow the untimely death demise of the late Pope John Paul II, which occurred on the 2nd day of April 2005;

AWARE that late John Paul II has been the spiritual head of the Roman Catholic Church and head of State of the Vatican for 26 years;

RECOGNIZING that late John Paul II, a great communicator reached out to the peoples of the world and those of Africa in particular promoting peace, freedom, justice, the right to self-determination and the equality for all races and religions;

FURTHER AWARE that the His Holiness Pope John Paul II on his pastoral visit to Uganda in 1993 reached out to the women of Uganda, not only recognizing their endeavours but also encouraging them to speak out on issues of concern; 

COGNISANT of the fact that through the Pontiff’s committed leadership, devotion to the youth, support for the disadvantaged and perseverance in the face of physical hardship, we all draw significant lessons both as individuals and members of the wider community,

NOW THEREFORE this Motion is moved that this House resolves as follows: 

That it collectively conveys its deep condolence to the entire Roman Catholic community, to Ugandans as well as the governments of the Vatican and Poland upon the loss of His Holiness Pope John Paul II.

That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and the contribution made by the late Pope John Paul the 2nd not only to the church but also in his capacity as a statesman, which services have positively impacted on international peace and good neighbourliness. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: okay, motion seconded; proceed to justify.

MS MUKABERA: His Holiness, Pope John Paul II, born as Karol Wojtyla in 1920, was a humble and determined, dedicated servant of God. His many attributes cannot be outlined here because it will take quite along time outlining them but the most significant was that he was a good listener and was not afraid to speak out for the truth. This is a lesson that most leaders, especially political leaders, should draw upon, especially when he stood out openly on issues that concern the Church during the UN General Assembly.  

He was an ambassador of peace and a champion of unity. This was seen clearly in the time when he did not differentiate between the peoples of all faiths. He visited synagogues, especially in his visit to Israel, he went to the mosques and he increased relationship especially, religious ties with the Greek Orthodox Church and the Anglican Church.  

He reached out to the needy and the disadvantaged and the marginalized groups. This is especially again seen in his support to women as we saw in 1993 during his visit to Uganda. He was a distinguished political leader, tolerant of all and accepted all in spite of the ideological background or religious beliefs.  

He condemned atrocities against humanity way back even as a young man in Poland during the time when the Germans committed atrocities against the Jews. He continued his support against atrocities throughout his travels and continued to speak against them at all forums.  

He preached forgiveness, letting it to be known that forgiveness was the central part of the Christian faith. This was again seen at a time when he forgave his would-be assassin and showed us that world leaders, should be gentle, kind, compassionate and forgiving, and should not let history form a part of hatred in our lives.  

In his final days, knowing that he was about to come to death and meet his Father, he refused to go to hospital showing the world that he was prepared to die and go to his Holy Father and be with him. This should serve as a lesson to all of us; to be prepared at all times, and this should be the moral lesson that we should always have as political leaders.  

His humble death also taught us important lessons especially following the current debate on the right to die in the world.  

His Holiness the Pope was a great man. He will be missed by everyone, not just the Roman Catholic Community, but the entire world, and we pray that when our time is over, we will all be in God’s glorious kingdom.  Thank you. (Applause)

2.45
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri):  Thank you very much Mr Speaker. Honourable members, the late Pope John Paul II was a leader who was against all human atrocities. He is the first Pope to visit Rwanda and he visited Rwanda at a time when there was genocide.  He is a Pope who visited Sudan when there were problems against humanity. He is the Pope who condemned all the acts of the Lords Resistance Army and Kony in Northern Uganda when he celebrated mass in Gulu. He reached out to the marginalized especially the children and the women, and that is why when he was in Uganda, in his preaching, he encouraged the women of Uganda to always speak up and speak out on issues that really concern them; that was so good. 

Honourable members and Mr Speaker, the role the late played in the fight against communism especially in Poland where the crumble began. We need also to recognize the meetings he held with the several leaders especially Fidel Castro, the President of Cuba. At this moment, I want also to thank Fidel Castro for having recognized the role played by the Pope by going to the Church to pray for his soul since the last time he was in church in 1957.

The Pope was a leader who brought unity in politics and in the social life. That is why, though a Head of the Roman Catholic Church, he was the first Pope to hold prayers in a mosque.  Mr Speaker, if we are all to talk all about the Pope, I know everybody knows much, but I think that is enough.

2.47
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand up to pay my homage to the late John Paul II, our Pope. I would like to thank the mover of the motion, and you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity accorded to Parliament to pay its respect to His Holiness. I would like also to thank the Government for the measures it took to reflect truly the feelings of this country about His Holiness, the Pope.

I stand to pay this tribute in particular because in this Parliament I am a very important Member of Parliament in relation to some of the activities that His Holiness executed in this country. I am the Member of Parliament for the two Catholic martyrs, who were beatified by His Holiness, Pope John Paul II; these are Blessed Gido Oyirwa and Blessed Daudi Okello, who were martyrs from Paimol in my constituency. 

That single act of recognizing these two Martyrs meant so much to the people of Gulu Archdiocese and the people of Uganda in general. For the people of Acholi, that single event lifted their spirit high above the difficulties that they faced and it made them accept the difficulties as the Martyrs who scarified their lives did. In this regard we the people of Gulu Archdiocese extend our deep appreciation to His Holiness, the Pope, for the great work he did in recognizing these two Martyrs.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, when His Holiness, the Pope, came to Uganda he recognized that this country had regions. He came not only to Kampala, he went to the West in Kasese, he went to the North in Gulu and he went to the East in Soroti.  In doing that, the Pope was telling all of us Ugandans that every part of this country counts and that is typical of his conviction that every person of God counts, and I hope that in the life of the Pope we shall carry this message.

Finally, Mr Speaker, somebody like His Holiness, Pope John Paul II, whose deeds are so enormous, is a person very difficult to speak about even at a time that he has passed on. Therefore I would to end by quoting one of the Priests, who provided background information about the Pope on CNN, this was a Priest who was apparently a very close intellectual associate of the Pope. When they asked him about his final reflection about the death of the Pope, he said, “The Holy Father lived a good life and fought a good fight, and therefore in his going he had accomplished his mission”. We ask the Almighty God to receive him and that while he is there; he continues to intercede for all of us. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.52
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I too would like to thank the hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs, and through him, His Excellency, the President, for everything that he has said and done at this time when the world has lost a very charismatic leader.  I would also like to thank the mover of the motion.

Mr Speaker, His Holiness, Pope John Paul II, was a very special Pope in the history of the church. For example, he is the only Pope who has travelled more widely in the world than any other Pope. His legacy will cut across so many sectors of life; his legacy will be borne directly on the women, the elderly, the other faiths who do not profess the catholic faith because he has been a leader to everybody. When he came here, for example, he had a meeting with the youth, and I remember the statement he made when he said, with the youth, he was also feeling very young.

Mr Speaker, as we mourn His Holiness, Pope John Paul II, I think we should also reflect on his very charismatic leadership, especially his example of tolerance; tolerance which cut across all beliefs; tolerance which cut across all sectors of life. I think this is one thing that he leaves for us in Uganda, especially at this time when we are going through the transition period to multiparty politics. I think we should learn from His Holiness, Pope John Paul II, to be tolerant of each other’s views and each other’s convictions. I think this is a message, which is directed to Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the Pope was very forgiving, he even forgave the person who almost assassinated him, I think we should learn a lot from that. I have been watching the proceedings on television and the whole world is sorry for the demise of the Pope.  But for all humanity, I think it is not so much that the Pope has left us because we know his departure is not for a loss. We should pray more for his replacement because the Pope has played his role in the 20th and 21st century.  He has stood for the challenges of the 20th and 21st century, we need another Pope who will meet the challenges that are still ahead in the church and in the world. And for that, Mr Speaker, we need everybody’s prayers so that the Cardinals who are in Rome elect somebody who is going to fit in the footsteps of His Holiness, Pope John Paul II.  I thank you. 

2.57
MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to all the Members who talked and paid their tribute to thank His Excellency the President through the Minister of Foreign Affairs for Uganda having recognized the good work done by His Holiness the Pope.  

Hon. Jane Akwero and I happened to represent Uganda in Rome in October 2004 in the Children’s Forum and we had the honour and the privilege to meet the Pope as Members of Parliament because of his good work for the children, especially, traumatized children. While I saw in Rome, I saw that he was a very, very respected; he was very much loved and he was very influential. Despite his weaknesses, he was able to speak to a forum of Members of Parliament from all over the world.  

I would also like to pay tribute to His Holiness the Pope because he declared 2002 the year of the family. I am remembering him for this because of the Domestic Relations Bill that is going to kind of displace his prayers for the families. So we should remember him that he declared the year of the family –(Interjections)- Protect me, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Mr Speaker, His Holiness the Pope was very human and very humble. He is the only Pope who apologized for the sins that were committed by the Christian church in the early centuries. I want also to pay tribute to him because he had very high moral values and till his death, he rejected the gay marriages. With those few words, I want to thank you.

2.59
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr speaker. On behalf of the people of Lubaga South I rise to pay tribute to the Late Pope John Paul II. I was very privileged yesterday to have attended the historic service witnessed by His Excellency the President of Uganda and for the first time I was impressed by the Speech His Excellency gave. (Laughter)

His Excellency, the President praised the Pope’s commitment social justice and human freedom and he said the Pope was a fighter for freedom; and he related the zeal of fighting for freedom with his own’s protracted struggle in the bush. I do not know whether there was real uniformity in the two struggles, because the Pope has never used a gun to fight for freedom.  

However, Mr Speaker, the death of a Pope is the concern of everybody today in the world. Tony Blair had to postpone his meeting with the Queen to make sure that he attended service at the Cathedral Westminster. I would like to propose, Mr Speaker, that the death of the Pope having concerned all leaders in the world regardless religion and politics is a challenge to the entire human race in the world and to Uganda. Ugandans should emulate that commonality the globe has developed to remember the Pope. We should all come together and build one nation capable of sustaining the vestitudes of challenge and I do not see any reason why we cannot do so.  

Mr Speaker, some of the most celebrated writers about death namely William Shakespeare and John Milton refer to death as a glorious occurrence.  It is difficult to understand what is glorious about death, but Shakespeare says, “There is endless joy after death”. John Milton says, “The principle one holds on earth is what determines one’s fate after death.” 

I tend to be enticed by John Milton’s contention.  The principle you stand for while you live will have a bearing on what providence will say when you die. So it is good to check yourself when you are still living, because that principle will determine what your life will look like after death.

I was privileged to have been present when Uganda was receiving the Pope in 1993 at Lubaga. I was not yet a Member of Parliament at that time, but I was very close to the establishment, which received the Pope, and I saw in him a man who was committed - 1992 –[Hon. Members: “It was 1993”.]- 1993. Mr Speaker, when the Pope walked out of the car which brought him at Lubaga, I was privileged to have listened to the words of wisdom he gave. In him, I saw a man who is talented in communication, he had the art to communicate to the world, to excite and bring value in what he said. In him I saw a fearless man, he was able to visit Rwanda, the Sudan and Gulu yet at that time things were not all that good in Gulu; the war was still on, Teso had some insurgence, but he dared to visit Gulu and Teso area because he knew that his presence in Gulu could probably add value to the struggle of the people of Uganda to ensure peace.  

The Pope was also committed to dialogue. From what happened during the war in Iraq and related global wars in the Soviet Empire, without the Pope’s contribution, some of these wars would have already dis-integrated the globe. But his words of wisdom reformed the fighters, reformed the war dealers, reformed the leaders and I am glad, Mr Speaker, that the world is remembering that contribution.  

The Pope was also committed to a good family in the world. He knew that no one would meaningfully talk about unity of a nation without addressing the family. He was committed to the morals that bring up the family and the children. He was committed to the sick, the children, the youth; above all the Pope was committed to good democratic government. He never minced words about competitive government in any part of the world; he never minced his words about the need for people to decide what they want, including the resolve to decide whether they wanted a federal system of government.  (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I happen to be a Member of Parliament hailing from the Kingdom of Buganda.  Let me pay tribute to the Pope.  The Pope found time during his visit to Uganda to meet His Majesty, the Kabaka of Buganda, and I am using this opportunity on behalf of the kingdom to pay tribute. (Laughter).  Mr Speaker, in the same vein, His Holiness, the Pope, gave a special invitation to His Majesty, the Kabaka, in 1994. I would like to pay tribute to the Pope because he admired the way Ugandans lived. He respected diverse cultures, and in one of his speeches he said he has travelled in so many parts of Africa, nowhere did he see that rich flow of the mosaic of cultures; perhaps he found nowhere else in the continent, save for Uganda.

Finally, Mr Speaker, the Pope, without prejudice, was a man of vision, a man of character, a man of conviction and a man of joy.  God bless him.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have very little time, so curtail your contributions.

3.09
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to speak from a point of celebrating the life and activities of the Holy Father, and in celebrating his actions I am very sure that his legacy lives with us here today.  

I was part of the Parliamentary delegation that made the pilgrimage in the Jubilee year to Rome to attend the meetings of Parliamentarians and Statesmen from all over the world. I do recall that, that international assembly of Parliamentarians and Senators, the Pope only had one thing to share, and he shared with us a Saint, St. Thomas Moore, who was made Patron Saint of politicians and Statesmen, and for me that is the legacy of the Holy Father to we leaders of the world; that we should not forget his message and his pray, which will live with us to provide leadership, to provide the public good, to provide a shared hope of a better future for humanity.

As Members of Parliament and as Members of the Catholic Chaplaincy, we have worked all along to make sure that we bring God into the House; and more often than not, we have been told that, “Oh, you know, religion is not part of politics,” and so at times it surprises me why at this point world leaders would choose to pay tribute to a religious man when they so much do not want to hear about religion. We are also always reminded that we should separate the State from the Church. I think the tribute we pay to the Pope today is only a reminder that we cannot separate the two, and that nobody should make any mistake of trying to separate the two, because the two work together for humanity.  

So, as we pay tribute to the Holy Father, let us keep the light shining in the world, let us keep the light shining in our Parliaments and in our hearts, in all the words we say, and in our conscience.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the theme of the Jubilee year, in which we were celebrating another millennium, based on the life of Jesus Christ. I think it should keep us reminded of the message that the Pope brought in his visit to Uganda, about the strength of women. All of you who were reminded about his visit on WBS this Sunday, he recognized in us Ugandan Women the strength, and I would like that recognition to live with us all women of Uganda as we offer leadership in this country.

Mr Speaker, I want to call on my colleagues as we pay tribute to the Holy Father, that we should truly be statesmen and stateswomen as a living legacy of His Holiness, Pope John Paul II.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.14
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, the life of a dead person touches each and every one of us in many ways. When your father dies, or your mother or a child of yours dies, or a colleague or friend, all of them have different levels of touching you. But, Mr Speaker, when a world leader of the stature of a Pope dies, that one again has its level.  But for us the people of Uganda, Mr Speaker, the death of a Pope like Pope John Paul II, touches us immensely because; one, he visited Uganda and he interacted with us, the present political leaders and the present religious leaders.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the life of John Paul II touches me personally because when he visited Uganda in 1993 and came to Gulu; I shared with him the eucharistic celebration.  I shook hands with him and I have a photograph, which was taken with him and I do keep that photograph which I treasure.  So, as I speak now the life of the Pope is of great immense importance to me but I would not labor to go into this line of argument and of appreciation.  But, I think the life of the Pope is important to the people of Uganda and the world in one important aspect; that the Pope treasured the sanctity of life. 

Mr Speaker, I want this Pope who has died to be remembered in many ways, but I summarize it in the sense that he treasured the sanctity of life.  When we talk of the sanctity of life, it is a broad topic, but to us political leaders it means we must respect the life of each and every one of us as a creation of God. Therefore, all other aspects of freedom, which we are talking of; the democratic governance, the freedom to life, non-violence, the Pope’s opposition to abortion and gay marriages, all emerge from this great belief and admiration and defence of the sanctity of life.  

Mr Speaker, let me quote very brief as I get to the end of my remarks, the words of wisdom of the Pope when he addressed the Catholic Bishops on 27th September 2003. I think this is really the message, which the Pope gave to the people of Uganda through the Catholic Bishops. He said: 
“This is the time for Catholics together with other Christians to bring the freshness of the gospel to the struggle of defending and promoting the fundamental values upon which a society truly worthy of human kind is build.” 

I also remember this Pope for reaching out to other religions. In fact, when the Pope met all the religious leaders of the world in Rome he said, true religion is a religion of love and non-violence. I think whatever religion you believe, whether it is Hinduism, Anglican, Islam, whatever it is, it must be a religion of love and of non-violence and to protect the sanctity of life.  

May the soul of this great Pope whose life, whose rule for 26 years has affected the lives of half the present generation of the world, may his life shine and be a perpetual reminder to all the leaders, that when you are a leader like Pope John Paul II, you have the fundamental responsibility of protecting the sanctity of Life. Thank you Mr Speaker. 

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe North Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Moslem Parliamentary Caucus of which I am the Imam, and on behalf of the people of Kawempe North Constituency and on my behalf, I rise to pay tribute to our Father the late Pope John Paul II.

Mr Speaker, death has robbed us of a very important person. Pope John Paul II has not been only important to the catholic community, but has been someone who has no equal, someone who has come out broadly to bridge the gap, especially creating harmony in our various religious denominations.  

Mr Speaker, the harmonious relationship that exists between the Moslems and the Catholics is greatly attributed to the input of the late Pope John Paul II. Mr Speaker, we believe that he has played his role and the only way how we could be very grateful to what the Pope has done to this world is to borrow a leaf from whatever he has been doing. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday you attended the mass and in the message delivered by the Papal Nuncio he told us to open up the doors of our houses including Parliament. He told us, “Open the doors to your Parliaments” and I am glad that the doors are now wide open; we are discussing this. We are paying tribute to the late John Paul. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, we believe that the demise of the Pope will not be a hindrance towards doing what is right.  We know the Almighty God is still around and in as far as his love is concerned we say “Ina lilahi wa ina ilaihi rajiuni”, meaning from God we come and to Him we shall all go back. Death is not the end of our life, but it only opens doors for another life.  May the late John Paul rest in peace. 

3.24
MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to pay tribute to our great Father, Pope John Paul II. 

Mr Speaker Pope John Paul the second was a very inspiring and very dedicated person. I first had an encounter with Pope John Paul II when he came to Uganda in 1993.  At the time I was a student in senior six, so I was one of those youth that came to meet the Pope at Nakivubo Stadium. I found him a very loving person, a person of great humility and very ready to reach out to everyone. 

Mr Speaker, maybe as other speakers have already said, that could explain the reason why he was highly travelled, and it reminds me when I was at university. I remember one Lecturer told us that when you go into a home, you can tell whether it is peaceful or not. You don’t have to find there the father or the mother or the children; even if you found goats or chicken, you would tell that the home is peaceful.  I did not spend a long time with the Pope, but I could tell that he was a very peace loving person. 

Mr Speaker, the second encounter was recently in 2003. I was one of the Ugandans that went for the beatification of the Uganda Martyrs from Acholi region, Gido Oyirwa and Daudi Okello. Of course he was a very old man at the time. He came in his carrier towards the Altar, but he had to come out of his carrier and walk towards the Altar, and he was kind of bent, which was portraying how old he was. 



What comes to my mind and what I vividly remember, Mr Speaker, is the dedication he had to serve his people. If you have all been watching what has been happening on television, you could see that even in the last hours of his death he still had a very big heart to serve his people with all the dedication. I think as leaders we have a lot to learn from this great man; that once we have been given the opportunity to do any work, we should do it wholeheartedly. As a person who was very prayerful, we should always trust in God so that whatever we do is according to his will. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We agreed that maybe we conclude at a quarter to 4.00 p.m. So we have about 15 minutes.

3.28
PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE (Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to be on record in honour of this great human being, Pope John Paul II.  Mr Speaker, when a person dies it reminds those alive that they will also die.  Very often we admire the actions of the dead, but then at the same time we tend to ask ourselves, if he has done good things, can I do as well?  Thirdly we ask ourselves, where do they go when they die?  Where will I go when I die?  I have therefore, for this occasion, derived three points from the life of His Holiness, the Pope. 

One, that goodness has no religion, goodness has no culture, it has no race, and in our context it has no ethnicity. Goodness has an objective co-relative, goodness is universal; and that goodness is inbuilt in humanity. The difference between ourselves and other animals, although sometimes we are seen the lesser animals showing more goodness than human beings, is that we can tell a difference of goodness from badness.

The second point, Mr Speaker, is that Pope John Paul II, has been a unifier, which is not a surprise in many ways, because he leads a Church, which is supposed to be the original Church in the history of Christianity. So, the catholicity of the Church is what he represented. But of course this does not mean that there have not been other religions, which have splintered from this very Church. However, as somebody who has tried to bring back, to convince others that we can be one, even if he has not succeeded in having one Church, at least he has left a memory for us to believe that getting together is good and it is a goal we must pursue all the time.

Thirdly, it is not easy to recognize goodness.  I am sure there are people in the world who see Pope John Paul II as a bad person.  There are those who include that man who wanted to kill him, who obviously must have seen that killing him was a good thing. So, goodness has many enemies, but it is easier within the Church. 

For example, a Pope is only one, you do not imagine that there are Cardinals, who were organizing to kill him or to carry out a coup.  But in the real world, what do you see?  Therefore, there is a lot to learn from the life of Pope John Paul II, particularly for us in Uganda, because the Pope is also a worldly leader, he has also been a leader in the world. I do not think there are may be Cardinals who had been killing each other to take over his seat.   There may be a quarrel or a competition in the conclave of Cardinals, but for us in Uganda they are more than a conclave for the positions we have in Uganda, particularly the top leadership position of President. So, I hope that some of us will learn to appreciate that the one job of a Pope, the one job of a President, should not be a source of fighting against goodness.

3.33
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Mr speaker, I want to begin by expressing my appreciation to the mover of the motion, and indeed to the Government for the deserving respect they have accorded to the demise of the Pope. 

In addition to being a Member of Parliament, Mr Speaker, I am also an Honorary Consul of Poland, the ancestral home of the Pope; and I can share with you that right from birth, the Pope stood for resistance against oppression.  He is a beacon in Poland of a man whose inherent feeling was to resist oppression.  He is a man who from the young days of his growth has been a voice of the voiceless, the voice of the needy. (Applause). We leave in a very rich world, but in the midst of richness, you have poverty and misery, and who could speak better than the Pope on these issues? If the rich just sacrifice breakfast, they could feed the whole world. We shall miss the voice of the Pope.

Mr Speaker, the Pope was a man of courage, a courage that would speak the truth regardless of the fears involved. For some of us dedicating ourselves seeking the truth, the truth makes us free. The Pope was a free man, because he sought the truth. (Applause)

Well, the Pope has died, but the ideas he stood for will endure forever. The Pope lived a glorious life, a life not measured by just the passing of years, but a life measured by the enduring deeds.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the Pope has died. So, what challenge do we who are left behind take?  All that we can say at this moment is that the ideas of freedom, the ideas of a just world, the ideas of a world free of hunger; these are enduring. The Pope has died, but the struggle continues.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us proceed this way; we have to conclude.  But be brief, honourable members.

3.35
DR ALEX OKOT (Moroto County, Lira):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember very well when the Pope came to Uganda the theme, which he got from the Gospel of John, was that I am the good shepherd. A good shepherd shepherds his flock, takes them in the green pastures, waters them and protects them from wild animals. Mr Speaker, the Pope lived as a pope and did his work, not only because he was a Catholic, but also because he was a convinced person of what he was doing. His life was the message, which he brought across.

Mr Speaker, the name minister derives from the same stem as the word shepherd; it means servant of the people. How I wish that now that the Pope John Paul II has died, this message could cut across the whole world to all leaders of different levels, to realize that leadership is about serving.  Leadership is not about forcing, leadership is giving the people the space to development just as a shepherd takes the sheep in the green pastures and allows them to feed and to drink water, and protect them.  

Mr Speaker, the Pope had a lot of authority and power. This authority and power he used it for the good. That is why the Pope is loved across all religions. Wherever he went, he was treasured by all human beings; this is something we have to learn. 

Mr Speaker, when the Pope came to Uganda, he was able to speak to the local people and the message went straight to their hearts and each one felt the Pope was speaking to him or to her. This was because the pope knew about the diversity of cultures and whenever he spoke, he spoke to the different people in their diversities and gave a message, which touched the heart of everyone. This was what I would call a popular Pope, a Pope who reached everybody at all angles of the world. How we could take over this message from the Pope and accept this in each of our situations as leaders!  

Talking about a person who has died is talking to ourselves, because the person who has died has done the job. We are talking to ourselves. Can we take the message, can we accept the message, then there is a reason to pay tribute to Pope John Paul II if we can accept the message. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.39
MS NUSURA TIPERU (Woman representative, Yumbe):  Mr Speaker, I thank you for having recognized me fast from Yumbe. As you know Yumbe is a district with a Parliamentary Caucus of two members. I would like to join my colleagues in paying tribute to the Pope. I also want to thank the movers of the motion, hon. Annette Mukabera and the Seconder hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba. 

Mr Speaker, I would not like to contradict the message that has already been mentioned by our Imam hon. Latif Sebaggala, but I am now speaking on behalf of the International Muslim Women’s Union of which I am the Country Chairperson. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Muslim Women in the world, we would like to pay tribute to the Pope. I am personally touched, because I happened to have accessed some of the material that has been coming from the Pope. As you are aware that through the Papal Nuncio, this Parliament has been receiving messages and the Pope in particular has been sending special messages to the women of Uganda.  In that regard, we would like to thank him for having shown care, and Mr Speaker, the Holy Koran teaches us to respect our mothers, to respect women and that really humbles me when I speak today.

Among the messages that have been coming, , there have been focus on the issue of peace; the Pope has been focusing on unity. I vividly remember the last message that I happened to have access to, he was talking about humility on the part of leaders. He reminded us as leaders to always remember where we come from, who votes us because there is a tendency among leaders sometimes when you are put in a position, you start wining and dining and you forget those who put you in that leadership position. I felt touched by that message, and we have to thank God for the kind of person that he was. 

Mr Speaker, from the Pope’s life, I get to learn in particular that we are going to be responsible for our acts on earth. I also admired his total devotion to God, and I hope that as Ugandans we can all be devoted towards our different religions and also to the Almighty God.  I thank you very much.

3.43
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you for agreeing to end with me. On behalf of all the people of Tororo Archdiocese, which is about six districts, we join the rest of the Members of Parliament who have expressed tribute to the late Pope John Paul II, who passed away a few days ago. 

I remember the Pope personally when he visited Uganda, I was one of the hosts to the Pope when I was the Director of Soroti Flying School, he came to Soroti and I learnt a few things from him:  One; the Pope came to Uganda that year when a lot of people in that part of the country were suffering.  He chose to come to associate with the people who suffer; he was such a good sympathizer.

Secondly, I had associated myself with many religious people, but I had never found such a man who appeared to be very near to God. He entered the aeroplane, he knelt down there and prayed. I was watching! Even when the car, which was inspected by the security people came, still he did not trust that, he prayed all the time. I stayed with that man for almost three hours; he was murmuring words of prayer. This showed this man was truly as described, holy, every time he was near his Creator and he was communicating with the Creator.

He even taught some of us who thought that we were important in our own small castles, that we were just dead wood; we were nothing. We learnt to be humble and to forgive. The other day when I saw him murmuring words on television to forgive the person who shot and wounded him, I wished all human beings especially in this country learnt how to forgive those who do bad to them. 

Mr Speaker, many people have expressed many things concerning the Pope and if you moved in this country, especially when I moved with the Pope for about three hours, many people would have loved to talk and express their love for the befallen great man of God. People in that part of the country will always remember him and we pray that the Pope’s soul rests in eternal peace as he joins his Father, the Creator. I thank you.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (PENSIONS) (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion and to thank my colleague for moving this important motion. I would like to start by thanking God for giving us such a Pope for such a long time. We in the Catholic Church have cherished the life of this Pope so much, and we are really saddened by his passing over. But, we thank God that we had him, and we had him for a long time. 

Without repeating myself or repeating what the others have said and I appreciate, this Pope was a peace lover. He loved peace and he would go wherever there was trouble just to show that he is suffering with those people, and to pray to the Almighty God to bring peace to that place. That is why he constantly sent to Uganda messages of peace, and each time he would see that there is relative peace he would encourage us to continue in that direction. We thank him for praying for Uganda for peace and by the time he has left, we were actually seeing a ray of peace and we thank God.  

The Pope was a unifying factor; he would talk to all people because they were human beings. He was a lover of life and he would see life in every person regardless of his religion, his colour and race.  So, he has been a role model for us all, and that is why you see that the whole world is mourning.  If you watch CNN, you would see that actually this Pope touched a lot of people, both young or old, powerful and the lowly, they are all mourning the Pope.  

But I remember him most especially that he was a lover of the youth, and he is the Pope who has touched many youth at this particular time, and I think this is actually a blessing because the youth are the future of the Church, and they are the future of the nations. And if he instilled in them the love for peace, I think we shall have a more peaceful world to come because of his effort to meet the youth in particular wherever he went.  

This Pope actually loved politicians; he has been meeting politicians from all over the world, including Members of Parliament. Many of you have met him and he has always had a message for us, to forge for peace and unity for the whole world. He was a lover of unity, he has fought communism and he has actually been very successful. I sent my feelings to the people of Poland for losing a father, and for all the Catholic Church for losing a holy father. 

I was privileged to meet the Pope twice. In 1980, I went for a pilgrimage to Rome, and actually in Rome, Uganda is very highly regarded. Wherever we go we are given special seats just in front there, and the Pope would come and shake hands with us because of our now 24 Uganda saints, and we are actually privileged and the Pope knew us and actually loved us so much, and we would like to thank him for his love and prayers. 

The Pope was a very unique person; he was a sportsman, he was a nonuser and if you read about him you would be inspired and he has written a lot for the Church and for everybody on the things he cherished like peace, unity, respect for life and he was very much against abortion and he was also very much against the death sentence. He was actually very much against homosexuality and you know those are his virtues and I hope we shall always remember him and advocate for those things.

We would like at this time of mourning to thank everybody who is praying for the Church so that we get a good leader in the next Pope. I want to add my voice and my prayers to everybody who is praying and mourning, and I would like to thank Parliament for giving the Pope special respect. I think he is a man who deserved it and we shall always cherish his life. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, I think let us hear from Soroti. Honourable members, we have to conclude and we shall conclude with three honourable members from Soroti, Terego and –(Interruption)

3.52
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kasilo and the people of Teso, we want to pay tribute to the late Pope John Paul II by just quoting a verse from the book of 1John 3: 16-20.
“This is how we know how love is; Jesus Christ laid down His life for us and we aught to lay down our lives for our brothers. If anyone has material possession and sees his brother in need but has no pity on him, how can the love of God be in him?”  
The Pope had love that is why he was able to touch the lives of all kinds of people in this world.

Verses 18-20 say, “Dear children, let us not love with words or tongues; but with actions and in truth. This then is how we know that we belong to the truth, and how we set our hearts at rest in His presence. Wherever our hearts condemns us, for God is greater than our hearts, and He knows everything.”  

May the Almighty grant the holy father eternal life! Thank you.

3.54
MRS MARY KAROORO OKURUT	(Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One disillusioned poet once said that, “The more I see of men, the more I admire dogs.” Because when we think of the Pope he was such a great man, how could anybody even have thought of trying to assassinate him? Yes, one great poet said that, “The more I see of men the more I admire dogs” and I was saying that having seen and looked and known the Pope, how could anybody have wanted to assassinate him? Because he was a man who had an aura of reconciliation, who had an aura of goodness, who had an aura of holiness.

Mr speaker, this morning I looked at the photograph in my sitting room where I was shaking the Pope’s hand, and next to me was Mr Okurut who lead the peace mission to Teso to bring peace when there was rebellion and next to Mr Okurut was one of those people who had abducted him, Max Omeda, and Mr Okurut had a stone in his heart. But when he shook the Pope’s hand, he turned to Max Omeda and said, “I have forgiven you.” So, we remember the Pope as somebody who brought reconciliation and I am not going to say much.

Again, one great poet said that when the bell is tolling do not ask, “For whom is the bell tolling?” because it is tolling for us who are listening.  The Pope is dead! Long live the Pope! Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.56
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, bear with me really. We have other items to deal with.

MR KASSIANO: Mr Speaker, I rise on behalf of the ex-seminarians who are in this Parliament, and I also rise on behalf of the Catholic Association of Professionals to which I serve as the General Secretary, to add my voice to the motion that has been moved in this House.  

Mr Speaker, for record purposes allow me to take cognisance of the ex-seminarians in this Parliament on whose behalf I am talking. I begin with Maj. Gen. Saverino Otafiire – (Laughter), hon. Pataki Amasi, hon. Abura Pirir, hon. Kagimu, hon. Otto Odonga, hon. Rukundo Serapio and myself, not forgetting a Rev. Brother Peter Mutuluuza and even hon. Agard Didi, my senior brother. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, for those of us who took that path, we say many are called but few are chosen. We attempted to follow the path of the pontificate but we were not chosen.  

Mr Speaker, there are three major things that happen in life, two are of joyous nature and the third one is the sad one that we now observe this motion for. When a child is born, it is a merry making event in a home, when the child grows up either marries or makes achievements in life, it is yet another joyous occasion, but the third saddest part of it which we cannot escape in one way or the other, is that of death. Death has robbed us of John Paul II, formerly known as Karol Wojtyla Cardinal of Poland.

When you look at all these, you will realize that the 26 years of pontificate of John Paul II will remind us of very key virtues that he stood for.  The Pope stood for the virtue of forgiveness and that virtue, I think to us as Ugandans, is what we need most and more important now than ever before.  

Mr Speaker, it is during the pontificate of John Paul II that the Catholic faith was strengthened in Africa. It is during his 26 years rule that the Church in Africa grew by number of Bishops ordained and consecrated and Africa will live to remember Pope John Paul II for his good works. 

The Pope attached great importance to the family as a unit, as the source of livelihood and nationhood. And I believe, when we go into this difficult time of constitutional amendments and also considering the Domestic Relations Bill, the virtues for which he stood will be a guide to us so that we can be able to come up with laws, which have greater bearing to humanity.  

Today the Church is not seen only as buildings, but collectively we are the Church. It is during these 26 years pontificate rule that the community-based church as a system of Christianity, what is commonly known here as bubondo, was introduced. In that case, therefore, he has been able to bring the Church closer to us. 

One major aspiration and one major virtue that the Pope stood for, which I think will be a very key factor for consideration for us is – Mr Speaker, allow me to recite it in Latin - the Pope ever continued to say, “Servo ordo et ordinem sevabit te,” (Respect the laws that have been written and the laws in turn will serve you). I think this is very cardinal to us as Ugandans at this critical time when we are undergoing a lot of political transformation through the various constitutional amendments. Let us respect ourselves, let us respect this country and let us respect what we said yesterday, so that in turn our holy words will also be able to help us. “The Lord gives and the Lord takes”.

While we are in this critical time, I believe and pray to the Almighty that the virtues that have been left in the 26 year legacy of Pope John Paul II will be able to assist the 117 Cardinals all over the world to genuinely identify a replacement, who will be able to fit in his shoes very well. We look forward to that day when we will be once again told in Latin, “Abemus Papa,” (We now have a Pope) and that we can be able to strive and continue with the difficult life of Christianity. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appreciate that there are many of you who wanted to make a contribution on this motion, but as you see the Order Paper, we have a tight a programme and I appreciate you, I can mention you that you wanted to contribute but I think we end this debate here.  All of us heard the text of the motion by hon. Mukabera, which was supported by hon. Lumumba. I now want to put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much!  (Applause)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, when we adjourned the House last week on Thursday, I had asked a question -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes you had, but I have a lot of items to include on the Order Paper, I could not include it today. But I do remember, I will do that.
  
MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You had asked us to do certain things when we adjourned. My understanding now is that the debate continues.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we continue with the debate.

4.05
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity accorded to me to make my humble contribution on the consideration and adoption of the report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on amending the Rules of Procedure. And being the first speaker for today, may I re-echo in my own understanding the issues that were before this House: One, is that our Rules of Procedure be amended to allow open voting during the process of constitutional amendment, and any other activity Parliament may come to. And secondly, there was also an issue of having the working days of Parliament extended from Monday to Friday.  

Mr Speaker, I have no special interest in the latter aspect, but I want to submit honestly on the consideration to amend the Rules of Procedures of Parliament to allow open voting. I have been a very strong believer in secret voting, not until three weeks ago that I made up my mind that come shower or thunderstorm, we must vote openly. And I want to be counted among those who will support an open vote in this Parliament, not because I love open voting so much, but because we must aid those who love it to really do it in a very open manner.  

Mr Speaker, I want to give a slight amendment to hon. Kizige’s motion in line with what hon. Maj. Kazoora said, that other than having it in our rules that such issues will be determined by open voting, I want to submit that we all seem not to have principle disagreements on the manner of voting. There is somehow consensus according to me, although we are still generating consensus that we should vote openly. However, the division seems to exist whether we should vote by show of hands or whether we should go to the division lobby.  

Mr Speaker, in law one of the most basic elements is evidence. If we want to be seen even in 30 years, even in 50 years, we have to sign somewhere -(Applause)- so that the world does not speculate, so that people may not have also opportunity to deny, so that they may not also have opportunity to raise up their hands very briefly from behind there and walk out and say, “We were few.” This is a moment of truth.  

But, I want to give a small story, which I also heard from a close friend of mine. There was a man who used to beat his wife everyday, and when the people would come to rescue the wife, he would say, “These are domestic matters.” So, one day the wife beat the man terribly and the man cried miserably, and in the process a fight ensued and this lady in her own wisdom, decided to hold the man’s private parts. 

(Laughter)  So the man was crying more loudly than the woman used to cry. As the neighbours came to rescue, they started pulling the man from the hands and the man was saying, “Not there, it is down”. (Laughter) So, Mr Speaker, in relation to this open voting, I think the whole House should know where to pull. If we want evidence, division lobby. 

You know the other day I was saying on television, and I want to repeat it now, that you cannot steal a drum. Because if you steal it and people start hearing a drum in Katwe, people will say “Let us go and dance, that sings so loud” because the loud drum calls more dancers and when they reach there and say, “Does that not look like the other drum which was stolen? So these are public matters. I support the motion by hon. Kizige, but I suggest we should go in the division lobby and sign. Not all Ugandans, people of Aruu County do not have televisions. 

In fact, if signing sounds so radical, then I recommend we get the list of all MPs and they call out your names, hon. Omara Atubo, you say “No” before the Speaker can mark and you sit down so that those who are listening on radio can really know that Omara Atubo “No”, Sekikubo Theodore “No”, hon. Araali, “Yes” - (Laughter) - so that it is clear. We really want a situation where we do things openly and in the next 100 years, they will say professor so and so stood for this fact and you can get to the closest list. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity.

4.13
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In contributing to this debate on the amendment of our rules, I will not hesitate to quote one politician called Nancy Actor, who had this to say, “The main dangers in the life are people who want to change everything or nothing”. So, it has been argued that representatives of the people have to be open; we have to be accountable to our people. We can only be open by being recorded in the Hansard for future references. We often quote Winston Churchill because what he talked was recorded in the Hansard, it was recorded in the books of history and we can ably quote him and he is our reference, he is our model for what he talked.

Mr Speaker, I agree the people are supreme. But as Abraham Lincoln said, “I am a firm believer in the people, if given the truth, they can be depended upon to meet any national crisis.” The great point is to bring them the real facts. So, if we are firm believers in the people, we must be open to them, tell them the real facts so that they judge us according to what we have told them.  

Mr Speaker, it is our duty as Members of Parliament today, to guide the people for prosperity of this country as we enter this constitutional amendment process. As representatives of the people we have the duty. In my contribution I am quoting very many politicians so that we get the gist of what we are going to do when we are amending our rules, when we are amending the Constitution.

Mr Speaker, another politician called Edmond Burke, had this to say, I quote: “Your representative owes you, not his industry only but his judgement; and he betrays instead of serving you if he sacrifices it to your opinion”. So, we owe our people our judgement as representatives of the people. This is basically what he was saying. As we go to amend the rules, as we go to amend the Constitution, let us not sacrifice our judgement instead let our judgement guide us.

Mr Speaker, in deciding whether to vote by the division lobby or by show of hands, and aware that the constitutional amendment requires the exact numbers, we need the exact numbers when they say two-thirds. I know show of hands is mostly a bit difficult and tedious for our clerks, and sometimes difficult to verify whether they have counted the right number or not. But when we have recorded ourselves down or when it is a tally, no one will challenge us about the exact numbers because it will be on record. 

Show of hands in very many amendments, the clerks will get tired and you will not get the real figure. But to get the real figure you must be on record and my friends in the Executive, let me quote you one other politician, Napoleon whom we all know. He had this to say: “The people to fear are not those who disagree with you, but those who disagree with you and are cowardly to let you know”. Those are very dangerous! Now, put it on record, you will know it. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I must tell you, I want my name to be on record of the Hansard as we amend these rules, as we amend the Constitution for posterity. Winston Churchill once said that, “History will be kind to me for I intend to write it”. I also intend to write history by being in the Hansard so that my grand children will know that Byaruhanga voted for this. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, we debated this matter last week and it appears the trend is that there is a meeting of the mind on this issue.  One, that you want open voting and you want a record of those who vote this and the other and, therefore, the question of how do we do the recording. The issue with division, you go out and then you record. Is it possible also to record when you are here? Because now I see we are narrowing the differences, we have accepted open voting but I think we want recording.  

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Though I wanted secret voting, since you have guided the House, recording whatever method we agree to do should save time, because to me my major problem and concern is time. How much time do we use in any given method of voting?

THE SPEAKER: Order, please. 

MR EKANYA: If we say, every time we go to the lobby, how many minutes will it take us, what tools can we use to record from here? This is my proposal, Mr Speaker, that if Parliament can make a special card, which tallies with numbers and reflects our names and every Member of Parliament is given, maybe 20 cards, that every time we are going to vote you put up the card and then it is ticked, because if card number 120 is Ekanya and I raise it up, it is easy to tick against my name and it will save time. The other alternative –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please listen.

MR EKANYA: The other alternative, Mr Speaker, is for each one of us to have a card or a coin like in Church, the basket is passed and you drop it there because it reflects your name. At the end of the day it will be recorded against your name. We should choose a method that will save time. Thank you.   

4.20
MR SULAIMAN MADADA KYEBAKOZE	(Bbale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, having listened to the Members contribute, and also knowing that many of us are in agreement with the subject matter on open voting, I wish to move a motion as follows: “Notwithstanding any other rule to the contrary, voting at the second and third readings of a Bill for an Act of Parliament to amend the provisions of the Constitution, shall be by roll call and tally.  

Sub-rule (2), voting at the Committee of the Whole House for purposes of considering clauses in the Bill of an Act of Parliament to amend the provisions of the Constitution, shall be by roll call and tally provided that the committee may on the direction of the Speaker vote by show of hands with respect to motions moved to amend any clause of the Bill.” I beg to move.

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: I seek your guidance on this one, Mr Speaker. The Member did stand to move a motion, but interestingly is moving amendments. So, is it procedurally correct? 

THE SPEAKER: Who did what? You see, what happened is that there was a motion by hon. Nyombi Thembo seconded by hon. Kizige. According to our rules, the motion was to amend our rules such that we have open voting by show of hands or division as the Speaker may decide. This matter was sent to the Rules Committee, which considered the motion, and as far as the Rules Committee is concerned, it came up saying, yes, they want open voting but it should be by division so that the records of those who have voted for this and the other remain part of our record. That is what we have been debating up to last week.

What is happening now is that the honourable member is making an amendment to the proposal as contained in the report, to the effect that this should be by roll call so that they will call “Ssekandi” and it is ticked “yes” or “no”, and they go to so and so, they say, “Rev. Sempangi, yes or no”. Then as a result of that, we approve whether that is – I think for him he is saying that we need not move out, but we do it here. Well, you have heard, honourable members, there is that one, is it seconded? Let us debate and see how we go about it.

4.24
CAPT. DAVID	 GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I have read hon. Madada’s motion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you have copies of it?

CAPT. GUMA: I have read his motion, which seeks to amend –(Interjection)- I have been given the Floor by the Speaker, hon. Madada. What is primary to me is to have a record for today, and the future. If we can have that one on record as paragraph 1 seems to suggest, I would have no problem. However, I have a problem with paragraph 2 of hon. Madada’s motion, which seeks to amend the committee recommendation, which is talking of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you have just a clarification, what we should do is to hear him speak on the motion, and then if you do not follow it then you give the clarification. So, hon. Madada, can you justify the motion?  

MR MADADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin by putting a challenging question to my colleagues and myself; why do we make rules, why should an institution make rules? You must have a mission that you want to achieve and you make rules to regulate the actors in order to achieve that mission. Now this Parliament has a mission to accomplish, and when you are deciding on what Rules of Procedure, you should be mindful of the resources before you. 

One of the most important resources here is time and as we keep the issue of time, we should be able to look at it seriously. And what we are looking for at the same time is, how objectively can we achieve that mission in a most transparent and clear shortcut and a way we can achieve it within a shortest time possible?  

The Rules of Procedure should be as clear as possible and we should not leave room for a referee to interpret the other way or his own way. So, the best we are making here in the first point is that we are being precise and clear that the way we do the voting should be strictly by roll call and tally. By so doing, we sit in our positions, we do not go out to kill a lot of time; we are here, they call out your name you say, “yes”. You have, of course, gone on record and you have saved time, that is precise and it is up to the point.  

When you look at the other point as well in section (2) of this sub-rule, we have provided for a situation where an amendment is made within the amendment. And for us to be able to do it easily, we ought not to have all the time to go through the same process, but give the Speaker - for example, when you say there is an amendment to add ‘and’ or ‘yes’, we do not have a lot of time to go back and we do again a roll call, but we give the Speaker the right to decide the easiest way like show of hands. I believe that way the intention is clear and right. 

I want to say that for Members of parliament, if we are interested in moving this subject, this is the best way to proceed. I want to appeal to all colleagues that unless we have suspicion, but let us trust one another and move this country.  Thank you very much.

4.30
MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE	(Rwampara County, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I hereby second the amendment moved by the honourable member. One of the greatest reasons why I second this motion is that I watched –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, generally when somebody moves a motion to amend another motion, is it necessary to have a seconder?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it has been seconded. Let him contribute either as a seconder or as a Member of Parliament. (Laughter)

MR KABAREEBE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I have been following the quality of the debate in connection with the voting, especially open voting. It was agreeable that open voting is acceptable as per the discussion here in Parliament. 

However, Members insisted that at least it should go on record so that at one time, they should be held accountable. Members were talking of the legitimacy of putting up the hands and unfortunately they were quoting my friend hon. Awori, sometimes who raises two hands, one behind another in front. So, they knew definitely that that one would not work. (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, there is no doubt this House always meets whenever there is a Speaker in the august House chairing the proceedings, and I have no doubt in my mind that such a Speaker is knowledgeable on the procedure, he is aware of how we conduct business in this august House. 

Is it in order for my honourable colleague to insinuate that both the Speaker and my good self do not follow the procedure by allowing me to have one and half hands up during the course of voting? (Laughter) Is he in order to imply that your Office, your Chair and myself have been bending the Rules of the Procedure?

THE SPEAKER: Well, since the Member was referring I think to the things of the past, I do not have the recollection; we can just leave it as that. (Laughter)

MR KABAREEBE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. (Interruption)

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is seconding an amendment motion. Part 2 of the amendment talks about giving the Speaker the option to use show of hands. Is it still part of the amendment when he, as a seconder of the motion, is actually discrediting the process of putting up hands? Is this amendment still valid or he is withdrawing part 2 of the amendment since he has no faith in the voting by show of hands, and where there might be possibilities –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, would you read part 2 of the motion?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: It would be deleted, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, you read; this is their motion, it is not my motion. It is not yours.
 
MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: “Voting at the Committee of the Whole House for purposes of considering clauses in the Bill for an Act of Parliament to amend the provisions of the Constitution, shall be by roll call and tally provided the committee may on the direction of the Speaker vote by show of hands with respect to motions moved to amend any clause of the Bill.”

THE SPEAKER:  Then, what is the contradiction?

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: The issue I am raising, Mr Speaker, is that in his contribution to support this amendment, he has discredited the act of voting by show of hands. So, is it still valid for him to proceed with this amendment, which contains among other things –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is that how you understand this? (Laughter).

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not. You see, in principle they are saying it should be by roll call. But in some circumstances - I think the mover himself explained that where there are minor amendments like delete, and then put this, those, instead of going to roll call, we decide on them expeditiously by show of hands.

MR KABAREEBE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, part 2 is particularly for emphasis –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We have understood it.

MR KABAREEBE: Yes. So, consequentially, I hope my friend is now okay. But, Mr Speaker, as I said, the debate on the open voting has been of high quality in this House. By the time we adjourned, when hon. Ben Wacha as Chairperson of the Committee requested for consultations, it was already agreeable that open voting is okay. But there after the problem was that there must be a record for future accountability, and that is how this has come and you will find honourable members not objecting to it. I thank you very much.

4.37
MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had an important verse to read from the Holy Bible, but following the ruling on the earlier motion, I will save the House that verse until a later date. However, I was intimidated by the MP for Bundibugyo – anyway, on the latest motion there is a lot of mistrust. There are waves of suspicion and when we talk about being on record, there is no way people will be on record just by saying, “yes” or “no”. There is a lot of suspicion to the extent –[An Hon. Member: ”You do not understand”]- I do understand. (Interruption) Mr Speaker, if I may continue.

THE SPEAKER: No, let me help on that one. It will be recorded, what will happen, the Speaker or clerk at Table will say, “Hon. Kiraso” you say, Yes or No. That will go on record.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, let me finish what I was saying before I was interrupted by some new minister who says I do not understand, which is a pity really because I think I understand. There is a suspicion - and this is the truth; people may want to hear it or they may not. There is the issue of people who will be absent. Not those who are voting “yes” and “no”. Their argument is, how shall we know that somebody will not be put on the list as having voted, “yes” or “no”, when actually that person was not there. (Applause). Now, the problem of this suspicion is what we should try to cure. And I would propose as follows, if hon. Madada does not mind. That when your name is called –(Interruption)

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, for giving way. I seek clarification from the previous speaker that we have been voting in this House and we have been getting the Hansard. If, for example, to her the Member’s name is going to be inserted there when he is not here, I seek clarification from her whether all these records we have been getting in Parliament are doubted. Thank you very much.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, the vote will have been taken, and when we say there is suspicion, it is not between me and you, it is also to the people who are in charge of the Hansard; suspicion is suspicion. I mean, what I am talking everybody knows; there is suspicion on the side of people who want this against the people who want the other and vice versa. 

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Beatrice Kiraso for giving way. What is meant by roll call and tally is, your name is called and they say, “Hon. Kiraso” and hon. Kiraso stands up and says, “I vote yes” and sits down. It is recorded in the Hansard and it is also ticked on a list. It is not possible that they can call hon. Kiraso and Mr Kutesa stands up and says, “I am Kiraso,” and it goes on record. That cannot be possible. I wanted to give you that information. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, my understanding is that this proposed method will be done in full view of the entire membership of Parliament, in the presence of the Speaker. I think you can trust the Speaker, that I cannot say “Hilary Onek” and I say another one. The question of helping those, who are always suspecting the others, we have no medicine for that.

MS KIRASO: Finally, before Brigadier goes on the microphone, I wanted your guidance on this voting issue for fear of being controversial. I would like to ask, are the ten Members of UPDF also going to vote, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Well, as far as I am concerned, they are full Members of the House and they are entitled to vote.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, if we look at Article 209 of the Constitution –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Article 209?

MS KIRASO: Article 209, Mr Speaker, “The functions of the UPDF.” There is (a) which is, “To preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda.” I am more interested in (b) and (c), “To co-operate with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disaster”; I am more interested in “civilian authority” (c)“ To foster harmony and understanding between the Defence Forces and the civilians.”  Now on matters, which are very controversial, where the UPDF officials are going to vote either way, will it not bring some disharmony, which is not –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we are making these rules using the Constitution, which has not been amended.  In future, maybe we may not have them but currently we have them; they are not half Members, they are full Members. Internally in UPDF, they may have internal orders here and there, they are concerned with those orders and I am not concerned with those orders. Once they come here and swear, I treat them as equal Members like you, like me until those directives are put in the Constitution that on controversial issues they should not vote. But as of now, if you read this provision, then it will prohibit them participating as full-fledged Members of Parliament. So, for the time being, I do not have any difference; the difference I have is ex-officio Members, those will not be on the list.

4.45
BRIG. HENRY TUMUKUNDE (Army Representative): Mr Speaker, there are a few issues I thought I would raise with you or with any Member of this House so that I am clarified. You know, Lord Denning was asked after his very great career as a judge, what pained him most and he said that what pained him most in his time as a judge, was when he saw a good case being killed by a bad lawyer. Mr Speaker, I was here the other day and I saw people killing secret ballot, murdering it with a lot of competence, preparation, notes, everything. 

I know we are known for inventing whims. We have done very well, we invented the Movement, and it is a very successful thing here, it has been working, a peculiarity in the whole of Africa and maybe in the whole world.  But when it comes to rules, which we set ourselves, Mr Speaker, since the majority think that voting by secret ballot is very fine, when we come to how else we should vote, I need your clarification. Is this standing up and tallying an innovation with us or has it ever happened elsewhere because I was doing a lot of reading to see what else is done elsewhere? The new innovation is electronic voting; you go in, you press your card, you press your details, and you put in a pin number. That is what is known.  

Mr Speaker, the other clarification, which I want and I think it is very important, does it save time? If they start calling Tumukunde and he says “no”, and they record, and then go into a room there and they say, those who are for this side go here, a record is laid, and you all sign your names, shall we really save time? I am very concerned about innovations, which are likely to go to a level –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, are you discussing the merits, because I think what we seem to have come –(Interruption)

BRIG. TUMUKUNDE: Can I simplify my clarification, Mr Speaker? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hold on. I think we came to the conclusion that it appears people have decided on open voting and that there is a need to keep records of the voting. That is why I think the committee recommended that we have a division, because with a division you will sign against your name and that will be the record. Now, the proposal here from hon. Madada was that, yes, we should keep the record. How do we keep the record? It is by calling you, because once we call you, your name will go on record and your reaction will also go on record. 

The question you have asked is, will it save time?  I do not know; this will depend if you accept this motion. If you do, there is saving of time. The saving of time is that you do not have to move in the lobby, we do it here and after we have concluded, you do not have to move, we move to the other one. My answer on saving time is yes.

4.45
BRIG. HENRY TUMUKUNDE (Army Representative): Well, Mr Speaker, going on to the merits of division lobby and the elaborate procedure here and all the processes you go through to record us, unless there is something more, I am wondering, why this innovation? If it is indeed about saving time then why all this preparation? I want to –(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKERIS:  Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform you that in the modern world innovations are part of life. (Laughter) That is why we have modern technologies. We have got the nuclear systems and I know he is a military officer; the gadgets they used to use in 1900 in the military are not the same as those they use now. So, in order to cope with life in the modern world, you must innovate and the value is the difference. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, please give me one minute. To narrow down issues, there is general acceptance of open voting by division lobby but some people said, “No, we have not come to that”. Why do we not dispose of this issue by issue? Why do we not accept that it is in principle in the committee’s report that we do open voting so that we no longer make contribution to either secret or open voting? Should we put a vote to that? I thought that really, from the contributions, you had accepted that there would be some kind of open voting. But now it seems it is still an issue. If it is still an issue, why do we not dispose of it?

MRS MUSUMBA: I am seeking clarification on what you have just said, Sir. I do recall last week that hon. Justine Lumumba asked how much time would be available to each of us to make a contribution and I do recall you said, “We will see”. I came today to contribute and I can see the space for me to do so is not available. I worry about the rules about which we seem to have agreed. I have not yet made my contribution and I feel I should make a contribution like everybody else has. So, I need clarification on how we are moving.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from those who are opposed to the recommendation of the committee on open voting? If you want you can contribute. Can I know them so that I give you the opportunity to contribute and we decide? Otherwise, my assessment was that the issue on which hon. Salaamu Musumba wants to contribute is that we use open voting. But you see we are trying to assist you also because you are asking for innovation. Yes, innovation. Members are entitled to bring their motion for innovation. These rules can be changed and if you change, you are innovating something. These rules were made at the beginning of the life of Parliament and now we think that we need to revisit them. That is an innovation.

BRIG. TUMUKUNDE: Mr Speaker, something is not very clear. We have rules and they are functional. These rules - for the time being let me shed off secret ballot because that one will waste my time - it can go back to the debate. We shall hear from those who oppose it and those who support it. I support secret voting.  

If, however, everyone says secret voting is not good, I will bow and I will want that we go to open voting. Where the clarification is needed on my part, and I would request that you have sufficient patience, is: we have rules here, the rules say if you are not voting secretly you go to the division lobby or you raise your hand. Now there is a new innovation, and I did not want to use my specialized competence on the minister, but even in renovating warfare there are certain principles that are followed. 

I do not think, especially with our history, that we are known for advanced, polished parliamentary practice. You know we have had gaps and we have had our own problems. While we innovate, Mr Speaker, I want one clarification: what is wrong with secret ballot? If that has gone wrong, what is wrong then with division lobby and the show of hands? 

Those who are pushing for the division lobby want this elaborate procedure to be followed whereby you go to a side, they count you, you register and then you sign. When it comes to calling people and they stand up, I see a lot of gaps and I do not think really you have the technology to close these gaps. So, my clarification is, what is your view about going step by step? Secret ballot should be put to the side, then division lobby. Let us look at the merits then having seen that what is provided for is not workable, we can go for innovations.

THE SPEAKER: Precisely this is what is happening. You are interested in the status quo, other people are saying, “Let us move for better things”. That is why these things are being suggested. The justification for them is not for me to decide upon. We need to improve the method and they are saying division lobby is for purposes of recording. Let us have a more efficient and quick way of registering, but it is up to you to really decide on what you want. It is not for me. I am ready to receive innovations provided the motions are brought to deal with them properly.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, last week I was one of those who really wanted to make a contribution to this report and as hon. Salaamu Musumba has said, I am eagerly waiting for that chance. Putting that aside, I suggest we have two reports, including the minority report. I suggest that we first vote on the minority report vis-à-vis the committee report then whatever comes out as the stand we go for that. That way we can move in for this because now we have gone to a level where we are going back to the secret ballot. You are saying the majority is in for opening voting, so we can move systematically.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, you very well remember last week the committee tabled this report and we started to debate the report. Divergent views were coming in then the chairman of the committee, realizing the trend of the debate, moved that we adjourn so that people go and make consultation so that we could narrow the differences, and this happened. Somebody is suggesting an improvement - according to him it is an improvement - by bringing in his motion, which you are entitled to debate. 

But now you need to determine whether the issue of secret ballot is still there or not. The best way is for us to vote on that and see whether we accept the committee’s report. The committee has shifted from the original position on secret ballot on constitutional amendment. Why do we not do that so that further debates shall not refer to the secret ballot? Otherwise, we should discard what the committee recommended.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, we adjourned to go for consultations but the chairperson of the committee told us that we continue with the debate. May I know whether this motion is from the chairperson or is as a result of their consultations, so that we debate it?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, were there consultations officially and were you involved in this?

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, yes, we did have consultations and the gist of the consultations is reflected in this amendment –(Interjection)– how come other people are clapping if you did not hear? I am saying we did have consultations and the gist of the consultations is reflected in this amendment. But before we vote on this particular amendment, I would ask you to allow me to make a few comments.  

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr speaker, I attentively listened to people’s contributions on this report, and I also listened to the report. The issue that was for consultation was on the two-thirds at the second reading, committee stage and third reading. It was not on the issue of open voting or secret voting. When you read the amendment, it talks about the method of voting; it does not talk about the committee proposal of the two-thirds at the committee stage. Can I be guided?

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, hon. Lumumba is right. That is why I wanted to make a statement before voting.  

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that there were consultations and I was party to the consultations. As the chairman says, this motion embodies the core subject of the consultations in both aspects and it is true that when the adjournment happened last week, the debate was on the two-thirds question. But it is also true that in the consultations we considered that, plus the mode of voting as represented in this motion. It was all covered in the consultations. Thank you.

MR WACHA: My understanding then, Sir, is that this particular amendment touches only on one aspect of the consultations; the other aspect has not been handled.  

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, could you guide me on the procedure that we are using to handle the matter? Your last ruling was that this is a harmonized position between the committee chairperson and another group, which had come up with some form of a motion. If it is a harmonized position, do we need to go back again to their original positions, or we go by their recommendation to the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, today we can continue with the debate. There was an indication received from the reaction of some members that they still think that secret voting is still an issue. The committee made its recommendations that it should be by division lobby and so forth but some people said, “No, the other is still an issue”. Since the other one is still an issue that means what is provided for in the rules as they stand now is still an issue. I suggest that we dispose of that first as we adopt the other side, then that is how we will be able to dispose of the matter.  

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I seek your special indulgence for me to make a contribution before we get to that point. Where we are now, the amendment proposed by hon. Madada is an outcome of a healthy debate on the Floor of this House. The idea of tallying must be appreciated from hon. Ruzindana’s contribution and for as long as we are not listening to each other, we are not allowing ourselves to be enriched by other people’s debate and I think we are going to make a mistake. So, it is in that line that I really plead with the House that please, allow us to make our contributions as well before you move a motion prematurely.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Salaamu Musumba, we are giving you every opportunity to make your contribution but at the same time you must know what you are contributing to; there must be issues. Is the secret ballot still an issue or is it the question of the report, which you are debating? If you want to dispose of that then you are maintaining, as hon. Lumumba said, that we decide on the minority report as opposed to the committee’s report. We could do that. 

You heard the minority report by hon. Matembe, and this report by the Member for Apac. Should we decide on that then we move on? I will give you an opportunity depending on your decision. Do you want to make a contribution before you make that decision? If you want, I will give you the opportunity.

5.04
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Sir. In my experience as a Member of Parliament I do know that we debate a report and all other suggestions made across the Floor are just suggestions. However, we do have a procedure and a culture of debating and so it is in that light that I would like to debate the report of the committee. 

That is where we were, Sir. We were debating a report of the committee and my contribution is that yes, in choosing to refine the way we vote as a parliamentary system, I do appreciate the innovation by my brother hon. Kizige. I also do appreciate the principles that are laid out that we want to achieve maximum transparency and accountability. 

In that light I would like to see us reduce on the discretionary powers of the presiding officers because there are enough discretionary powers in the present rules that can be applied and not specifically to the amendment of the Constitution. So when a proposal is made, notwithstanding the provisions available in the rules, that we give discretionary powers to the presiding officer, I get very suspicious and very uncomfortable.

The matters of the Constitution are matters of 24 million Ugandans or whatever number they are now and in the same spirit of transparency and accountability I want to be sure that the discretionary powers do not put the blame on the presiding officer. I want us to share whatever must be shared amongst all of us. I know I have entrusted the presiding officer with the responsibility to guide the House and in guiding the House I would like that he or she also has limits. I would like for the presiding officer to have a limit, and I know that my powers and my rights are still preserved under the right for me to contest the Speaker’s ruling by 40 of us standing up and challenging his decision. 

What I read within this amendment is that even that right is about to be encroached upon, and that worries me. I am sure there are enough discretionary powers in the rules that make it possible for the Speaker to guide, not specifically on the Constitution. So, I would like to warn the movers of amendments overnight that please, do not encroach on that right. We should reserve the right for 40 of us to demand a division lobby because the way things are going, every right that is available for any dissenting person is being minimized.

Mr Speaker, in light of the amendment that has been made by hon. Madada, I would like a clarification on what a roll call is. I do recall a roll call at parade in primary school many years ago and the roll call was just for us to say, “I am present, Sir” - there were no Madams. Is this the same meaning for a roll call in this House? Are we going to call ourselves to establish who is present? Tally means another thing. 

Hon. Ruzindana did not refer to the roll call and tally; he knows the difference in English. He knows tally means that you tick, you do not have to repeat yourself redundantly with roll call in English; you do not. For that matter I am praising hon. Ruzindana because he knows the difference between roll call and tally. 

I am glad -(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much honourable colleague, Salaamu, and the Speaker. I want to understand the contribution of my senior colleague. Are we debating hon. Ruzindana’s contribution in this House or hon. Madada’s motion, which is on the Floor? 

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister would recall if she were present that actually it was hon. Ruzindana’s idea of a tally in the House. In the record of the Hansard here, it was hon. Ruzindana - and any researcher or contributor should acknowledge the source of his information for us to be transparent. So, I am not debating hon. Ruzindana’s –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to know, is secret voting still an issue in view of the committee’s report? Why do we not deal with that issue first then we see how - are you contributing to the secret voting issue or you are moving with the report of the committee?

MRS SALAAMU: Mr Speaker, I will wind up. My view is that yes, secret voting was good and that is what was provided for. We provided for it knowing that we would need to preserve the integrity of this House to a certain level. But as it looks now, the benefits of open voting are clear in the circumstances because I think this country would like to see for the first time how persons with disabilities vote on crucial matters of the country. Ugandans would like to see how women vote because they have never been so many women in the House of Parliament at a time of amending or making a Constitution. 

We would like to see how youths vote too. In the past I was being told, when I was still carrying the label of a youth that it was the old men – they were only men - who had plunged this country into chaos. But now that the young people are here, we would like to see how they vote. Likewise the women, we used to complain that it is the men who dumped us into this political chaos. Now we are here, we would like the world to see how women vote on crucial matters of state. People with disabilities, they have all said, “Look, you guys make mistakes for us politically and you run away and leave us in trouble”. We would like see how they vote this time round when the opportunity is in their hand. 

We would like to see how professors vote in times like this where wisdom is required. (Laughter) And we would like that recorded in the Hansard for posterity because you said Idi Amin Dada was an illiterate. So, we would like to see how the professors of today vote on these matters. So, Mr Speaker, the learned people of this world would like to see how the learned people of Uganda vote on matters of their governance about posterity. I do support the most refined form of accountability to ourselves, to our constituents, to our country and to the global, good governance move that has brought all these debates to this level.

Lastly, in my experience I know that you cannot be ten months pregnant and claim to be a virgin. From my experience you cannot be ten months pregnant and claim to be a virgin; it is not possible. So, I would like to see what we mean.

THE SPEAKER: If you are two months? (Laughter)

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, even if it were one day, there is no way you can say that. So, I would like –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want a clarification from hon. Salaamu Musumba. I have heard her talk about “ten months pregnant”; is she talking about human beings or elephants?  

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable minister was not listening attentively because my experience only has a duration of nine months. So, I could not have talked about ten months because from my experience it goes up to nine months, or less. 

I would like to see a House that has resolve. What exactly are we doing? If we agree on open voting, can we go for the most refined form and which is within the culture of parliamentary systems that we follow? Let us not forget that we are part of a family of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. We should avoid adulterating a parliamentary system to a point beyond recognition. They will ask, “Where else in the Commonwealth is this done?” We are ever attending Commonwealth meetings. Really, can we not add value to this? I thank you, Sir.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, at one time you indicated – I do not know whether it was a ruling or a direction - that a matter had been settled –(Mrs Ogwal rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure? He is also raising –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: The point I am raising also concerns him. Mr Speaker, some of us have been following the rules, we stand up and seek clarification and when we are ignored, we humbly sit down. But I have seen that people who are more aggressive stand up, switch on the microphone and they catch your attention. So, should we also amend rules so that we can probably become more visible in order to be recognised?

THE SPEAKER: You have made the point. My concern is that in the minds of some members the issue of secret ballot is still lingering. Why do we not dispose of that? Why do we not really dispose of that so that at least in the following debates we do not refer to something, which we have discarded? I see people mixing secret ballot with the committee’s report. What we are discussing here is the committee’s report and some are thinking that we are also debating hon. Matembe’s report. Why do we not do that?

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you are asking us to decide whether to proceed with the debate on the open voting or secret voting, but I think hon. Salaamu Musumba has raised a very important point. Can we first debate and resolve the issue? We should take a decision based on the debate so that we can form consensus on an issue because right now we are going to vote for either secret voting or open voting. We are debating the report; can we make a decision on the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That is exactly what I am saying. You cannot debate the committee’s report. The committee’s report abandoned what is in the rules, that is, secret voting but some people are saying it is still an issue. So, if it is still an issue, why do we not dispose of one or the other? If we say we maintain secret voting, therefore, we do not have to consider the report –(Interjections)- as the hon. Member for Lira Municipality rightly said, when you stand up you do not just start addressing the Chair. You wait until you catch my eye and I say, “So and so”. We accepted that is the procedure.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I recall when we adjourned a number of us were eager to contribute on whether we should stick to secret voting or otherwise. Before we were given that chance, issues of when we should start voting by two-thirds came up; is it at the second reading when we are debating the principles or when we are at committee stage? That is when you adjourned and said, “Let us go and think about it”. So, we had not debated whether we should accept the majority report or the minority report. That is one.

Two, some people had obviously taken a decision on their own before you even ruled that, “Let us go to the lobby”; others were saying, “Let us use the tally”. That also requires a debate on its own, which debate we have not actually done. But we seem to be rushing to this motion, which actually neglects the very important issue of two-thirds at the committee stage. If we leave it out, his is going to continue to be a very controversial issue. So, I think this House should actually sort out that particular area as we debate. I am requesting you that you allow me to debate.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, let me say this again. The report had two parts. The first part had rule 76 and the committee proposed an amendment to be entitled rule 76(a). The matter of two-thirds voting either in committee or at second reading, is covered by rule 108(3), and we have not reached that yet.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, if I recall correctly, whenever we have a majority and a minority report, we discuss them separately and dispose of both. I thought that is the practice and in a situation like this, we should have discussed the minority report first and then disposed of it then we move to the majority report. I thought this was the practice we were following. But somehow it looks like the minority report was relegated.

THE SPEAKER: Well, as you have rightly said, you debate the way you want. If you want to support the position of hon. Matembe, it is up to you. If you stand you say, “I do not support the committee’s report, I support this and the other”. During the last debate we had nobody touched it and I cannot say who is contributing on this. It is up to you to really decide which position you are supporting and because of that I have sensed now people think they should also consider hon. Matembe’s report, which is for the secret ballot. That is why I said, “Why do we not dispose of these differences between the committee and hon. Matembe”? 

If we adopt hon. Matembe’s question of debating, what we do in the lobby will not arise. That is what I advise that we do. Those who support hon. Matembe’s minority report, make your contribution and we see how to dispose of this. I want contributions.

5.26
MR PATRICK MUSISI (Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am in for secret voting, basing on the history of this country. The history of this country is unfortunate and today I am carrying with me a book by the late Prof. Samuel R. Karugire, The root of instability in Uganda. I will quote bits of it as I proceed. 

Our history shows clearly that the Executive and the sitting President has in the past and up to today carried some unimaginable degree of influence over what type of business we are to have in the House. At times it has gone beyond reasonable limits. Therefore, I find it at this very moment when we have got something sticking out, that we might end up in the same manner that we did in the past where we had individual stigmatized in our history. 

We are aware that we have got in this book here, and everybody knows that the former Parliamentarians of this very House were stigmatized. Among them is the late Grace Ibingira, the late Bataringaya, President Binaisa and recently Mr Mulondo Besweri. Unfortunately, we have been forced in a way because of politics, and we have been viewed by the majority of our people in the countryside as being somehow opportunistic and sometimes shamelessly opportunistic. This has been expressed all over the country. You hear this over the radios. It is our sad history and I think we should take all measures today to avoid the same. I find this show of hands as going a little towards that trend of depicting us as being shamelessly opportunistic. 

Let me quote what the late Prof. Karugire said about politicians then; page 53: 

“The political system came to be dominated by the unemployables, the master opportunists and other kinds of undesirable characters whose perception of public affairs was limited to manipulation and intrigue. In other words, politics had become the professional of the less reputable members of society.” 

So, I detest and I shudder that the future - that is the end of the quote. I shudder when I think that in the future we shall be classified in the same manner by another writer, this time not the late Prof. Karugire - another professor –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, as I stand here my voice is heard over the radio and we are appearing on television. There is live broadcast of this so what are we hiding anyway? I am seeking clarification about why you think secret ballot is an operation matter. 

MR MUSISI: It is again good that I am getting this from a professor. Our last census revealed that we have got only 4 percent in this country of our people who have got access and can watch television. But you might also save this. I want to tell you that part of this population is always unable to watch television because of blackouts, and the other part is now about to be deterred from watching television because of higher tariff rates so you are getting –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order to say that actually the speaker on the Floor should not involve this House in speculation. Let him be factual if he is to guide this House and not make us think in terms of speculation and projections. Is he really in order to mislead the population towards the Constitution or try to amend the Constitution according to speculation? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, the House is ready to receive innovations and he is giving his innovations.

MR MUSISI: There is a biblical saying that so many have ears but they do not hear. I have just mentioned - I am not speculating - I have even given you names of people who were stigmatized in the history of this country. Therefore, I now want to say that during that period I am referring to, the 1960s, there were very few who could come out irrespective of the wrongs that were there. On record we have got a member in Eastern Uganda, Mr Cuthbert Obwangor, he is the only one who stood and said, “No more intimidations to me man, I have got to decide and I have my conscience”. But such people are few and when we come amongst us there are always far and –(Interjection)- may I be protected from another honorable professor here? In the past there was such intimidation in the House.

In these very Chambers, a Member of Parliament by the name of hon. Ruwande, during the debate on amending the electoral law stood up to speak about elections and he was told, “Please, do not speak about elections when you know without me - it was Dr Obote speaking - without me you could not have been in this House”. This has continued up to today. You have seen in this very House fists flying. If I am to mention names, my brother hon. Jacob Oulanyah had problems with hon. Tumwine. I have seen hon. Otto and the Defence Minister - I have seen all this intimidation and fear being created. In such a scenario I just pray and beg, that we maintain -(Mr Mbabazi rose_)- no, learned colleague, it is your deputy and I am sure you are not hon. Nankabirwa. 

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that His Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni, attended a function where water was supplied in his constituency. The President told the public that, “How I wish I were working closely with hon. Musisi, this water would have reached here a long time ago.” Hon. Musisi told the President, “Your Excellency, no, I am working very well with you and that is why the water is here.” So, is there any intimidation there? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala Mafabi, would you like to switch the microphone off? 

MR MUSISI: My colleague, I had better continue. You are talking about Patrick Musisi; Patrick Musisi is another Cuthbert Obwangor. I was telling you that very few people can definitely stand the type of intimidation and you have seen it in this very House. That is why I am praying for one thing, I think I have had enough from you, colleagues –(Interruption)

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is not my intention to debate in this House to please hon. Musisi. I come to debate in this House so that I fulfill the mandate given to me in my own constituency. Recently I acquired Shs 5 million from a source –(Laughter)- and I traveled to every village in my constituency. In the constituency they told me exactly what to say when I come here. For instance, they told me that I must vote for the regional tier and I want them to know I voted as they told me. They told me I must not vote for a proposal to discipline the Kabaka of Buganda. They told me that, and I am going to vote in accordance with what they told me. 

They also told me that I should vote to remove term limits, and I will vote in accordance with what they told me. I will not come here to vote to please hon. Musisi; I will vote to please my own constituency. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Shall we say, hon. Patrick Musisi that you are moving that we reject the committee’s report and maintain the position as is in the rules? I think that is the essence of your motion.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you very much, hon. Musisi, for giving way. Would you appreciate it if as a Member of Parliament you are equated to a radio cassette, which is forwarded, rewound, paused, stopped and played, as a Member of Parliament? Thank you.

MR MUSISI: I am very sure that a number of our constituents do not normally hear us when we are debating. I am very sure that even the hon. Dr Kibirige Sebunya, his constituency did not hear him when he was urging the population in this country to eat monkeys. (Laughter) If they had heard that they would be more violent. Therefore, if they cannot hear such insults, I do not think they will hear him even today. 

I continue that according to records available in this country, we have got only four percent of our population that can watch television. And power tariffs as they are today, Shs 240 per unit, they will definitely knock off another one or 0.5 percent. The power cuts we will also knock off another one percent, and then maybe only 1.5 percent will be able to watch television. Out of those only 1.5 percent will tune in to the appropriate programme. Therefore, this question of being watched by our constituents does not definitely hold. It only goes to strengthen one thing raised by the late Prof. Karugire, pushing for a very high degree of opportunism but unfortunately, shameless opportunism. 

I want to tackle the question of the army officers, respectable Members of Parliament as under Article 208(2), which says, “The Uganda People’s Defence Forces shall be non-partisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined ….” I will not labour to define each one of these and what it entails but if we voted on a partisan issue, I think in a way we shall be abusing Article 208 to some extent.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are mixing issues. As of now we are not debating the role of UPDF Members of Parliament; this is not a general debate. We are debating amending our rules in respect to handling constitutional amendments. Why do you have to single out persons with disabilities or this and the other? Restrict yourselves to the rules. I suggest that you tell us what you want. Do you want us to reject the report and stick to - we want to be able to vote rather than debating generally.

MR MUSISI: Mr Speaker, I definitely respect your guidance. For sure I was just trying to highlight that in a secret ballot you would not be able to tell even how our other colleagues, who are bound by our Constitution to be non-partisan, vote. 

MR KUTESA: Mr Speaker, is hon. Musisi in order to mislead this House that while the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces should not be partisan and should be nationalist in character, when they vote secretly that makes them partisan? Is it the secrecy of the voting, the openness of the voting or the voting itself? Therefore, is hon. Musisi in order to mislead this House by saying that if you vote secretly and you are an army man you become partisan? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, misleading is a deliberate act. But my assessment of the situation is that this is a question of interpretation. As far as he is concerned, that is how he interprets it.   

MR MUSISI: I am very pleased that ours is a learned colleague.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Article 78 of our Constitution tells us who the Members of Parliament are and these Members of Parliament include members elected by the UPDF. We are also clearly told which Members of Parliament may not vote and that does not include members sent here by the UPDF. Therefore, is the honourable member in order, in any form or manner, to relegate hon. Members of this House to positions they do not belong to and remove them from positions they are entitled to by our Constitution? 

THE SPEAKER: I have about five times said that all members in this House have equal rights and, therefore, the question of saying UPDF should not do this and the other does not arise. In any case, the position, which hon. Patrick Musisi is advocating for will not be solved by secret ballot. So, the issue of what the UPDF can do or not does not arise in this debate. They have full rights.

MR MUSISI: As I wind up on this issue I want to be very clear that what I have been driving at is the degree of intimidation that was there in the past, that is here today in the present, and the scuffles that you have all witnessed in this House. People should be protected to serve this country with their clear conscience, not with other people’s eyes. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you not appreciate that the intention of this debate is to raise a motion that will reject a report and maintain what is in the rules?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, under rule 61(1), I am moving a motion that the question be put to whether to vote secretly or openly. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion. Whoever has been contributing to this has been making a straight forward motion. Do you agree, hon. Patrick Musisi that what you want to say is that we should reject the committee’s report and we stand with the position as it is in the rules? Is that your motion?

MR MUSISI: Precisely. I want a secret ballot.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us debate that motion. Otherwise, how are we going to dispose of this one without a motion? Honourable members -(Interjections)- hold on. He said we should put the question but put the question to what? Yes, there must be a motion and I want hon. Patrick Musisi or another person to own it. There are some other people –(Interruption)- hold on, that is how you behave. Are there some people who want to contribute to his motion? Yes, hon. Patrick Lumumba? (Laughter)

5.47
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to begin by clarifying that I am Kasule Lumumba Justine; Patrick Lumumba is my husband.

THE SPEAKER: Do you not take your husband’s name? (Laughter)

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am going to advise him that since I carry his name, Lumumba, he should also call himself Kasule Justine.

THE SPEAKER: If he were here then I would call him Kasule, but you are here. (Laughter).

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, thank you for that humorous bit. I stand to support the motion that has been moved by hon. Musisi to support the minority report by hon. Miria Matembe. Reason? When you read the preamble of our Constitution, page 1 says: 

“We the people of Uganda: recalling our history, which has been characterized by political and constitutional instability ….” 

I will begin with a personal point of view. During 1980 my father, the Late Karoli Kasule, was the Chairman of DP in Bugiri District, which was then Bukholi County, and our neighbour, hon. Patrick Mwondha, was the chairman of UPC in Bukholi County, the current Bugiri District. Mr Speaker, when UPC took the day, we suffered as kids. We used to sleep in coffee plantations and I think this was because –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, it is a well known fact that during a certain period of our independence the Uganda Peoples’ Congress ruled this country properly under –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I you should take a lesson from hon. Cecilia Ogwal. She made a correct statement of the procedure less than an hour ago. So, take a lesson from her.

MRS LUMUMBA: I want to advise my colleague that whatever happened, happened and you cannot reverse it. We went through it and we are still nursing the wounds of whatever we went through.

I was building my point that when you look at the preamble of the Constitution of the Republic of Ugandan: “We the people of Uganda, recalling our history, which has been characterized by political and constitutional instability …” I will just stop at that. I was building on to it that we suffered as kids whose parents were DP and this is because my father came up openly to support DP. There he was, moving around singing all the songs; and the only benefit I can say we got is that we ate enough rice. 

But what does this show? Mr Speaker, this shows that there is not yet political maturity in this country.  Even if children would suffer at that time, how about today, is it any better?  When we say we are going for open voting, we have problems of political intolerance in this country, which have really been manifested. Let us not cover it; let us be open.  

Mr Speaker, let me cite examples of political intolerance.  When the report of Election Violence was read here, it cited quite a number of election violence and individuals even went to the level of losing eyes.  During presidential campaigns of 2001, an Army vehicle driven by a soldier, an officer killed people because they were supporting a side he did not support and it ended to that.  

Mr Speaker, the Parliamentary Advocacy Forum (PAFO) beating in Jinja was a sign of political intolerance.  The intimidation, the insults by prominent politicians in this country, shows us what is ahead and we have to be careful.  

Let me give examples, especially insults from prominent politicians, especially our number 1 of this country, the President.  He heads more than 25 million Ugandans, but he finds time off to put our State time to an individual and abuse or regard somebody as a poisonous mushroom, rabid dogs, monkeys and weevils. This is a sign that we are not yet mature politically, the whole country -(Applause)

Mr Speaker, there is a case at Central Police Station where Members of Parliament were followed by somebody from Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI).  How safe are we when we go for open voting?  How safe are we on the streets of Kampala where now we have two extremists groups supporting two extreme sides and holding demonstrations one after another. Now that demonstrations have been cancelled, where people will have no forum, no way of exposing or bringing out their anger, are we safe on the streets? Whatever side you vote openly on the constitutional amendments, are you sure of your personal security on the streets? 

When they read Justine Lumumba, whatever side I say, whether yes or no, each side will mark me- my face is not like any other face in this country, it is one face in Uganda. I do not resemble anybody, so, Mr Speaker, who is going to guarantee my personal security on the streets after the voting?  

Mr Speaker –(An hon. Member rose_)- I am just building this point. I will give you time for the information.  When people take decisions in politics, whatever side they take it never ends at them, it goes as far as their relatives.  So, as we stand here to vote and they say Justine Lumumba this side, or we go for the division lobby and I go and –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member on the Floor in order to intimidate us by –(Interjection)- yes, I feel intimidated by the manner of her speech. The honourable member is saying she is followed, she is saying she cannot say her mind, yet she is speaking on live radio, on live television, which is being watched by all of us here in the House?  Is she in order to intimidate, because intimidation is not one-sided?

THE SPEAKER: There is nothing out of order for somebody to vigorously defend a position.

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling.  But I even want to take this opportunity to tell my hon. Minister that I am so surprised that a woman can intimidate a man -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order!  Are you saying that a woman is not equal to a man? Are you saying that it is only the man that can intimidate?

MRS LUMUMBA: You know, Mr Speaker, the word “intimidation” is relative.  But when it comes to this case when we have a full hon. Member of Parliament, a Minister of Local Government, a Professor –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order!  Please continue and conclude. 

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want us to debate the two reports with a bit of calm and sober mind because this is now the beginning of the amendment of the Constitution. We may either take wrong decisions or good decisions for this country.

Mr Speaker, I want to inform the hon. Minister that Uganda lies in Africa, in a country where we have a lot of proliferation of small arms.  That is why there are so many illegal guns in Karamoja, and that is why we have disarmament - somebody is even giving me information saying even in Teso.  So that is why - and we already have on record 800 licensed personal pistols – they are giving me information, it is 800,000 - Mr Speaker, these are all arms in the hands of individuals.  Whatever side the individual maybe on an issue in the Constitution Amendment Bill, anybody can misuse it.  So, the issue of open voting exposes you whatever side you are. So those who are in for a certain stand can decide to go against –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just in line with the proliferation of private arms, which we have close to a million pistols. There was an incidence reported at the Police where someone was shot because he was a Manchester United supporter and the other one was Arsenal. So, if football people can fire pistols, what about federo?  Thank you.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the point I am building is that we have two positions: There are people who support and there are people who are against and we have people who are so extremists who may even decide to misuse the arms, which may be in their possession. And with life, anything can happen.

Mr Speaker, this Constitution, part of the objectives, objective 19 is Protection of the Family. I want to read it – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But please curtail your debate because others want to make contributions.
  
MRS LUMUMBA: Okay, let me summarize. It reads:” The family is the natural and basic unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State.”  Mr Speaker, leave alone in society even in houses people always take different views when it comes to politics.  We have heard of marriages breaking up because of just mere campaigns.  Now we are coming to the issue of amending constitutions, Mr Speaker, the intention of this motion of open voting is it to protect the family or to break up the marriage?  

Mr Speaker, when members were reporting here on their consultations on the White Paper, I sat here and I attentively listened. I remember the MP for Kapelebyong, hon. Malinga Johnson, said on the issue of term limit, 50 supported and 50 did not support. He then asked the Speaker who was in the Chair, “Now, Madam Speaker, how am I going to divide up my votes?”  So, such people need secret ballot so that they take a decision as Members of Parliament without any intimidation, without any fear from whatever side in their constituencies.

Mr Speaker, when we talk of a genuine vote, if you know whatever you are forwarding, this report we are debating, it because of the constitution amendment. If the constitution amendment the Executive is forwarding is good for this country and is to benefit this country, why do we open up and go for open voting?  That means if it is good, people are convinced and will vote for the amendments secretly and will support what they want.  Why do we go for open voting, what is the intention?  Is it for the betterment of this country?  

I want to end, Mr Speaker, by saying, whatever decision we take for open voting, whether you go in for Government stand or against it, the effect may not be to you an individual, it will even affect the innocent relatives and your children who are not yet born.  
Mr Speaker, I am saying this because we had here an example where somebody voted on a land issue and his innocent banana plantation suffered first.  So, if we are really in for the betterment of our children who may live when we are long gone and may not be in politics, Mr Speaker, I support secret voting.

6.10
PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise to oppose the motion by hon. Patrick Musisi.  There are many reasons why I would rather support that people, especially leaders, stand and be counted. 

This is what hon. Matembe chooses to say as her concluding remark: “I for one, I choose to stand and be counted for my beliefs openly.”  I, Kagonyera stand to be counted for my beliefs openly. There many of us in this House who would say the same thing if they had an opportunity. Even if it is for academic reasons, I think it is arrogant of anybody to think that they can stand up and be counted and others are not courageous enough to stand and be counted – (Interruption)

MR PATRICK MUSISI:  For sure I respect hon. Prof. Kagonyera. We also knew his past and what he supported.  We still hold how he performed in the past and we want to count him the second time because he has ever been involved in other politics.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, we have to restrict the time, since many of you are interested. I think we give you five minutes.

MR BEN WACHA: Mr Speaker, as Chairman of this Committee, I think it is only fair for me to read what hon. Matembe said. I do not support it but as her Chairman, it is my responsibility to protect her.  She says in the second last sentence, “I for one, I choose to stand and be counted for my beliefs.”  Sir, Matembe did not say, “openly”.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Speaker, if I can respond. First of all, I must apologize I did not get what hon. Musisi said. I cannot respond to it; if it is something we can sort out together, I have no problem.  But I thought that if a person stands to be counted then it is demonstrable. That is all I understand about it. 

Hon. Matembe talked about freedom of conscience and that is absolutely good. I am sure all of us here have got a conscience as a human being.  Actually, your conscience is not necessarily the same as what you do from day to day.  I would dare say that there are many times in this world when people have done things that are not according to their conscience.  

It is only one person I remember, Sir Thomas Moore in politics who stood for his conscience and paid with his own blood.  But even the Cardinal at Canterbury advised him to accept what the King wanted and he refused.  He voted for his conscience and paid with blood.  So it is not convincing to say that always you go with your conscience- yes.  Practical politics, we all know, everybody does what they do with objectives. 

In the debate to impeach President Clinton, everybody was free to say what they wanted.  Senator Liberman admonished Clinton, when it came to voting he voted for the Democratic Party, and that is how President Clinton survived.  It never at all meant that the Republicans had a morally high ground according to their conscience and the Democrats were vulgar. It is a fact that each group voted the interests of their party.  

So, I am not willing to be persuaded by this pontification of virtue. Hon. Musisi, I have no intentions of intimidating you through the Speaker.  Seriously, Sir, I think it is important that we recognize as we move into multiparty politics - we are moving into multiparty politics, there are people who are saying that we are not yet there. Practically we have arrived; we are there. Multiparty politics, whether you like it or not, each group have their house they belong to.  If you wanted us to vote freely according to our consciences, you should have struggled very hard to maintain the Movement system of Government.  Now that you are going multiparty, you better be prepared because that is how it is going to continue to happen.  Let me conclude, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Professor for giving way.  The information I want to give the Professor is as follows. The existence of a multiparty system has nothing to do with what hon. Musisi is alluding to. This is because under a multiparty system of Government the Member of Parliament is elected secretly. He should have been elected openly because we have a multiparty system.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I am concluding.  That is hon. Ken Lukyamuzi’s opinion, and opinions do not constitute information. Information should be on points of fact and figure.  I want to end by saying this, Sir, that really why should members imagine that they have the courage and ability to say what position they are on.  

Hon. Musisi was stating his position. By the way, we should not have been misled.  Very many Ugandans, I cannot tell you how many, may not listen, may not view the television, but they listen to the radio. All of you, I am sure when you go back to your constituencies there are many people who will come to you and say, “We heard you say this,” at least they tell me.  Therefore –(Interjection)- hon. Dr Ogenga Latigo, excuse me.  

Therefore, if you are going to imagine that you take cover through secret ballot you have a serious problem, because the sooner we liberated this country from intimidation because of the political positions we take, the better.  For as long as we go on being intimidated, saying things that we do not mean and meaning things we do not say, that intimidation will go on.  So, we should, out there, tell our people, please, it is virtuous of political leaders to publically take positions and our people will get used- (Applause)-so, go out there and tell your supporters to stop intimidating those who hold different political views, and democracy will mature in our country.  Mr Speaker, I oppose hon. Musisi’s motion.  Thank you.

6.20
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me the chance to contribute on this debate.  I am afraid I support the minority report. I support it and I also want to inform hon. Members that I am the least capable of being intimidated. I am not supporting secret voting because I fear intimidation.  

As a matter of fact, the idea that brought about this motion is itself an intention to intimidate. Why at this time?  Rule 75 of Rules of Procedure has so many issues for secret voting, why use (a).  If you want to be totally open, we should have amended the entire Rule 75 and go open voting on all those issues listed under Rule 75.  Therefore, I see a sinister motive in selecting only one issue under Rule 75 of our Rules of Procedure for open voting.  Therefore, in principle I do not support the motion for open voting.  

Mr Speaker, the idea of transparency and accountability, which are being stated as smoke screens - they are smoke screens, that is not the idea. Otherwise, let us also have Cabinet meetings held in the open because we also need the Ministers and the President to be accountable to their voters.  Personally, I do not like selective ways of doing things, that when it shoots you today you behave this way, when it shoots you tomorrow you also behave the other way.  Consistency in life is so important. Otherwise, as human beings our behaviour must be predictable -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, is the hon. Member on the Floor in order to confuse this House by mixing the three roles of the separate Arms of Government: the Legislature, the Judiciary and the Executive?  Is it in order for him to advocate for the legislature to attend meetings of the Executive when he clearly knows that these separate roles are laid out in the Constitution?  Mr Speaker, is he in order?  

THE SPEAKER: I think maybe he is holding the theory that you may not completely sever these three; there must be some connection.  I think that is the theory he is advocating.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The principle for removing secret voting is that we in Uganda as elected representatives of the people must be open and accountable, and applying it across the Floor.  The other arm of the Execute, the Judiciary, conducts their business in open.  Then we have the other arm conducting their business in secret and then they want to come to Parliament and say, “Do not exercise what we do.  You be open while we remain secret”.  This is highly pretentious.  –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, on this order paper, there is a bill on access to information. I think when we do- you will be able to access the information.

DR OKULO EPAK: Yes, so also one will be able to access information on the manner we have debated because it will be in the Hansard.  There will be so many people who will not speak.  How will you assess their position?  There will be so many; even time alone will not allow all of us to speak.  So, how will the people whom he or she represents say he said this?  

So, what is important to me is that we should do things impartially, and if anybody thought, and we thought as Members of Parliament honestly that we will not do our things openly, we should have disapproved the entire Rule 75, not this partial way of moving about it.  I thank you.

6.25
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise to oppose hon. Musisi’s motion, that is secret voting and Matembe’s motion.  

Mr Speaker, I was here and I listened when we were debating a report from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the White Paper.  Each Member here came, gave an account of how he or she traversed her or his constituency and gathered opinion from the voters.  Each one gave a full account, they said, “We support this, my people support that and they told me not to do this, do not support federo, support Ekisanja”.  

Now if your employers told you to support Ekisanja and now we are coming to amend that constitutional provision on Ekisanja, and then you go secret and you vote against your people and Ekisanja fails, you seek a third term yourself, you go back and say, “Look, I tried my best, you see –(Laughter)- the thing could not work out.  But let us see next time.” 

Mr Speaker, I think it was hon. Kazoora from Kashari who said, “When you eat your cake, you cannot have it.”  If we are honourable Members of Parliament and we can allow to be intimidated and we can allow ourselves to be bribed and our conscience is influenced by a bribe, then you are not worthy!  That is why, Mr Speaker, I support the position of the Committee –(Applause)- that we vote openly by a method which keeps record of how we vote - (Applause)- so that even if my people from Kiboga East are not here and would like to know how their hon. Member Kiwalabye voted, they will have access to the information.  

There is no way we can take this country when we fear to be counted, when we fear voters to know how we behave when we are here.  In fact, I think that is also the reason why it was felt necessary to suggest that if a member, supposing we go multi-party- suppose a member crosses from one party to another, that Member should lose the seat and go back –(Interruptions).

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, hon. Kiwalabye for that powerful explanation.  But I think the issue is not fear of being counted, the issue is fear of not being counted.  I do not know if you can make a distinction between the two.  

MR KIWALABYE: Yes, that is why I said I want to vote on this constitutional matters and my people and the entire population of Uganda who want to know should know that Daniel Kiwalabye voted this way on this issue.  So, we go to the lobby, we devise the means of allowing ourselves to be counted fully, 30 years, 40 years, 100 years to come, people should know so and so took such and such a decision and these are the results.   

When you are a honourable Member and you cannot obey your conscience, then that is very unfortunate.  Whether or not somebody is looking at me, but that is what I believe, that is what it is.  

We have been here and we have been praising the Late Pope for his stand he has been taking on very controversial issues.  He even went to a Mosque, prayed there openly when his followers were looking. He was convinced that it was very nice; it was important that he leads the way for integration.  That is what he believed. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I will vote openly if it is decided. We should decide that we vote openly, we record our names whichever side we vote so that we stand to be counted properly.  I thank you.

6.30
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern):  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I rise to oppose the motion by hon. Musisi.  Secret voting encourages dishonesty, hypocrisy and corruption -(Laughter)  We are talking about the Constitution and the Constitution is the Supreme Law of this country.  We, who are making decisions, we must be responsible for the decisions we are making and we become responsible when we know where we have voted. 

Why do you pretend to say, “I have voted ‘Yes’, when actually you have voted ‘No’?  I know majority through open voting or secret, it is clear that the majority may make wrong decisions.

So, in case we make wrong decisions by making this Constitution, we shall be responsible. We shall be saying, sorry, I wish we did not do it, so that in future you make the right decisions. 

Mr Speaker, our voters are all out looking for what we are deciding on their behalf.  Now they tell me, “Please, hon. Baba Diri, vote for X, then I go for Y” Are we honest to our voters, Mr Speaker?  We must be open and we must vote, people must know where we have decided.  

Mr Speaker and the House, I would like to inform you that there is nothing secret in this world.  When you vote, your own people will know from your face where you have voted -(Laughter)- yes.  We were here voting for our Speaker, I know exactly who did not vote for the Speaker, and who did vote because through your jubilation, through your reaction, through the way you were lobbying, it showed clearly that you were voting that person; it was already open.  Why don’t we now go open and really stick to what you have decided?  

People are talking about the past; they said secret ballot has been protecting people.  When we made the first Constitution in 1996 it was secret ballot, did it not bring confusion?  When it was revised in 1966, the pigeonhole Constitution, which nobody knew how it was made, didn’t it bring confusion?  So, by the fact that - and even when we were voting for the UPC and DP, was it not secret ballot?  Why did it bring confusion?  So, why don’t you make a change and use transparent method so that we are accountable for what we are doing?  I support the open voting so that my people can know where I voted and I follow their instructions.  

Last but not least, people talk about caucus and they call it carcass to be buried.  I think caucus is very important, and in any Parliamentary debate caucus is very important if you have to win, and the best way is to convince the people.  Once people are convinced that we are going to vote that direction, why change and vote another group?  I think open voting will find out those people who are very dishonest and corrupt.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.35
BRIG. HENRY TUMUKUNDE (Army Representative): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to contribute to this important motion. I support hon. Musisi’s motion. I have thought about it.  Let us go back to the norms and practice of other Parliaments.  

It is known, Mr Speaker, that most Parliaments on very crucial issues vote secret.  Even when we are choosing people here, we vote secret.  

I can assure you, Mr Speaker, that there are some people here, some of them seated right in front of me, who have been haunted for a very long period for having censured some elements within this Parliament.  They cry over it, they say they were harassed 100 times; they were attacked during elections.  Some of them seated right in front of me may be having different views today, Mr Speaker, but let me tell you they were seriously haunted.  

Mr Speaker, we have five minutes, I beg that people rather give contributions than –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: He has declined the information.

BRIG. TUMUKUNDE: You, Mr Speaker, know the fever of people when there is about to be a mere reshuffle here; people do not sleep, people really are smiling even when it is not required –(Laughter)- largely appealing and actually lobbying even people who are not concerned.  When you see all that being done, and now you are telling us people have now become open. 

I remember, Mr Speaker, some person who came to me and said there is a newspaper, actually I saw –(Ms Tiperu rose_)- Mr Speaker, allow hon. Tiperu to contribute in case it matters.  So, I know the fever, I know how people really feel and when it comes to –

Let me start by reading Churchill. This is the so-called developed world, everything is supposed to be working in a right way, people even do not have problems like the third world have, no money, no nothing.  This is Churchill. He said: “The world today is ruled by harassed politicians absorbed with getting into office or running out the other man, so that not much room is left for debating great issues on their merits.”  This is Churchill. He is not necessarily an authority on politics –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you see, honorable member, I just want to inform you one interesting thing about Churchill.  I think recently when we were talking about - I think it was the Minister of Tourism who said Churchill is the one who called Uganda the Pearl of Africa because of its insects and so forth. Therefore, we should keep these insects, and people were quarrelling about those insects -(Laughter)

BRIG. TUMUKUNDE: Mr Speaker, everyday a mention of the argument is accommodatable. I am only raising mine, Mr Speaker. There is another one on Churchill. This is about politicians and their qualities. How to choose a good politician: “A good politician should have the ability to foretell what is going to happen tomorrow, next week, next month and next year, and to have same ability afterwards to explain why it did not happen -(Laughter)  So, Mr Speaker -(Mr Kutesa rose_)- the power is mine to give him a chance to speak.

MR KUTESA: I am seeking clarification from the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable Minister, he is holding the Floor and definitely he has declined.

BRIG. TUMUKUNDE: Mr Speaker, I hope you are recording my minutes, which I am losing in this process.  We are lucky to have here senior players in Uganda’s politics. I am sure we have forgotten that for some time that Chair was empty and this Chamber was closed. Do not forget that actually immediately before that there was such a House, such great speakers.  I see the eloquence; I see the smartness, Mr Speaker. This has nothing to do with what the reality can be. 

There are times when people vote even against group interest just because maybe they may be few or even one, but he could be right. Or that very one actually, Mr Speaker, could - like it was raised in the Clinton case - have, for example, voted against a situation that would cause problems and maybe that would save the situation for that very period. 

So, Mr Speaker, I come back to the point. We would want to exercise our conscience in privacy. This business of standing and being counted- I want to surprise you, Mr Speaker, that some of us will stand and be counted. That is not the issue. 

Get back to some things, Mr Speaker, which you know very well. The other day a Member of the CA voted against a group interest, which I do not have to elaborate. I know for sure he is not a very, very peaceful man where he is. He may have that time voted in a way that was to his conscience and actually spoken to his conscience. But, I am sure, Mr Speaker, you know that the gentleman is not a happy man. I am not even sure if his family members are happy. I do not have to mention names. 

So, Mr Speaker, we do not want to come here and pretend. If I vote against Tumukunde and he is in charge, Tumukunde can say, “I will not appoint him.” Tumukunde can say he can lose a constituency, especially in Africa. Tumukunde can finance an opponent. Tumukunde can – what do you not know, Mr Speaker? 

I am very sure especially in inadequacy of resources many may not vote their mind. That is why it is important, Mr Speaker that they are allowed because of the circumstances. If the English find difficulty in voting their mind with all their convenience at politics, how about, for example, a young man who entered Parliament yesterday and he knows that if he expresses himself very vividly and clearly about a matter, they will fight him? They are here. Yesterday is another matter. I am told today is different, but I know what they say. I know how they cried, even calling me at night, saying: “Tumukunde, we are being assaulted here; we are having problems.” Now as I talk, I see them look at me with a lot of sympathy –(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, a lot is being said about whom I represent. Yes, Mr Speaker, it matters. But you see going to choose me to represent some people as I represent UPDF; there is something they read in me that is extra to merely being a representative, Mr Speaker. That is my ability at a crucial time to tell what is wrong and right and vote accordingly even when actually the majority may not have voted with me. It is always very common, Mr Speaker, that very few people have had the capacity to tell wrong even when a large majority was saying it is right. 

I remember, Mr Speaker, when we came here in 1986, there was a Parliament. Some people I see here chanting with pleasure were fixed in a corner, majority or no majority. I remember how Kawanga Ssemogerere cried here having lost an election. What did you do?  You did nothing. It comes back to the very point. We should allow people, Mr Speaker, sometimes maybe the few who cannot express themselves openly could be the most important. We should allow them to quietly vote. It even emphasizes individual rights. You do not have to be interfered with- 

Hon. Lumumba is telling me about a matter between my wife and myself. You can imagine sleeping in one bed and it is rocking like a volcano in the middle just because you voted a certain direction. When did Uganda gain this maturity, Mr Speaker?

Mr Speaker, I was hearing the good arguments about what, especially UPDF and the importance of impartiality. A lot must be examined about whether we shall flush ourselves here left and right for the side and for the other side, especially when we have our history on record and it not a history of the year, it is a history of yesterday. We still remember it. I must give other people time. Thank you very much for allowing me -(Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Opange –(Interjection)- motion? Let me hear this and then I consider the motion. 

6.45
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I stand to oppose the motion presented by hon. Musisi on understanding that the amendment of the Constitution involves the people of Uganda and all the members of Parliament in this House to hold the amendment and show the people that the Constitution, which we are having at hand was made by the people and Members of Parliament. 

You are aware that Members of Parliament were insisting of having records here so that even our children to come will definitely know that so and so voted for the motion or against the motion so that when the boat capsizes, then the members will accept the blame and say we made a mistake.

I was one of the Members here who was against the open voting. I cited the issue of intimidation and harassment. I cited the issue of objectivity, that this motion would encourage subjectivity. Later on I revisited my thinking that when you are a fisher monger flies surround you; and if you do not want the flies, then you will never be a fishmonger. 

I am aware that hon. Musisi was talking about 1980 when members were having the pistols. I am aware that honourable members, this system as we talk now, we have over one million pistols outside there, but the discipline of the army, the discipline of the people holding the pistols, everybody can tell that you can move openly. 

I can tell you honourable Members, as we talk now the people of Uganda are watching this open debate. It is the same as voting openly so that when the vote is brought to this Parliament you talk for your people and vote according to what your people are thinking of.

Mr Speaker, if you look at the proponents of those against open voting, they talk about having a hidden agenda. I am aware in 1980, I was a youth winger of UPC, and what we did you can get it in the records. I am telling you, honourable members, you can either go with the majority of people of Uganda- Hon. Musisi you are aware what happened to you, it is very clear and you should not accept to go back to that system. Let us agree that we should move –(Interjection)- hold on. 

Hon. Musisi is now married to UPC, I am told.  But at the same time, in 1980 –(Interruption)

MR MUSISI:  Mr Speaker, everybody knows in this country, I was married on the 14 January 1978 at St. Augustine’s Chapel in Makerere to a lady known as Catherine Nambalirwa. How can the priest now in the name of hon. Opange, one of the people who is to torture me, claim that I have been married to a new wife called UPC. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: You may not depend on the information he has given us. But the kind of marriage he was talking about is political marriage. (Laughter)

MR OPANGE:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  These are facts, there is a provision here in our Ugandan politics, DP, UPC, CP, are now married to form one party so that they fight –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point order. I happen to be the Secretary General of the Conservative Party. I do not know yet that I am married to any political party.  I am only waiting to contest the elections when they come.  So, is the speaker holding the Floor in order to allude to that kind of sentiment, which could destroy my expectations and the expectations of the party without substantiation?  How do you classify that marriage?

THE SPEAKER:  I think the honourable member did not know that you have just been registered. So, you could not have been married.  Thank you.

MR OPANGE:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The gist of the matter is, the people of Uganda need one country, need one people and need peace.  We should really work hard and really sustain the already existing political environment, which promotes development to the rural poor.

Finally, I would wish to end by saying let us stand firm and vote openly and drive the bus to its destiny.  Thank you very much.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I have listened very attentively to the debate of my honourable colleagues on the motion put by honourable Musisi and reading the mood of the House, I see that we have already made up our minds as to what to do.  Therefore, I would like to move that the question be put to dispose off this matter.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Mr Speaker, point of guidance.

THE SPEAKER: The guidance is this. Honourable members, our Rules Committee considered this matter and came up with the Report, but there was a minority report.  The essence of the minority report was that we do not make any alteration. We stand with the provisions as they are in our rules. Therefore, we could not deal with (2) at the same time when there is a Committee’s Report and the other one. Therefore, honourable Musisi came with a motion that we reject the Committee’s Report and then stick with the principle of honourable Matembe, namely that we continue with the secret ballot.  I now put the question.  I am putting the question. That leave it to me.

MR EKANYA:  We are voting?

THE SPEAKER:  I know how to do it. 

MR EKANYA:  Mr Speaker, procedure!

THE SPEAKER: I know what to do with the procedure.    The procedure I am going to follow is the procedure, which is in our rules. I am conversant with those –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA:  We use secret voting to amend this provision, which will determine secret method of voting. I want to be on record, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  We are not amending it and nobody has said we are amending it, because we have not come to that conclusion.  

The motion is that we reject the Committee’s Report, which as you know – and we shall continue to debate the report.  If we say we maintain the position as it is, then there will be no point of debating the report.  That is the position.  

I now put the question on honourable Musisi’s motion that we do not consider the Committee’s report, but we take the position as advocated by honourable Matembe. 
 
(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: The position, honourable members, is as follows: Abstaining - one; for the motion - 25; and against the motion - 123.  

(Question negatived.)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  I am wondering whether those are the two-thirds majority. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, the two-thirds majority is the constitutional requirement and we are dealing with the rules. 

Now, honourable member, that is the position. The question of considering hon. Matembe’s report does not arise. We shall continue to deal with the committee’s report, of course with improvements, if you think there is a need for improvement. We now give you time to study hon. Madada’s motion with the committee’s report. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.  

(The House rose at 7.02 p.m. and adjourned until 2.00 p.m. on Wednesday, 6 April 2005)

