Tuesday, 1 April 2008

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Mr Steven Bakar Mugabi 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery we have students from Uganda Christian University, Mukono located in Mukono North County. You are welcome to Parliament! (Applause) We also have voters from Bukooli constituency of the new member. I understand they have also come. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, in the first place I want to welcome hon. Bakar Mugabi, a new member who has just been sworn in. You are most welcome –(Applause)- and I congratulate you upon your election that has brought you here. Now that you have been elected to represent a constituency, you should take all the people in the constituency as your people and represent their interests. Do not separate them on the basis of who voted for you and who did not. 

You have joined a parliament, which is under a multiparty system. We have a number of parties here: the Opposition and the Government side. Feel free to interact with any Member here. We are not enemies; we are just transacting business for the benefit of the country. Although you are on this side, consider the people on the other side as friends and colleagues as well.

Honourable members, I welcome you from the Easter recess and I hope you have come with the necessary energy to enable you transact a lot of business, which we have pending with us. I thank you for the development projects that you have been able to effect during the recess and the sensitisation exercise especially about what we are doing, and what we are about to do especially on the Land Bill.

There is a lot of pending work in form of Bills and motions. We shall have to make a programme to see how best we can clear that business. The Business Committee will soon sit and consider what to do because although we have started today, Parliament is due to be prorogued. That is, this is the last part of the second session, which is likely to end around mid May. But as you realise, the budgeting process is supposed to start as far as Parliament is concerned. Therefore, you will have to programme to meet the sectors in your respective committees and consider the budget so that we are in time to report back to the President about our views on the proposals that they are sending us - I suppose today or tomorrow. Therefore, I appeal to you to be diligent and I hope you will be diligent as you have always been so that we can do as much as we can during this last part.

I have been informed by the Minister of Internal Affairs, Dr Rugunda, that we are expecting the signing of the Juba Agreement this week. I don’t know whether we will be able to send - but I think our prayers should be to have the successful conclusion of that exercise. You are welcome back, honourable members.

2.47
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to request that we follow up on the statement that the Minister of Works had promised us on the matter of road safety. While we were away on Easter recess, we learnt of the accident on Masaka Road where so many people are said to have died but I don’t have the exact figures. However, the thing that continues to run through is the issue of over-speeding. Before we adjourned, we had asked the Ministry of Works to come with an update to this House and tell us what is happening with speed governor installations and the implementation of the road safety regulations. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, before we went on our Christmas recess you had directed that the Ministry of Public Service presents to this House an update on the payment of pensions. To-date, we haven’t had that statement. I would like to ask that both statements are availed to this House. Thank you.

2.48
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a matter of national importance, urgent in nature and it concerns the issue of the floods in the city. I don’t want to call them floods because it is just a run-off in the city when there is rain. This is not a hurricane or the Tsunami but we have continued to witness catastrophes in the city. 

On the night of Thursday last week, people in Kampala Central suffered a disastrous catastrophe when there was heavy downpour, which affected a number of homesteads particularly in my constituency in the villages of Luzige Zone, Kisenyi III Parish, Yowaana Maria in Kisenyi, Mengo Parish and St Balikuddembe Market. People lost property worth lots of money particularly in St Balikuddembe and homesteads were destroyed in various parts of the city; inside and outside my constituency although I will speak particularly about my constituency. 

We need to know the cause of this. At least we should get a statement from the line minister on this. Why should we continue to have these floods in the heart of the city? Mr Speaker, if we have failed to tame nature then we cannot talk of modernisation or development in this country. This is just rain water; it is not floods as I said. 

Secondly, I have been talking to people particularly in St Balikuddembe Market. They have studied the cause of these floods and they know the source. It is basically the narrow trenches, gutters and failure to maintain the drainage system. They have made it categorically clear to the authorities concerned that they have the capacity and they can do it but they have been denied the opportunity to go ahead. I would request the Minister of Local Government because I have read a document- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought you rose on the issue of floods because there are many issues. Don’t you think you should confine yourself on floods and what should be done for your people?

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable member for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is that, these floods in Kampala are basically caused by channels that are blocked by buveera. We brought here a motion to ban buveera but it has not been effected at all. The way it is being administered leaves everybody wondering whether there was a ban on buveera; they now come in microns, which cannot be explained. So, the only way to control these floods in Kampala is to have a total ban on buveera. 

The Committee on Environment is working on this and I think that it should expedite the process and come up with a law on a total ban on buveera, then the issue that the honourable member is presenting will be lessened. I thank you.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, for that information. Mr Speaker, I was requesting the Minister of Local Government to come with a statement on this particular matter as well as the Ministry of Works because there are issues that involve this ministry as well. The Ministry of Local Government wrote a letter dated 30 November 2007 to the town clerk stopping all the transactions with service providers. This has affected the people in St Balikuddembe Market who are desirous of working on the process themselves like de-silting these trenches and gullies. I wonder whether we could get a statement on this particular issue. 

In the mean time, I wonder whether the Minister of Disaster Preparedness could come to the rescue of these people who have lost millions of shillings, assets and properties. This is a serious matter! People in St Balikuddembe particularly are relying on borrowed capital from micro finances and they are going to suffer tremendously if they are not helped to get a fresh start. Some of these have lost their assets completely and it is difficult for them to start up their businesses again. If the Minister of Disaster Preparedness could come to the rescue of these people, I would be happy. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.55
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring to the attention of the House a bizarre incident that occurred on Friday morning 28 March 2008 in my constituency in a zone called Centenary Zone, Wabigalo. 

On that day at about 4.00 a.m. a gentleman called Wilson Kasaya who poses and claims to be an operative of State House, accompanied by about 30 other men wielding hammers and machetes and 20 others in civilian clothes armed with AK47s and pistols, attacked the zone and began an eviction exercise.

Mr Speaker, the team awoke their victims and hounded them out of their homes and later they used a grader to raze all their structures down and in the process, wanton looting ensued of the victims’ property. Three people, including the LC1 Chairman Laurel Matovu and his son Richard, were badly beaten, and these sustained very serious injuries and are receiving treatment in Kibuli Hospital.

All these victims who are 22 families, lost their shelter, they lost their household essentials and property and they are right now homeless. I am concerned that this eviction was not lawful. Kasaya Wilson acquired this title by public auction following a mortgage default by one Yawe, to Centenary Bank and at the time that this land was mortgaged it had two types of tenants: one, the lawful tenants who had purchased these portions from Yawe and were awaiting transfer of title. The others were bona fide tenants brought in by operation of section 29 of the Land Act. 

Mr Speaker, the due process of the law was not followed. There was no service of notice to these victims, neither was there any arrangement of adequate compensation and here we are in my constituency now with a problem of this nature. I would like to make an appeal to Government - first of all, to the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness because this is disaster. I have got 22 homeless families with nothing to eat, with nowhere to sleep, with no cooking utensils, and I think this can as well be termed as a disaster. I would now like to call upon and beseech the Minister of Disaster to intervene and assist the victims of this illegal eviction.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to call for very stern action from the Inspector of Police. I called the DPC of Katwe on Friday and Saturday morning; they brought in Police but to my amazement, the Police told me that “Hon. Mabikke, we are helpless; we cannot move and intervene with these armed people. We do not know; they could be on special operations.” So, we would like Police CID to investigate this and take action on this culprit of this illegal eviction. Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much; we are really ending with you. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, you had already picked me. 

3.00
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is a national concern. Last year, the Minister of Education and Sports told us that they were working on the issue of universities. But now as we talk, Kyambogo University –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought you had just come in to supplement what, these Members who came and said they have a problem, and who before we came had indicated to me that there are serious problems in their constituencies that they wanted to bring at home, had said. But for you, I did not really receive your indication. I think what we can do is maybe you can come to my Office tomorrow and let me know the kind of matter, and then we shall solve it.   

3.01
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to share with Members of this House a matter of national concern which affects the livelihood not only of my constituency, but also of our general farmers and the rural citizenry. It partly pairs in common with the concerns of hon. Lukwago. 

For sometime now since last year, we have been seeing a trend of not only manmade disasters but also natural disasters. We had floods in the east and our farmers were heavily affected. Just some days to the Easter holidays, my constituency in Kamwenge - a whole sub county – 2,300 households were affected by a very bad hailstorm. It destroyed the gardens and houses. It did not also stop in Kamwenge; it crossed to Ibanda and all those are farmers and I have a very keen interest in farmers. 

But on the same note, I think we should give credit where it is due. I am very happy for the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, who sent in his colleague Musa Ecweru to intervene. But the reason I am mentioning this is that, the intervention of the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness is very limited to emergency relief –(Interjection)- yes, only emergency relief and this calls for a bigger planning programme on how to manage disasters.

MR ABURA: Thank you, Colleague, for giving way.  Mr Speaker, the Member has just raised a very genuine issue concerning disaster. We have seen many times when we experience disaster that the first aid which is given is always posho, beans and sometimes blankets. I think to address this issue properly, other long lasting provisions like timber, iron sheets and nails should be addressed. 

On top of that, we have never in our lives planned for disaster and right now as I talk, the entire mass media is warning us about Nibiru; that it will come and destroy the earth. (Laughter) How prepared are we? We should be prepared because it is the biggest; it is the mother of all disasters. So, we should be prepared like Noah. So, as the Member said, sincerely let us extend our service and our aid to the disaster areas. Thank you.

MR TUMWEBAZE: As I wind up, Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable colleague for the information but I am not yet to the level of Nibiru; I am just concerned with the disasters that affect our livelihoods on a day-to-day basis. I hope when we get to the days of Nibiru, we shall pray. 

But, Mr Speaker, the point I am putting on the Floor is that we should think of comprehensive planning, which allows government sectors to mainstream disaster management in their sectors, perhaps. For example, not only crops were destroyed in Ibanda; a health centre, a roof of a government school was blown off. The Ministry of Disaster is limited; they do not have the iron sheets, they do not have the capacity to compensate the other property. 

I am, therefore, calling upon the Prime Minister, in addition to their good rapid response mechanism but limited, to start planning now for disaster. If a roof is blown off, the Ministry of Education should intervene. Programmes like NAADS should not only think that they will support the farmers who are progressing; they should also prepare for emergencies. So, this is a point that we should take note of because it is like a trend and perhaps one may get worried that even the prophecies of Nibiru could be on the way. So, our planning should be focussed to have the component of disaster especially in the key service provision ministries. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. But honourable members, I think for these kinds of interventions, the purpose should be to report and seek immediate action rather than going into policy matters, which can be considered by the appropriate committee handling the sector. They should be just to alert Government that we have had this and this please, can you come to our rescue, instead of these long contributions that have been made when the opportunity comes. 

I think that ends these kinds of interventions because as I said, if you have anything to say after the communication, is to indicate to me the kind of problem that you have so that when you stand I can know the kind of problem that you have other than using it as a general way of making debates. Yes, Minister of Disaster. Why don’t we hear the Leader of the Opposition first so that you can finally come? It may also have something to do with disaster. 

3.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine has very little to do with the concerns raised by the Members. But since you have requested me to make my submissions, I thank you very much for the opportunity.

It has been our tradition that when a new Member comes to the House and is sworn in, we welcome that Member. And we in the opposition, being decent ladies and gentlemen, we do not want to send a wrong signal to hon. Bakar that we have anything personal against him. And, therefore, I wanted to rise on behalf of the Opposition, to welcome hon. Bakar to the House. (Applause)

While we wish him well in the House and in the celebration that he will definitely engage in after here, and while we do not want to spoil that celebration, I think I am constrained to again say something about by-elections in this country, which we must take very seriously. Mr Speaker, we are having in every by-election resident district commissioners, who are senior civil servants, taking sides. We are having in every by-election Police patrols moving to scare off people. We may take this lightly, but by-elections are normally simple issues. If they are taken to the extent of deploying people in civilian clothing with guns, getting RDCs to exercise whatever authority they have - which we do not know - in being partisan, we must then get worried. Because what will happen to bigger elections?

We have seen what has happened in Kenya about elections. We must pray now for Zimbabwe about elections and honourable colleagues, as mush as we want our members to come and sit with us in the House, let us try to do the decent thing and build democracy based on openness, freedom and competencies to convince rather than intimidation, scaremongering etc. Otherwise, honourable member, you are welcome against that background. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.11
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to add my voice to that of the Leader of the Opposition, to welcome hon. Bakar in the House - (Applause) – and to congratulate him for a resounding victory in Bukooli North. 

I just wanted to give information to this House, in my capacity as Minister in charge of Security - [Hon. Members: “Insecurity”] - if hon. Katuntu does not know what insecurity means - (Laughter) - I could help. Just to inform the House and the hon. Leader of the Opposition and my good friend, that the resident district commissioner is the chairman of the district security committee and the Police of Uganda is in charge of law and order everywhere in Uganda everyday, and particularly in places where there is reason to take all the precautions necessary to ensure that there is law and order. So, simply to assure the opposition that when you see the RDC and Police perform their duties, kindly lend them all the support that you can in order for them to effectively execute their duty. Thank you very much. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my honourable brother, for his submission as security minister. But I wish he had also submitted as a lawyer -(Laughter)- who knows the provisions related to elections. The Electoral Commission is in charge of elections and it is only when they need security to a certain level that they are mandated to deploy. But where RDCs who I know are chairs of district security committees, and whom I would respect if they were exercising their responsibility, come with hooligans with guns in plain clothes and control politicians who have a legitimate right to participate in elections when they don’t have any right, then Mr Minister, you should get worried. I thank you for the information, but I also request that you follow up on the conduct of the people under your charge. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Minister for Disaster Preparedness, you had to make a statement on the requests made to you. 

3.14
THE MINISTER FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for having brought to my attention and to the attention of this House the problems that our people are facing. 

On the question of floods, it looks like we are facing a serious problem globally. We have unusual rains in many parts of Africa and even in Asia. Recently, I was in the United States; rivers were over flooding and destroying property. It looks like it is a global phenomenon which we must face and therefore not attribute to simply negligence on the part of any government. That does not exonerate governments from taking precaution and reducing risks. 

The floods in Kampala can be explained using many ways. Part of the problem is that some of the properties are in areas where they should not be; people have built in swamps. And there are people who choose to invest in very risky areas and authorities like the city council, permits them to do so. And the Minister of Local Government, the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness may not stop them when they have already built. But I think now, honourable colleagues, we have enough evidence to show that building in certain areas is risky and you do not need to call on the minister to tell your constituents that they should make wise decisions given this experience so far.

However, I would like to also call upon the Members of Parliament from Kampala particularly in Central and Lubaga South, and other parts that they should take note that the situation has been worsening. If you look at the Kalerwe area, 15 to 20 years ago, that was a catchment for water; now it has houses. So, what else happens when water has no way of sinking into the ground, it floods. That is not to say that I do not sympathise but certainly there is a problem there. We may have at some point say that people who are in areas where they should not be should leave. If that were to come, I hope Members here would be supportive of that kind of decision because it is not government that persuaded them to put properties in areas which are very risky.

Now, on the question of evictions, I would like to tell the honourable member where this took place that the law is very clear; those affected should take the course of the court. In the case of those who are affected and they need relief, it is better that the honourable member, and indeed even those areas where floods are affecting people that we get details of what we can do and not wait for Parliament to be the place – (Interjection) - because by the time I leave this House to go and organise relief, people would have suffered already. If I were told before I came here, then I would have had the machinery to move to their rescue. Rescue is as important as informing on a disaster.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, honourable minister. I wanted clarification on two things: One, the issue of haphazard development that you are talking about with the permission of Kampala City Council. I do not know whether Government is not aware of this problem and is putting it or lumping the blame on Kampala City Council.

Secondly, I specifically mentioned St Balikuddembe Market. I do not know if it is one of those facilities which are in a wrong place. Are you saying it is not supposed to be there? I want to get clarification on this because it is one area which has suffered tremendously every now and again when it rains. I want to hear it from you or any other minister responsible whether it is not supposed to be there so that we get to know.

Finally, on the particularisation that you are talking about honourable minister, of the kind of relief we are seeking for, I need to know whether it is not your responsibility to find out how these people have suffered, how many have suffered and the kind of assistance they need. But the information I can give you - I have told you that people have lost their assets, they have lost their capital and they need assistance to get a fresh start, particularly in St Balikuddembe and in those other residential areas. They have lost their homesteads. Their houses have been brought down by these floods. So, you need to get the kind of assistance you can give them. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, is it not really in view of what has been raised, the question of those concerned to investigate and see what kind of assistance that can be given rather than going into these policies and what not? Because these are cases of emergency, we should not really –(Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the reasons why Government decided to take over the management of Kampala is precisely because of what hon. Lukwago is saying. (Applause) I hope therefore you will be on the side of that decision.

Secondly, if I knew the number, you see you can say people have been affected, yes, how many? You say they are many, but how many? Where? That is why it is important that we get information. You cannot act in a vacuum. You need concrete information for the intervention to make sense. (Interjections) Can I be allowed to finish, Mr Speaker?

Hailstorms are on the increase. Hailstorms have to do with weather changes in the oceans; they are not controlled by any government; they are not controlled by a country. I therefore would appeal again that when a disaster hits, give us information to see what we can do. I think the honourable member earlier on said that the ministry is not adequately equipped but that has to do also with the awareness this country has had on how to handle disaster preparedness. I think we are getting very prepared and I think when I come here with the disaster preparedness policy, I will have your support and the planning of the economy, the planning of survival, will incorporate more measures than has been the case.

Lastly, this question of Nubiru – I do not want to disappoint my good friend.

MR OKOT OGONG: I would like to thank my honourable friend for giving way. I want to get clarification from the minister whether he is aware of Chapter 17, Article 249 of the Constitution, which stipulates clearly that there shall be a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission for Uganda to deal with both natural and manmade disaster? Mr Speaker, we promulgated this Constitution in 1995 and it is now 13 years and we have not effected this Article of the Constitution. 

So, I want, if Government cannot bring forth to Parliament this provision because Article 2 says, “Parliament shall for the purposes of this Article prescribe the composition, functions and procedure for implementation of the functions of the commission.” If Government is not ready to move this, I think I am going to prepare a private member’s Bill and put it to Parliament.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from you is whether you are aware that normally before the Members of Parliament intervene, the local leaders of the affected areas are the people who are primarily responsible? Are you aware that the LC III Chairman of Kampala Central, which is the area hon. Lukwago is talking about, is a very good cadre of the NRM who should have come to you and informed you even before hon. Lukwago came? (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I have high regard for my good friend, the Leader of the Opposition and I also like his humour but some of these things are not humour generating issues. I think the honourable member was talking about a serious matter and he, unlike many of us who have large constituencies geographically speaking; he is in an urban area so he can sit with the local administration people and present a detailed information paper to the ministry for action to be taken. That one I think he is entitled to do and is expected to do it. He does not have to be the local and then area MP as a separate entity; they are supposed to work together for the same people. (Hon. Members rose_)

I want to conclude, Sir. Since the issue of Nibiru was brought in, I think we need astronomers, those of you who have downloaded information on the Internet it may be a bigger problem than we may think and it may be affecting us globally and therefore some of us are victims in all ways, including those who are administering relief. We may not have enough relief to challenge the impact of Nibiru because it may be so catastrophic that all of us will no longer exist. Otherwise, I would like to appeal to honourable members on both sides – I am aware of course of the constitutional provisions; that is why I hope before the end of this month, I will come to this House with the disaster preparedness and management policy whereupon all these challenges will be addressed collectively and recommendations made for policy implementation. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, in his communication the Speaker made reference that the Minister of Internal Affairs had given him in regard to the Juba Peace Process. A number of us Members of Parliament were in Juba last week together with the minister. In fact the minister and his team returned and left us in Juba. When all the agreements, all the items were initialised and final argument was also initialized, there was a question of how the agreements would be signed. The LRA were saying that their leader Joseph Kony would not be able to travel to Juba -(Interjections)– let me just give this information because the Speaker said it and nobody could give this information to the House. So, we returned.

Over the weekend we got communication that we were supposed to leave for Juba this afternoon. Unfortunately, today again and part of yesterday we got information that the date for the signing of the agreement had been extended from the 5th, which should have been this Saturday, to a new date of probably 15th and reason that we finally got was that Joseph Kony and his group were trying to come back to Garamba and they had not reached, and they are not likely to reach by the 5th. That is why you have seen us. Otherwise, we should have been at the airport by 1 o’clock and we would have written to you, Mr Speaker. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I wish to lay on Table the following papers:

1. The National Budget Framework Paper for the 2008/2009, covering a three year micro economic plan for 2008/09, to 2010-2011. 
2. Programme for economic and social development. 
3. 	Preliminary indicative revenue and expenditure frame work for the next financial year and the medium term.

Mr Speaker, in accordance with Section 5(2) of the Budget Act I beg to lay before this Parliament the preliminary estimates for self-accounting bodies with comments and recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: It is original. (Laughter) Thank you very much honourable minister. The documents will be taken by the Budget Committee to start the process. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

TREASURY MEMORANDUM FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2000

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I would like to thank the Public Accounts Committee of this Parliament for the work that they are doing in looking at what the report of the Auditor-General has said as far as various accounts are concerned. We as the Ministry of Finance, together with all relevant ministries have appropriately responded to the issues that were raised both by the Auditor-General and by the Public Accounts Committee. I beg to lay this on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

PRESENTAITON OF PAPERS
TREASURY MEMORANDUM FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2001

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Treasury Memorandum for the Report of the Public Accounts Committee for the financial year ended 30th June 2001 and I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. We have appropriately responded to all issues that have been raised. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The appropriate committee will again take this for study and then help us to debate.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE LUGOGO LAND

THE SPEAKER: I remember the report was tabled and we adjourned to enable us to study and make contributions to the report. It is now due for debate. 

MR LUKWAGO: As far as I can recall, this report was presented but since then, no copies have been circulated. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that the case?

MR LUKWAGO: To the best of my recollection, Mr Speaker; but I stand to be corrected on this. 

THE SPEAKER: I have been advised that the copies were circulated. It would appear that because of the recess, you forgot to read the report to enable you to make a response but the copies were given to the Members. The same appears to be the case for Nakasero. Is it true that you do not have copies of Lugogo? The answer I receive is that we got the copies. 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I think we have a small problem in that coming to the House today, I do not know how many people knew what we were going to discuss -(Interjections)- whether it is online, Members may not know. Therefore, many would have come without the copies of this document and if we have to do justice particularly to this sensitive report, I would suggest that both Lugogo and Nakasero be deferred to tomorrow.  

MR LUKWAGO: As far as Nakasero is concerned, Mr Speaker, I do have a minority report, which has not been presented. If you would allow me to –(Interjections)- the main report was presented in my absence.

THE SPEAKER: Let us first deal with Lugogo. It appears Members are not ready to make a contribution and perhaps we should shift this to tomorrow so that you go and read the report overnight, for debate tomorrow.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE NAKASERO MARKET

THE SPEAKER: This report was also presented but he says he has a minority report and because he was not in the country then, he could not present it and he wants to do that so -

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, our Rules of Procedure say that if there is a minority report, it would be attached to the main report. Our brother, the Attorney-General of our side; did he attach the minority report to the main report? 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not the chairperson of the committee and it is not my duty to do that. Mine is to forward the copy to the relevant authorities. If it was not attached, it could be a minor irregularity, which can be rectified with leave of this House. It would not go to the substance of the matter and I know as far as the spirit of the Constitution is concerned, there are irregularities, which are minor and do not go to the substance of the matter and they should not defeat substantive justice. In this particular case, I am submitting that if it was not attached, with leave of this House, you would permit me to proceed and present it so that when we debate, the two reports are together.

THE SPEAKER: Can the chairman of the committee help us on this? He is not here. How about the deputy chairperson?

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Mr Speaker, I am not the deputy chairperson to the committee but I am a member of the committee. I thought if my colleague, hon. Lukwago, wanted to raise the minority report, this report could have been put at the time when we were producing the major report. It was not even presented to the committee as a report to be attached to the major report. 

Secondly, most of the time when we were debating the issues of the committee, hon. Lukwago would come once and twice. And if he wanted to raise this minority report, he would have brought us together as the members of the committee to go through his divergence in the report and we attach. And by the time the chairman presented his report, he would have said, “There is also a minority report raised by so many members”, and all the reports would be given to this House. He would also say, “Maybe tomorrow when you are coming, check in your drawers in your offices and come with the two reports to this House”. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter. The procedure is very clear. When the majority members of the committee make their report and you have a dissenting opinion, you first go through their report and then you make yours. You cannot object to something you have not seen. This is the procedure. What I did was to request for the majority report; I went through it; I made a minority report; I submitted to the office of the chair and that is the procedure. I am a committee member and so I submitted it to the office of the chair. It is not my duty as a dissenting member to follow up the matter to make sure all the time that it is appended, stapled and so on and so forth. The rules do not impose a duty on Lukwago.

THE SPEAKER: This is rule 178, on minority reports: 
1.	“Any Member or Members dissenting from the opinion of the majority of a committee may state in writing the reason for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee. 
2.	The Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee shall be given time to present the minority report at the time of consideration of the committee report.” 

MR LUKWAGO: This is what I am saying; that if it was – first, I am saying I submitted to the relevant authorities. And if there was any omission on the part of any Member, I think that omission should not vitiate the substance of the matter because the rule is very clear that I shall be given an opportunity to present it. But if it was not, I think that is a matter that can be rectified. The report has not been debated and I do not see any reason at this stage why a report should be frustrated from being presented when we have not gone into the debate – I mean the minority report. It is my duty to present my report. Unless they prove that there was negligence on my part, which is not there. I made my report and submitted it to the office of the chairperson and my duty stops at that. It is not I who organises the final report to be presented to the House. It is the duty of the chairperson and the vice but not my duty.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, you have clearly quoted the rule which should be guiding us on how to treat minority reports. Clearly, you said the report should be appended to the main report. We are not in court to start arguing legalistically to justify the case of an honourable colleague who is about to bend a rule. Can you restrain the Member from insisting because as far as we are concerned, no minority report was appended to the major report? Therefore, we can consider this as an independent report in its own right? We seek your guidance over this matter.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, you read this rule and if I did not hear wrongly, the minority report is mentioned in the second rule, which you read. The first part says that a Member objecting would state his or her objection in writing and that would be attached. I did not hear the report being attached. Then you said the Member would be given opportunity to present a minority report. But even if that had not happened, we have all stood on the Floor and breached the rules until we are told what the rules are. I think a breach of the rule which is not malicious –(Interjections)– my big worry is that because of what we consider a breach of the rules, we are going to deny the people of Kampala Central the voice of their Member of Parliament who considered the report and believed that a position should be presented that protects their interests. I, personally, would wish to see that there is no minority report emanating from the Opposition in relation to the report of the chair of the committee. But my sense of justice tells me that if the Member insists, we should not stifle him. 

MS NAKAWUKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I am seeking your guidance. I do not see any reason as to why we should have regard to that small technicality in the Rules of Procedure. If need be, let us just amend that rule because I do not see any harm in hon. Lukwago presenting a minority report, which represents the interests of the people of Kampala. Let us just do it in the best interest of this country. 

THE SPEAKER: It is up to you, Members. What I did was to read to you the rule. It seems to be mandatory in the sense that it says: “Any Member or Members dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of the reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.” This is your rule. 

The second consideration is that this should be, “at the time of consideration of the report which has the other appendix”, then he is given an opportunity. There are two parts; one, is how you start it. You start it by appending your objection or dissent to the report. The second is at the time of considering and one is given an opportunity to make his case to justify his report. What happened is that the report was presented. Was it presented with the appendix or it was not? Hon. Lukwago is saying he did submit this to the chairperson but if he did and the chairperson did not append it, it is a question of whether what he says happened. And this of course goes to the integrity of the chairperson: assuming hon. Lukwago presented. But if he did not, then the chairman is going to say, “He never presented his minority report”. 

We have to investigate this because it touches integrity. Otherwise, what we can do is, after a pray, we can suspend the rule. We can say, “Suspend rule 178 so that the minority report, which was not appended, is submitted.” That is the procedure.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, the issue you have raised is whether the chairman received this communication or not. If he received it and never performed his duty then it would be incompetence. And as hon. Lukwago said, he submitted it to the office of the chairperson. I do not take this as submission to an honourable member, but he submitted to an office, which has a chair, vice and a clerk. If the chair is not here as a person, the office is still represented, we have the vice-chairperson, he can guide us on this. Otherwise, I would beg that if there is no consistence on that matter, it would be incompetence on the part of the chairperson and the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a bit complicated because it is officially known that hon. Lukwago has complained against the chairperson in respect of Nakasero Market. Now it turns out that he says that he did give a report and he says that the report was not appended. I do not know whether what he is saying is what happened especially since we do not have the chairman concerned. It is a serious matter – the facts have now been given to you. It is up to you to say that, “The rule says this but let us suspend the rule –

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, for whatever sentiments that we all own, let us go back to what the rules say. I want to read it a gain. Rule 178 on minority reports says: “Any Member or Members dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended - yes statement of reasons, but it is only when you object, which you may or may not –

THE SPEAKER: No, it is a report, hon. Leader of the Opposition. The subject, you see it is a minority report, and a report must be in writing and must be appended. So you cannot miss this. 

I think what we should do – hon. Lukwago says he made a report - the question of whether it was not a report doesn’t arise because the author himself says that he made a report and gave a copy to the chairperson of the committee. However, you are saying that you do not have it as an annexure to that report; it is a serious matter. We cannot just rush it and say, “It is okay”. But in our wisdom, we can suspend this rule to allow a late filing of the minority report so that we can consider it.

MR LUKWAGO: I want to erase any doubt in the minds of the people on this question of whether I submitted it or not. I did take the responsibility, in addition to that, I got a copy and gave it to the Leader of the Opposition and to the best of my recollection, the Leader of the Opposition wrote to you, Mr Speaker. I received a copy of the letter about this minority report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you now changing to say that the notification was given to the Speaker? I am not the chairman of the committee. Now you are changing.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I rise under rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure and I move that we suspend rule 178 in order that hon. Lukwago presents to this House his minority report. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, do we need to hear arguments on this or we can pronounce ourselves on it?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I wish to support the motion because we deserve to hear both sides of the coin so that we can have a balanced view.

THE SPEAKER: I have asked: do we need a debate? That is my question.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You said that there is apparently a conflict between hon. Lukwago and the chairperson of that committee, and that is a very serious statement. And we are seeing a trend of accusations: “I submitted in my report,” and we are saying the report was not received. Should we leave this matter at that, or you direct an investigation? 

The integrity of this House has many times been challenged because of careless statements and unsubstantiated allegations. I think we should not leave it at this. Much as we have in agreement, as guided by our Leader of Government Business, allowed the suspension of the rules. I think this should be pursued further; personal disagreements should not be allowed to affect the conduct of parliamentary business.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think your argument is that you are opposing the suspension because you want us to conduct investigations; is that the case?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, the two issues are not in conflict. All that this House needs is information. And if hon. Lukwago says that he has information that can help us assess the report on Nakasero better, then I think this House should have that information in the form of hon. Lukwago’s minority report. 

This does not mean that this House cannot direct an investigation into whether the chairman of the committee received the report or not. The answer would be whether he received the report or not, and that has nothing to do with the substance of the report on Nakasero. So, I support the motion moved by hon. Ben Wacha to suspend the rules so that we can have this report, this piece of evidence before this House, so that this House can know the truth and pronounce itself on the basis of proper information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that we suspend the rule, which requires attachment of a minority report to the committee’s report so that we can therefore receive – even if it was not attached to the main report - we receive it and consider it together with the committee’s report. Is that clear? I think it is.

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the purpose -

MRS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We expected to have received a minority report attached to the main report so that if we are to debate it, we would debate it from an informed point of view. But right now we do not even have anything. So, much as he may present his minority report, what are we going to be debating based on? 

THE SPEAKER: I think what will happen if you allow the suspension is that he will give you copies of his minority report, you attach it to the main committee report, you study it and then you can come and make your contribution. That is what it means - because definitely you cannot debate it unless you have copies. But when we suspend the rule, we allow him to table and present it, you get copies, and then you use his report and the report of the committee for a comprehensive debate.

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also support the motion but I have a procedural concern and I just need guidance from you. This House mandated a committee on Rules to investigate hon. Lukwago’s behaviour in regard to this very report. The committee also received communication from you about the complaint by hon. Lukwago against the chairman of the same. My inquiry is: what will be the effect of the recommendations we make here in regard to this report? What would be their effect on the investigations of the Committee of Rules? I just seek your guidance on this particular issue.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I remember but I do not know how far the committee has gone with this. So I think what I need is at least to keep hold of this and I get in touch with - hon. Kiyingi is not here, the chairman of the committee -(Hon. Members rose_)- but why don’t we deal with the motion and then see what to do? Maybe we may not debate –

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I am a member of that committee and as far as I know, both Members are yet to appear before this committee such that investigations can begin. I am really concerned about the effect of the recommendations we shall make here.

THE SPEAKER: Are you trying to suggest that our action here may prejudice your proceedings?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, that is what I imagine.

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to you under our Rules of Procedure, which provide you with specific authority as the Speaker of this Parliament. Under rule 6(2), the Speaker has the authority to preserve order, decorum, in the House and shall decide on the questions of order and practice. The question between hon. Lukwago and hon. Ekanya cannot override the question of the people of Nakasero. I would like to pray to you that as the Speaker of this Parliament you take a decision and –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, these rules have to be followed. I think the motion, which was moved by hon. Wacha is what I had suggested to you that because we did not have a copy but we have the powers to suspend a rule, so that we get his minority report. But assuming we have decided on that, the other complication will come - what he has now said. Do we continue with the debate? We can receive the report but can we debate the report when there are other matters pending? That is the issue. Otherwise, I think let me put the question, you decide on the suspension of the rules, then if you say yes, we receive it. If you say no, we do not receive it, and then see how to proceed.

(Question put) 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is as follows on the motion to suspend rule 178: abstentions 7, against 11 and those for are 56. The motion is carried.

(Question agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now what it means is that hon. Lukwago, you can present your minority report whose copies members say they do not have; make sure you give the copies to them so that they can study it together with the other one, please.

4.10
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members for giving me this opportunity to present the minority report.  Mr Speaker, I would request - (Interruption)

MR WERIKHE KAFABUSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am seeking guidance on what you actually guided us on earlier. What I am saying relates to the fact that you ruled that we get copies of the report from hon. Lukwago, we study it and then be able to debate it.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes.

MR KAFABUSA:  But if he presents it now when we do not have copies, how are we going to react or respond to this report.  I thought that is the guidance you gave, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Lukwago, you have been permitted to present your report, but of course you have to get copies for the Members so that when time comes for you to read it they can use it during the debate. So, permission is granted, but get copies for the Members.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, if I could be permitted to lay it on Table for purposes of – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you can do that, but copies must be produced for the Members.

MR LUKWAGO:  I am requesting for this because right now I cannot make copies, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  You just lay the copy on Table.

MR LUKWAGO:  I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to take this opportunity to lay on Table this minority report of the Local Governments Accounts Committee on Poor Revenue Performance in respect to the tender and development of Nakasero market. 

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, thank you, but we need copies.  So, the consideration, therefore, is suspended, right?

REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE CONCERNS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC LAND

4.12
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Sebuliba Mutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to present to the Parliament, the report of the Public Accounts Committee on its investigations into the concerns of Auditor-General on the Illegal Distribution of Public Land in Uganda as prepared in March 2008.  The copies are available. Mr Speaker and honourable members, the report begins with the introduction.  

Introduction.
This report is necessitated by actions/decisions -

THE SPEAKER:  Are you going to read it or you have a summary?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: I am going to summarise because, Mr Speaker, after presenting it, I am going to give members about a week to go through it together with the second report we are going to present before they come to debate both of them here.  

On page 1, we have got the introduction and of course on page 2, we have the methodology.  Under the methodology, I would like to say that the committee held meetings with all the affected accounting officers. The following people appeared before the committee: Officials from the Uganda Land Commission; the permanent secretary - Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment; the permanent secretary - Ministry of Health; the permanent secretary - Office of the President; the Director, Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital; the Director, Uganda Broadcasting Cooperation (UBC) and the LCV Kitgum District.  

Section 3 has the concerns of the Auditor-General. The Auditor-General was concerned that land held, in trust, by Uganda Land Commission for some Government institutions was allocated to other individuals, investors and institutions without carrying out consultations with the responsible institutions.  These transactions mostly affect the Office of the President, particularly the encroachment on land measuring 8.165 acres belonging to Radio Uganda broadcasting station at Bugolobi by private individuals without clearance of Uganda Land Commission.  In one of the cases, the Auditor-General noted that attempts by the accounting officer, Office of the President, to block encroachment, failed.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, another reported case of public land grabbing was in the Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital. According to the Auditor-General’s report of 2003/004, the Uganda Land Commission allocated public land set aside for this hospital to private developers who included, among others, public servants from Ministry of Land, Office of the President and State House.

Section four details the committee findings with paragraph 4.1 giving the description of Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital. Paragraph 4.2 gives details on management and disposal of public land, while paragraph 4.3 gives the background to the sale of land.  

Mr Speaker, as Members read through this report, this House will recall that on the 6th day of May 2004, - I want to particularly bring out this one because they may have to refer to the Hansard – passed a resolution urging Government to stay the sale of land belonging to Butabika Hospital.  The motion had been moved by the then Chairperson of the social services committee, hon. Dorothy Hyuha and seconded by six others who included the following: Hon. John Eresu, Mp Kaberamaido, hon. Dr Lwanga Herbert, MP Bukoto South, hon. James Mwandha, Representative of People With Disabilities, Eastern Region; hon. James Kinobe, MP Katikamu North; hon. Martin Wandera, MP Workers then and hon Jane Alisemera, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo.  You will find, in here, attached annex 1 of this report regarding this motion, but like I have said, Members can refer to the Hansard if they want more details on this.

Paragraph 4.4 gives details of the beneficiaries of the land. Mr Speaker, according to the list obtained by the committee, the beneficiaries include Ms Sana trading of P.O Box 61493 and Jabel Ali, Dubai, United Arab Emirates with 250 Acres of land to construct a modern hospital facility. Secondly, 100 acres are owned by Ms Property Services Limited of P.O Box 1707, Kampala and thirdly, 50 acres owned by Ms Mukwano Industries Uganda Limited of P.O Box 2671, Kampala, for the construction of a housing estate.  

Further scrutiny of the information availed to the committee revealed that the investors listed were actually public officials from Ministry of Lands; Office of the President and State House; and if you read through, this list of public officials, the committee discovered that it included, among others: 
•	Tibisaasa Jonathan- Commissioner of Lands Registry - Plot 9 Mutungo Hill View Road; 
•	Edward Karibwende- Commissioner of Lands- Plot 3 Butabika Rise; 
•	Luziraa Florence- US/Lands- Plot 1 Mutungo Hill View Close; 
•	Mrs Kabanda- wife of PS Lands- Plot 2 Mutungo Hill View Close; 
•	Wanyenze Rita- Secretary/Chairman ULC- Plot 19 Butabika Drive; 
•	Bwayo Ivan- Son Secretary/ CM- ULC- Plot  17 Butabika Drive and Plot 9 Circular Road Access 1;  
•	Watson Wakooli- Ministry of Lands- Plot 33A Mutungo Hill View Road; Makoba Wilson- Ministry of Lands- Plot 13B Mutungo Hill View Road; 
•	Richard Muhinda- State House Comptroller- Plot 23 Butabika Crescent; 
•	Sikubwabo Kyeyune- PS/HE- Plot 9 Mutungo Hill View Drive;
•	J.M. Bwogi- State House- Plot 2 Mutungo Hill View Lane Stephen Ojara- Auditor-General’s Office- Plot 8 Mutungo Hill View Road; 
•	Semakula Lawrence- Ministry of Finance- Plot 5 Circular Road

The “investors” allocated land also included members of the first family. These are: Edwin Karugire- Plot 6 & 8 Butabika Rise; Geoffrey and Diana Kamuntu- Plot 17&19 Butabika   Crescent; Derrick B. Akandwanaho- Plot 31 Mutungo Hill View Road. If you read on, you are going to find appended to this report, the full list of private developers or the investors who have been allocated the Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital land.

Opinion of the Director, Butabika Hospital
 
The Director, Butabika Hospital informed the committee that the irony of establishing these investments too close to a big referral hospital would be a source of mutual inconvenience. If you read on you find more concerns about the developments around the hospital. 

Opinion of the Ministry of Health

The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health noted for example that the conditionality of future development of the hospital would rely heavily on the availability of land.  There is annexure v to that effect. 

Observations 

a)	The sale of Butabika Hospital land contravenes section 44 to 45 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act, 2003. 

b)	The whole process of leasing had been violated at the time and the Uganda Land Commission watched and participated in violating the law which they are supposed to stand for. 

c)	The mentioned investors did not apply for land from Uganda Investment Authority and this left the committee wondering as to who advised them on the availability of Butabika Land for investment.

d)	The Public Servants under Ministry of Lands, Office of the President, Uganda Land Commission and State House became investors for purposes of allocating themselves Government Land.

e)	Section 2 (f) of the lease agreements provides for the automatic termination of the leases if there is transfer of the leasehold before the completion of and obtaining of an occupation permit of the proposed building by the initial lessee. However, in most cases this section was violated but no action was taken by ULC which showed the violation was abetted by the commission.

f)	Efforts by the committee to get the registers and verify the shareholders/directors of the companies allocated Butabika Hospital land hit a dead end due to lack of cooperation from the Registrar of Companies. This showed that there were a lot of underhand methods in this transaction.

Recommendations

1.	All the transactions on land belonging to Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital be cancelled and the land reverted back for the development of the hospital
2.	The officials of the Uganda Land Commission are held accountable for their actions/omissions in this transaction as they tantamount to abuse of office. The committee invokes Article 164(2) of the Constitution for this purpose.
3.	The actions/omissions of the chairman, commissioners and secretary Uganda Land Commission are investigated with the view of charging them in courts of law for corruption and abuse of office
4.	Investigations are carried out on all public officials involved in this transaction by virtue of their offices with the view of charging them for violating the provisions of section 10 of the Leadership Code Act, 1992.
5.	Uganda Land Commission must ensure compliance with the Constitution, the Land Act and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 in the disposal of all public land. Consultation is carried out with the responsible institutions before such sale.
6.	Government should immediately provide funds for the survey and titling of all Government land to avoid further abuse.

Land under Office of the President.

The Auditor-General’s Concerns

On 11 March 2003, the Secretary, Office of the President, wrote to the Secretary, Uganda Land Commission raising concern about what she called “gradual and steady encroachment of land that officially belonged to her office by private developers.” She observed that the practice was illegal and requested that a caveat be put on the land. 

She further requested that Plot 14 Faraday Road which had been allocated to Brigadier, now Lt. Gen Ivan Koreta, be revoked and all copies of titles and deeds of all surveyed land be forwarded to her. However, in his report to Parliament for the year ended 2004/05, the Auditor-General noted that all these pleas were ignored by the Secretary, Uganda Land Commission, leading to audit concerns in paragraph 3.0 above.

The details of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) Land at Bugolobi

The committee was informed by Uganda Land Commission that seven plots listed below had been allocated to private developers because the corporation did not need it. Those are the ones down:
•	Plot 12 Faraday Road- Hon. Amanya Mushega
•	Plot 14 Faraday Road- Brig(now Lt. Gen) Ivan Koreta
•	Plot 1 Mast Close- Lt. Col (now Brig.) Eric Mukasa
•	Plot 2 Mast Bend- Bernard Mukasa
•	Plot 4 Mast Bend- MS Africa International Tourism (Col. Bogere)
•	Plot 6 Mast Bend- M/S Africa International Tourism 
•	Plot 8 Mast Bend- Maj. Henry Kamufumba (RIP)

The Secretary, Office of the President however, had earlier informed the committee that the following plots were also encroached upon:
•	Plot 3 Mast Close allocated to Standard Petroleum (U) Ltd
•	Plot 5 Mast Close allocated to Ahimbisibwe Bernard

Procedure of the sale

Mr Speaker, Members can read through the procedure of the sale but it leaves a lot undesired. 

Observations

The committee noted with concern the hasty decision taken by Uganda Land Commission to sell this public land which was reserved for Uganda Broadcasting Services way back in 1962.

The committee noted that the opinion, views and pleas of the Secretary, Office of the President, Ms T. Kinalwa, were ignored despite the fact that she was the custodian of Government property in the ministry. 

The committee found a number of contradictions about the actual number of the plots sold. While the Uganda Land Commission informed the committee that it was only seven plots sold, the Secretary, Office of the President, claims that an additional two plots were encroached on, namely plot 3 and 5 Mast Bend. 

Furthermore, the committee observed that the method involved in the process of sale of this land was not transparent as it was mainly initiated by the buyers. It would be interesting to know how these buyers discovered the existence of the land and as to how the prices were determined since the laws of demand and supply did not apply. 

The majority of the people who bought the land were soldiers. It was difficult to believe that this occurred accidentally. The committee wondered whether the knowledge about this land was obtained during the course of their duty or as a reward for their “fruits of the struggle”.

There is a lot of similarity, Mr Speaker, between the sale of both the Bugolobi and Butabika land, for example, the nature of buyers, procedures of sale; the people who bought are similar, as if there is a well thought out plan set out by a group of people to rob Government of all its assets. 

While appearing before the committee, the Secretary Uganda Land Commission and his team, were rather edgy. They were unwilling to freely give information until put to task. The committee views this as a deliberate effort by Uganda Land Commission to protect the interests of a particular “group” of people. 

Recommendations

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, the committee recommends as follows:
1.	All the transactions involving change of land use of all the land belonging to institutions and departments of Government should be done with the consent and approval of Parliament to avoid abuse in the process. 
2.	The land reverts to Government and the people involved in the saga be held responsible, for example, the Chairman, Secretary and Commissioners Uganda Land Commission. 
3.	All the allocatees who are Government functionaries be held accountable for influence peddling and flouting rules. 
4.	The established procedure for disposal of Government assets should be followed in future. 
5.	In cases where established procedures were ignored, all the officials involved be held responsible for their actions or omissions as per the laws of the land. 
6.	All titles of Government land should be in the custody of authorised officers as was the case with Butabika land. The Secretary, Office of the President, did not have her titles. 
7.	All Government land should be immediately surveyed and titled and a proper inventory kept preventing further encroachment on public land.
8.	A list of all public land allocated to private developers since 1995 be availed to Parliament for scrutiny.
9.	Lastly, the CID should investigate the role played by the Registrar of Companies, the then Minister of Lands, hon. Maj. Gen. Otafiire, the then Minister of Health, hon. Maj. Gen. Muhwezi, and the Commissioner of Lands in all these transactions. 

As we conclude, Mr Speaker and honourable Members, Land is a capital and non-renewable asset that is essential for any development. All public land is held in trust by the Uganda Land Commission on behalf of all citizens of this country. It is, therefore, crucial that all transactions involving public land be handled in a manner that will benefit both current and future generations.

Mr Speaker, Parliament has a clear mandate to ensure that all public resources are managed in accordance with the Constitution and the established laws and regulations. Parliament must, therefore, guard against having its resolutions abused by public officials and they get away with it; it should be able to stand firm on public resources. Parliament must also not be lenient to public officials who misuse their offices in the course of their duties. This is the only way to preserve and protect the integrity of this institution.  Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I beg to move that the report be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Chairman and members of the committee for the report. I do not know whether Members are ready to debate this report. But what I have seen is that there are legal and constitutional issues that were not addressed in this report. I have just read it but definitely, there are constitutional and legal issues that were not considered. 

If we want to discuss this report meaningfully, as an institution, we need to address these constitutional and legal issues. For instance, ordering the cancellation of a certificate issued, there are laws to deal with it. I am just giving you these hints so that when we start debating, you are aware of those provisions. But I think you need time to study the report and be able to debate it. 

4.34
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In light of your guidance, I do not know whether if this report just came for debate, we would be able to resolve these legal and constitutional issues, just on the Floor. I really doubt that we could resolve those issues. I do not know, Mr Speaker, if you may not be pleased to think of a way of having some legal minds address themselves to this report and then we can come and debate this report. Otherwise as it is now, for those of us who want to come here and start raising those issues on the Floor, we may not be able to resolve those issues.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I also just got the copy here but this is what we should do. Definitely, the legal part was never considered. What we can do is to constitute a small ad hoc committee to study the report, particularly on the legal aspects, so that you are advised before we embark on this report. Is that agreed? Okay. So, give me time to think about the names so that we constitute that particular committee. 

4.35
MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would not wish to disagree with that proposal but I thought the legal mind of this House is the Office of the Attorney-General. And once this report has been provided to this House, we want to find out what the Office of the Attorney-General has to comment on the issues as have been raised by the committee and what their legal implications are, and how they relate to the Constitution, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to seek your advice, would this not be a better way of dealing with it?

THE SPEAKER: What I can do is that I can involve the Attorney-General in that committee but Parliament can have its own – eventually we may resort to the Attorney-General but definitely there are glaring legal and constitutional issues that were not addressed in this report. 

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I was objecting to the proposal by hon. Dombo because we are setting a very dangerous precedent in the workings of this Parliament. The work of this Parliament should not be legally audited but the Attorney-General, he can give us advice but to audit our work, that is unacceptable.

THE SPEAKER:  You give me time I will think of the names and I will announce the committee before we embark on debating this report.

4.37
MR KADDUMUKASA (Independent, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I thought this will be an opportune time for me to lay on Table the findings I have for the assignment you gave me last time- (Laughter)- Mr Speaker before we broke off for our brief Easter holiday, I was given an assignment to bring certified copies of the land titles of those people who currently occupy most of the 9000 square miles that Buganda is claiming.  

Mr Speaker, it was not an easy task. I found hindrances here and there. The land registry has not helped me much because I got just names of four people but I have not come empty handed. I manoeuvred and went elsewhere to get some incompatible evidence. From the national land registry, I got just four names and it looks funny they gave me just numbers and letters, RLDR 34519; they say, Kyadondo road was given to the Late John Kazzora. Another one with numbers, hon.Salim Saleh, they do not indicate how much he possess. Bukoto crescent, they indicated Amama Mbabazi; Kiwafu road, they just indicated Elly Tumwine that is from the national land registry- (Interjections)- that is why I am saying the national land registry did not help me much, that is what I managed to get from the land registry.  

But, Mr Speaker, I moved around and it was costly. I had to go to Kiboga, Mubende, Mukono but I did not reach Mawogola.  But just a brief report of how I moved and what I found before I lay this report on table.  

Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to extend my thanks to the President of Rwanda, Gen. Kagame, I mentioned him here the other time but through his advisor of Communications and Public Relations, Dr Alfred Ndahiro in The Daily Monitor of Friday, 14 March 2008, I quote: “The office of the President Kigali would like to make it known to the general public in Uganda that His Excellency President, Kagame, did not re-apply for the five year lease of land in Kiboga when it expired.”  So, he confirmed he had one square mile.  He did not re-apply, this is my report and he continued that, “Mr George William Katongole applied for that lease and took ownership”.  So, it is in the hands of Mr Katongole now; it is no longer in the hands of Mr Kagame. 

And just yesterday, again I want to thank Dr Besigye, he also clarified and confirmed that he has got some land in Kiboga, one square mile and another one in Wakiso but he said he bought it using his own money, that was during a press conference yesterday -(Interjections)- those are his words I am quoting.  

Mr Speaker, I will give just three brief reports which were referred to me, because I was prompted to bring this report when I heard the controversies on this issue.  One is about the land in Kalungu that is Ddwanilo sub-county, these were five square miles belonging to the family of Mr Ssebana Kizito but it was private mailo land, five square miles on private mailo land not this public land.  But they were forcefully converted into public land and leases were given away on that same land and up to now Mr Sebaana Kizito is in courts of law.

Another funny story is about Mr Waswa Lule, the former Member of Parliament, Lubaga North; he acquired a lease in 1988 for 49 years, thereafter the same land was leased to Steven Kalogola from Gomba for five years.  Waswa petitioned the Commissioner by then it was Nathan Tibisasa –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  If I may ask, are you reading a report or interviews? The report you are making, these are interviews with people, because what we had asked you was to get copies from the land office – yes if you have the documents then you can –

MR KADDUMUKASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I will just table what I got from the registry of companies, the company is called New Forest company originally owned by Juliana Ozan and Michael Richards, their nationality is just indicated as UK.  They were the directors of this company by the 22 July 2005 but the director changed immediately after two months. Now the director is Banarbas Taremwa of Ntinda; these people have got 57 square mailo land that is in Buwekula.  

Another one – I am ending with this one - this is a letter thanking the hon. member of Parliament for Ruhama, the letter is written in Kinyankole I cannot read it or understand it, but these were 32 people because last time I mentioned that Mr President has got a square mile in Bugerere, someone said no but this is-

THE SPEAKER:  But, honourable member, you see – because this subject came up before we went on recess and if you want to find out facts about ownership of land the source is only the registry of titles.  There are a number of registries this I am saying because I know. There are registries of mailo land which you may find in Masaka and elsewhere. There are registries for leases ,which are here. So, when you are talking about ownership of land, you do not go to the company registrar. The proper place to go to is the land office. You get the white page, which they can photocopy for you. This white page is the title kept by the land office. You use that one. But anyway, you present your case. I am only advising you the proper source to search for land ownership -(Interruption)- No, let him finish. 

MR KADDUMUKASA: Mr Speaker, I did all this but I was somehow blocked; they were not helping me, so I had to find another way of getting this evidence because I was almost failing- (Interruptions) 

THE SPEAKER: No, let him finish. Please, proceed.

MR KADDUMUKASA: Now, Mr Speaker, why I call this evidence credible is that this is in courts of law. This is a person in Kayonza who sued these people who were brought from Ntungamo. They took his land, he had the title of a lease, everything presented in court but this is a case that was recorded on a world record of a land case. This case was reported on 13 June 2007 but was settled barely two days later. It was reported on 13 June 2007 and on 15 June 2007, the case had been settled in favour of the plaintiff because the plaintiff sued the former owner of the land for encroaching on his land. Although the former owner had all the titles and everything else, these people from Ntungamo have now settled on that land. All this land was acquired through Mr Sikubwabo Kyeyune as an agent of State House and there are some other 5 sq. miles in Kiboga again acquired through Mr Sikubwabo. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this report on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.48
MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE (NRM, Ruhinda County, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, you will recall that I wrote to you asking you to use your good office to ensure that hon. Kaddumukasa brings to this House, incontrovertible evidence of my land holding in Kiboga or Katogo or wherever else, equal to 1,200 sq. acres. I am surprised that the hon. member has been here fumbling with papers and documents to do with everything else other than the answer to the request I put to you, Mr Speaker, and through you to him, that he brings incontrovertible evidence of my grabbing land in Buganda to the tune of 1,200 acres. To-date he has failed. Mr Speaker, I plead once again, that the hon. Kaddumukasa brings this incontrovertible evidence otherwise I will ask this honourable House to lift his immunity and I take him to the courts of law -(Interruptions)- It is not intimidation, Mr Speaker. A mockery is being made of this House. Mr Speaker, I seek your protection. This is not a House where people come and make stupid and blatant and irrelevant allegations and they think they can get away with them.

Mr Speaker, for this House to be honourable, and for this House to deserve respect, hon. Members of Parliament must say things they understand and things they have got evidence. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have told you that the proper source to look for information on ownership of land is the land registry. If you fail to get these records from the land registry, you rest your case. This is a fact. When land is registered it has to be registered in a registry. I think we should not dispute that. You have heard the hon. Member say he had problems in the search. Perhaps the information is there; I do not know. But as far we are concerned, the kind of evidence we shall rely on to say so and so owns this, must be from the land registry.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seem to have come across the letter written to you by Gen. Otafiire- honourable, I think he loves Gen. more than honourable- (Laughter)- he was complaining about the statements that had been made by hon. Kaddumukasa and requesting that this matter be forwarded to our Committee on Rules and Disciplines. 

THE SPEAKER: He wrote me a letter? 

MR KADDUMUKASA: Sorry.

THE SPEAKER: I do not recollect but I will check. But you see the question of writing me a letter was because this matter had come up and we gave time to the hon. Member to go and do research and come back; he could not present his case during recess. He has only been able to present it today. So, the question of investigating him when actually he has been given time does not arise. It can only arise subsequently.

MR KATUNTU: That is true. But my problem is, assuming now this- the hon. Gen. Otafiire had communicated, it is going to be referred to the committee. Is it not going to be prejudicial to the proceedings of the committee for us to start, or hon. Gen. Otafiire to start trading either accusations with the hon. Kaddumukasa on the Floor? 

THE SPEAKER: I think I will decide on that after I have scrutinised what has been presented. The Member is protected to speak what he feels he should.  But I will look at the documents but now I cannot say refer to the committee. Give me time.

4.55
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member should present all the sitting tenants, all the millions of the sitting tenants on the 9,000 sq. miles of land in Buganda for us to be able- (Interruptions) - I have a point- for us to be able to erase the tribal sentiments he is attaching on only the few members he is putting in his report. Because there are so many tenants on this land and encroachers, why must he pick out only 10 western names and bring out an issue as if it is westerners who are grabbing this land? To me, Mr Speaker, it is only when he does that that we will be able to establish who those people are who have grabbed the 9,000 sq. miles of land he is talking about. 

And two, we will know how they acquired that land. Was it rightfully acquired or not and it is only then that we can look into these allegations because to me, they are mere allegations. There are so many people on this Buganda land and not only these few whom he is bringing out if he is to be credible. Otherwise, he should be ruled out of order.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we have a problem. I worked in the Land Office for about 28 years until 1996. We have two registries in the office of the commissioner of land registration; there is a huge place where land titles of selected citizens of this country are kept. This matter was raised in a high level management meeting in the ministry while I was still serving and to-date, those titles are there. They are not in the open registry where you could pay and get access and do your search. [Maj. Gen. Otafiire: “Information.”] Can I finish? I am very well informed. I know the honourable minister was there briefly –(Laughter)- but I know what I am talking about. [Maj. Gen. Otafiire: “That commissioner was removed.”] I have not accepted your information. I am speaking about what I know. The matter was raised at a very high level meeting and it was not the commissioner. The commissioner is not the last person in that ministry. The commissioner has got mountains behind him or her. I am saying that –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be cool. 

Maj. Gen. Otafiire: You are a liar.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I want to seek clarification. I am a professional and I do not lie. An honourable member like hon. Kaddumukasa here can find himself helpless in the ministry; he is blocked. What can this House do –

THE SPEAKER: In view of what you are saying, there is a problem because there are titles of certain people kept somewhere. Therefore, the conclusion would be that he could not have authentic evidence -

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: No. My clarification is that hon. Kaddumukasa is a Member of this House, is there anything this House can do to assist him to access the information? What do we do when the people who are grabbing the land are the people who are sleeping on the titles? What shall we do? I think this Parliament must find a way of assisting such Members.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, I think you remember the genesis of this matter. It was started by the Member of Nakasongola who made a statement and the hon. Kaddumukasa came in that for him he had the information of ownership of this land. It means he had got some information and then we said; “If you have this information, bring the certified copies of these titles”, and we gave him time to do so. But now he comes to us and says he has a problem. Maybe he has it. What would be our conclusion? When did this system of keeping some people’s titles you are talking about start?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: This system started as soon as this present government came into power. It was not there before.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank you, Mr Speaker. When the hon. Okello-Okello was a commissioner in the Land Office, I was a young registrar in the department of land registration. I was privy to everything that pertains to land registration. As a lawyer and as a registrar of titles, not only did I know about the procedure, but I also knew how land titles were kept. I want to put it on record that it is not true that there has ever been a practice in the Land Office where specified titles are kept in an exclusive place. On the contrary, all titles are kept in the registry. There is what we call an instrument book; there is what we call a “Kalamazoo”. If you fail to get any title, you go to the instrument book and it refers you to a “Kalamazoo” and the “Kalamazoo” refers you to where the title is. That is point number one. 

Point two –(Interruption) 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I normally do not rise on points of order. I rarely do. When the situation is getting out of hand like it is now, then I am forced to rise on a point of order. One of the former ministers of lands has just admitted here that the commissioner who was keeping those titles was dismissed -(Interjections)- I am rising on a point of order. Is the hon. Rukutana, therefore, in order to contradict a senior minister using his title as a young registrar? (Laughter) 

MR RUKUTANA: As to the allegation that the honourable member could have got difficulty when he was doing a search to access some of the land titles, I would have preferred for him to come and say – since the Member stood there and read a list of land owners with acreages and in specific areas; I would expect him to come and say, “I went to the land registry to carry out a search on land owned by so and so. I paid this search fee –”, to make a search, you pay a fee and you get a receipt to show that you have actually carried out a search. “I paid a search fee and this is the receipt, but the registrar could not bring me a copy of the land title.”

In absence of that, I want to be fair to the honourable member – I want to repeat that he enumerated the people he said were occupying the “Mailo Akenda”, giving particulars of where and how much they occupied, implying that he had the particulars. If he failed to get the particulars he alleged here, let him humbly come here and say that he has failed to get the information so that we can see how to treat that submission of his, because ordinarily, that submission ought to be expunged from the record. Mr Speaker, I did not hear him ask for more time, but meanwhile his allegations are on record. Should they be allowed to stand?

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Mr Werikhe Kafabusa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would just like to confirm what my colleague has said. In the Ministry of Lands, we have a Land Registration Department. I am actually pleased to inform this House that I joined it as a young professional when hon. Okello-Okello was in that ministry – yes, I have ever worked with hon. Okello-Okello. So to hear from my senior brother – I do not know whether this was the policy when he was in the ministry; whether they had a special place for certain titles. But to my knowledge and from my involvement in the Ministry of Lands – even when I went there as one of the political leaders, I have never seen a special place or safe for special titles. We cannot have this on record that there are special titles kept in a special place. That is not true.

Secondly, land registration is a public department, and we have procedures. When you want information, come. If you fail to get the information – even some of us are there as political leaders, we can be approached as colleagues. I wish our colleague had come to some of us; we would have assisted him to get the information. 

So, it is unfortunate for one to come here and inform the august House – I hate to say lies but it is misinformation. This is not correct and I want to again appeal to my brother that if you want information, we have laid down procedures, the political leaders are there and we are willing to help. Should there be any hindrance, you can come back here and inform the House that you approached all of us and we failed to assist you to get the necessary information. And this is public information and the Constitution is clear about access to public information. We cannot be party to blocking this kind of information.

So, Mr Speaker, we are ready to assist any honourable member to access land registration information any time. Thank you.

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a lawyer in private practice and now as a Minister in the Ministry of Lands, I do know there is a procedure to use when you want information from the registry. The procedure commences by an application to the registrar. When the registrar receives your application, I think he initials that you can go and pay such fees. Then you go and pay such fees and then you go back and say that, “I have complied, now give me the information”. Usually that takes one or two days.

If the registrar is unable to access that information, he will initial on your application that he has not been able to get that information for one or two reasons. 

So if the honourable member came here with that kind of receipt to say that, “I applied and did not get what I wanted”, then that would be credible. But I think now the honourable member is bordering on the abuse of the process of Parliament by bringing allegations that are not substantiated. Thank you.

5.12
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I am raising here on just two simple matters. First of all, statements have been made here, names have been called – very powerful personalities in this country. I would like to know whether hon. Gen. Otafiire would like to correct his record. I am an agricultural scientist, and I have never heard of 1,000 square acres. If you want to correct it, let it be corrected. (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: I am much obliged, Mr Speaker. I am very grateful to you, honourable colleague. If I made an error and talked about square acres I am sorry I meant square miles. (Laughter) But that does not defeat the fact that this gentleman told lies about me. I want him to come clean and say, “Otafiire, you grabbed this land, and it was unfair.” Then I will apologise to the House; no problem. If I bought the land, then I will defend it. But I am telling you hon. Kaddu that I do not have land in Kiboga and that you are telling lies about me and that I am going to give you the worst three years.

MR ODIT: I think the House should applaud the general for accepting to correct that error.

Number two, having listened to these sometimes very wise statements in my imagination, sometimes fair statements and sometimes claims of non-substantiation, I listened to a claim that 57 square miles belong to one family, and this is something, which we cannot take lightly. 

I have also heard about 57 square miles. I have also heard about a number of other statements and personalities. I therefore would imagine that this subject is more likely to go beyond Parliament. I would therefore think, Mr Speaker, that having looked at all these situations and considered, after the debate there should be nothing wrong to propose a judicial commission of inquiry over this matter. Thank you very much.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of land is a very sensitive matter and I think that we should handle it very soberly. I would like to suggest that when hon. Kaddumukasa tables his evidence in the House - [Hon. Members: “He has tabled it”] - please, when he tables it in the House, the purpose is to give us time to scrutinise it. But because he delved into the content, it allowed room for people to get a rough picture of what the content of that – (Hon. Members rose_) please let me just make my contribution. And consequently there have been very useful suggestions that can help, not just him, but us as Parliament. 

I agree with hon. Otafire if allegations are made, they must be substantiated. If they cannot be substantiated, to protect the good name of that person, you must withdraw it. [Maj. Gen Otafiire: “and apologise”] that one depends on the person doing the withdrawal. There are others who withdraw without apology.

But Mr Speaker, the point I am trying to make is this, that for example the Minister of State for Lands, has offered to help hon. Kaddumukasa to try and access information about those pieces of land that have been matters of concern to him. 

But also it was clearly said by hon. Rukutana that when the hon. Member tabled his report he did not suggest that he needed more time even when we complained. I am trying to suggest to him that since the offer is given, he should ask for more time so that we clear this matter without unnecessary heat. Because, Mr Speaker, otherwise, we can only debate the content of this document when we have looked at it, and we cannot debate a document that has been tabled and not been looked at. So, I would suggest depending on how the hon. Member sees it that he tries and when he fails or succeeds, or succeeds partially, he will come and report to the House what happened, and then we will see how to proceed from there.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I see the approach of the hon. Leader of the Opposition like baby-sitting. That somebody seems to be misleading this House and he is pleading for him to get more time probably to further mislead us. I want this honourable House, first of all, to understand whether land ownership in Uganda is a problem; whether constitutionally, anybody cannot own land, from one square inch to any amount of land; whether it is anywhere in the law in this country that a person is restricted on how much land he can own.

Secondly, whether there is any law which restricts a person in Uganda from legitimately buying land and occupying it, and using it for development, or for whatever interest he has. So, if there is nothing like that, aren’t we really to take note that we may be touching a live wire in the history of this country that you can be in Parliament and actually cause problems either historical or legal, where it should not be? Mr Speaker, I am a Sociologist and I know that you can enliven a non-issue and create problems for society.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Kaddumukasa sometime back stood on the floor of this House and made allegations and he was required to provide information that would either substantiate what he had made.

Mr speaker, hon. Kaddumukasa has just brought the information and laid it on the table of the House. And I do not know whether this house now has sufficiently looked at the information provided to enable us as a House to make a submission of condemnation or appraisal. Couldn’t it be procedurally right, to use your Office and either pass over that information to a relevant organ or Members to look at the evidence provided and find out whether the information provided would substantiate the information that he was required to do, in order to enable us as a House to proceed and make a judgement on the information that has been provided. Otherwise some of us have not looked at the information and we would want to debate with information so as to conclude this matter with proper information, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Well the fact is that the information we wanted him to produce was certified copies of titles of the persons he mentioned. And this he has not been able to do and he has explained. So, the position is, as of now that information is not considered.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was coming to the conclusion, that the hon. Kaddumukasa admits that the information he promised to bring so far has not been adduced and that since this can be a cause of unnecessary conflict in society that he takes a historical responsibility of withdrawing his allegations and closes the chapter. I thank you.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I want to start from where Prof. Minister of Disaster Preparedness stopped. It is clear that the information that we had asked hon. Kaddumukasa to bring is not before us. But it is also true that he has explained why he could not bring the information to us. Mr Speaker, I respect hon. Otafire; I respect him utterly. But today, I am coming to a state where may be I might think that my respect was misplaced. (Maj. Gen. Otafiire rose_) I am saying sir- 

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, in the interest of time, let us - please, please!  Okay, you can proceed, hon. Wacha.

MR WACHA: I was saying that the hon. Leader of the Opposition made a suggestion, which I support.  It is possible that the hon. Member did not know how to access this information.  It is also fortunate that one very senior Member of this House has come out and offered to assist him access this information. Therefore, it is imperative that we have conclusive evidence, whether positively or negatively, that the statement that hon. Kaddumukasa made to this House, is true or not true. This is important because names of very important personalities of this country are involved.  It is – (Interruption) - let him give. 

MAJ. GEN.  OTAFIIRE: Point of information, Mr Speaker. Is it not also possible that the hon. Member may not have searched for this information? Why don’t you add that? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, let us keep cool.

MR WACHA:  I think, Mr Speaker, you now understand why I was trying to say what I am about to say -(Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER:  No, no, you proceed.

MR WACHA:  So, I am trying to urge this House that for us to come to a logical conclusion of this matter - and it is important that the House always comes to a logical conclusion - we should never be seen to be half way on a serious matter like this.  We should give hon. Kaddumukasa another chance; we can give him limited time -

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Kaddumukasa, do you want more time to take benefit of assistance given to you by the minister?

MR KADDUMUKASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Before I left the Floor I was about to suggest that maybe you set up a committee so that I do not work alone as an organ of the state –(Interjections)- this is not an easy task. To work as an individual, I will have almost become an organ of the state. But, Mr Speaker, if more time can be given and I get such assistance, I will be appreciative because the other time I only deployed my lawyer and he only managed to get that.

Mr Speaker, lastly-

THE SPEAKER:  I give you 10 days from now. I think the matter should end there –because it only came in when he was told to lay evidence before us and that is when we have found that that is not evidence and he has expressed problems as to why he has not been able to do that. Now that the minister has offered to assist him, we can revert to this 10 days.  

Honourable members, as the Constitution provides, the owning of land is freehold, lease or mailo.  In all the district registries you can go and search for mailo or leased land documents. So, since the minister has agreed, let us give the Member 10 days. Hon. Member, you can take the benefit of the assistance. If you fail, we shall say, “okay, that is the end of the matter.”

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from you is that listening to this debate I got two aspects out of it.  One is the factual issue of land ownership - and this is what is being referred to the land registry for the certified copies.  But on the other side there is also the issue of land grabbing, which is the method of acquisition. 

So, the clarification I want us to put to rest is, while this other matter is going to be investigated and these documents being sought, it is important that the matter of land grabbing is put to rest because the concern I see being raised is that you quietly hear that this land was given to some individuals either because they were liberators and so forth.  So, I feel that, that matter should be put to rest, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, the issue of land ownership is controlled by the Constitution.  If you want to get land from me and I have mailo land, you come to me, we agree and I sell it to you before you get it registered.  If the land is under the customary occupation, and you want to turn it into a freehold or lease, you have to go to the local district land board and submit your applications.  If the District Land Board had granted you a lease, you can apply to it to convert it into freehold.  Anything to do with land, which is not privately owned as mailo or freehold, you acquire a title from the district land board; this is the Constitutional position as of now; it is a fact.  This is what was done in 1995. So, that is how you get it.  Or if it is just giving you, again it will be the responsibility of the District Land Board. If they give you a lot of land when actually there is no justification for it, you go again to the District Land Board. 

Any authority, be it a minister or who, if he wants to get land, he has to apply to the District Land Board, or if he wants to get land, which is under the custody of Uganda Land Commission, he has to apply to the Land Commission. The Land Commission acts independently and it has powers to give that land.  

As to the question of Government land, I would like to say that most Government land has no titles because you may consider that as a surplus estate.  But I think it is being recommended that – from what I saw here - Government land to be issued titles; I think that will be very good if it is done.  

MR KIGYAGI:  Mr Speaker. I would like to make one clarification that when we give information sometimes we must be very careful. On the issue that was raised about a New forest company, I want to say that this company acquired land from the National Forestry Authority and it has been the best tree planter as of last year.  Our committee visited it and realised that there are so many people who are participating in its activities.  So, to come here and bring such information saying that these are also land grabbers is not true. This company is under the Uganda Timber Growers Association, which operates under the SOLOG project; it is a well known project. The committee visited it and saw for itself the work being done there. But according to the information given, it is also recorded as one of the land grabbers.  

I have also looked at the plots that were given under public service house sell, which was passed in this Parliament and realised that there is something wrong.  I think as we look for or give information, we should be very careful because some reckless information will cause us problems as a country and as Parliament.  I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:  I think this brings us to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to debate the Lugogo Plan.

(The House rose at 5.33 and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 April 2008 at 2.00 p.m..)



