Wednesday, 2 April 2003

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we started our third meeting of the second session some time back but there is still a lot of business, which has not been done and this is the last meeting during this session. It is important that we transact as much business as possible. I am, therefore, appealing to various committees to complete their reports so that the business, which is pending before us does not elapse because of prorogation of Parliament.  I have also received complaints about lack of attendance in committees. Please, I appeal to you to attend the committee meetings so that the work of the committees is expedited.  

In the Strangers gallery, we have our children, the pupils of Sir Apollo Kaggwa Boarding Primary School in Old Kampala. You are most welcome our children! You also realise that we agreed that our proceedings should be covered live and, therefore, if they are covering you and your electorate sees empty seats, this may prejudice you.   So please, try to be here so that your electorate knows that you are attending.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Mr Speaker, during the deliberations of the National Movement Council, one of the statements made by His Excellency the President and Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces was to the effect that officers from the UPDF are not supposed to participate in politics. As a matter of fact, he refused them to contribute during the deliberations. I see one of the officers here. I am just seeking -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I don’t think this is the opportune time to deal with what took place in NEC and the Movement Conference, which have just ended. I think we should leave this. I was not there, but what I have read in the papers indicate that recommendations were made. It was reported that these constitutional recommendations were going to be taken to the Constitutional Review Commission to be considered. The Constitutional Review Commission is not going to change the Constitution.  

The purpose of the Constitutional Review Commission is to traverse the country asking the 24 million people what they think about the performance of the Constitution. They may opt not to change the Constitution, or they may say change the Constitution. The commission is going to gather and put these views in a document on behalf of the 24 million people, as recommendations. If it is found that it is necessary to amend the Constitution, it is this Parliament that is going to amend the Constitution.  

Therefore, I do not really think that we should take the recommendations as the law. The current Constitution allows the UPDF to be represented in Parliament, and until that law is changed, do not say, “because the statement was made, therefore, we should not see members of the UPDF”. 

Honourable members, we should know that there are people suggesting that the Constitution should be amended. Yes, they are entitled to say so, but when these amendments come here, we shall follow the procedure laid down in the current Constitution. There is no other way the Constitution can be amended without following the procedure laid down in the current Constitution. I think you should not bother the honourable members from the UPDF who are here.  They are here constitutionally.

DR STEVEN CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, many of us are in receipt of some of the documents of the meetings, which were held by NEC members in the districts. And the recommendations that they made to NEC or to those who came to Kampala are at variance with the recommendations that were read in the NEC meeting and the Movement Conference meeting. In regard to all these problems, what do we do?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not here to consider the minutes of the meetings of the NEC conference. But if the NEC conference has made recommendations, these recommendations will go to the Constitutional Review Commission. From there, they will go to the Executive, because it is the Executive, which set up this Constitutional Review Commission. I also suppose they will write a white paper, and in case they find it necessary to amend the Constitution, the Constitution will be amended by presenting to us a bill. It is only then that the Constitution will be considered amended. This is the same thing on any other matter.

MR MICHAEL MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I rose yesterday on this particular point, and you did not rule me out of procedure.   I had risen to raise a very important matter - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to interrupt you but I think, honourable members, whatever is raised after the communication from the chair must be a very urgent matter. Should you have a very important matter that you think should be exhaustively dealt with, I think it is better that you bring a fully-fledged motion and we deal with that matter. This time is to allow you to raise something that requires an urgent treatment.  It is not any other general matter.

MR MABIKKE: This is also very urgent, Mr Speaker.  I would like to start raising this issue by quoting the Constitution, Article 79, which clearly spells out the functions of Parliament. I would like to quote verbatim.
 
“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.”  

Sub-section (3) goes further to state that “Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda.”  

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, on Friday, 22 March 2003, there was a very important development in Uganda. This was a verdict of the Constitutional Court on petition No 5, 2002. The Constitutional Court of Uganda gave its judgement, which was as follows: I would like to just quote one particular aspect. 

“After considering the submissions of council for both Parties, the authorities cited the relevant laws and we reached a unanimous decision on each of the above six issues as follows - and this is important for our case today. “Section 18 and 19 of the Political Organisation’s Act do render Political Parties and Organisations non functional and inoperative”.  

Judgement number three says that: “Section 18 and 19 of the same Act in effect establish a one Party State in favour of the Movement Political Organisation, not system, contrary to Article 75 of the Constitution.”

Mr Speaker, as Parliament, the onus and power lie entirely on us to guide the public. The general public is very confused about the verdict of this Constitutional Court petition. It is important that we come out to guide the public and even guide the organisations that are affected by the same provision. With this kind of judgement, Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance - (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) can I finish?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, please, do.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, having read to you sections of the Constitutional Court verdict, should we take it that with this verdict, the current Movement Political System has been toppled? Should we take it that with this court case the status quo has been determined? That having declared the Movement a Political Organisation, should we say that we are now operating under a multi-party political system?

You are all aware, Mr Speaker, that I am a member of a very vibrant political party in Uganda, the Democratic Party of Uganda. With this constitutional – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think you need guidance. You are talking about a case, what is the case number?

MR MABIKKE: Constitutional Court Case No.5 of the year 2002.

THE SPEAKER: You are saying that the court ruled that the Movement political system provided in the Constitution is a political organisation. If that is the case, the way you enforce a judgement is to seek the execution of the judgement; this Parliament cannot execute a judgement. What you can do is to go to court for an order to enforce a judgement of court.

MR MABIKKE: But, Mr Speaker, you are a lawyer yourself – (Interjection) – no I am not allowing information as of now. Let me conclude – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I seek a clarification because he refused my information. I want to find out whether my honourable colleague is not aware that the Attorney General had already informed court that we are going to appeal against that judgement. Today, we have requested for stay of execution of that same judgement in court.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why are you really involving Parliament in this delicate matter? Because, as you can see, the Constitutional Court said there is a Movement political system. Now you are saying the judgement read that the Movement political system is a political organisation. The Government is supposed to be run under a Movement political system. What do you think is the consequence of this?

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much for that information, honourable minister. I think the Constitutional Court judgement establishes the status quo until a similar court, competent as the Constitutional Court, rules otherwise – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Now what is the status quo? Because when you say that is the status quo, it means a Political Party is running the Government and others are not in. I think there is need to interpret it. I do not really think Parliament itself will be in position to deal with this matter.  But, as I have said, the best way to reap the fruits of judgement is to seek for execution of the judgement.  Then we shall know how this will be executed so that the proper thing is obtained. Because we are laypersons here, we are Members of Parliament, we are the ones who make laws and it is the court to interpret and enforce its judgement.  I think let us seek a remedy from the proper court, namely, the Constitutional Court, which made that judgement.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much. I just had a reasonable issue to raise after the Communication from the Chair to this august House. On Monday, while watching television, on a channel called Super Sports - this is what I would call a very big national humiliation to see the five young Ugandans representing the country in the world cross-country championship in Switzerland in a place called Lausanne. It was somehow a very big embarrassment to this country.  

Why would I say this? This is just on two grounds: I had wanted to understand thoroughly through this House whether the team, which represented the country at an international forum had been privatised. The last minute trip of the three Ugandans and one who brought us a silver medal to this country survived missing a flight until they got handouts from an Air Travel Company and several businessmen were giving Shs10,000, Shs30,000 as if someone was on drip dying because there isn’t much money for buying enough blood; and yet the representation these particular Ugandans were going for was to be on behalf of the country.  

Now, to make matters worse, when this young Ugandan, a Kalenjin called Boniface Kiprop earned the country a silver medal - they were giving the awards to the individuals. He got a silver medal and the group got a bronze. When they were called to the platform to get the medals for the country where they would sing the national anthem, it was a very big shame! First of all, they were nearly naked; they did not even have a national jersey.  In those stained attires of blue shorts and white shirts was where – (Interruption) 

DR KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKWOMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I actually witnessed a press conference, which was being addressed yesterday when those young men came back. I had to ask a similar question. The coach, the only Ugandan, who had accompanied the team, answered that all the clothes had been kept in the dressing room. And at the end of the cross-country race, as they went to the finishing yard, the people who were responsible for collecting the clothes and taking them to the finishing yard actually forgot the kit for the Ugandans, and it reached there late. That is the answer the coach gave at the press conference yesterday. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, my concern was that there was even no national flag as they were climbing up to show that they are Ugandans. I thought showing Uganda to the outside world of investors would have been a very good showdown in this particular series!  

I have passionate love for sports because I represented the Minister for Sports, and to see that such becoming behaviours are becoming unbecoming - Mr Speaker, I would really expect your office, at an appropriate time, to request the Minister of Sports to let us know who is responsible for sending Ugandans abroad. Has it been privatised?  Then why should they get medals on the country’s behalf and not on their own behalf? Otherwise, we shall lose all our players to other countries who are just ready to buy them with visas on those particular tournaments. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member, but since I do not see the Minister of Education, I do not know what the – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Okot Ogong): Mr Speaker, the matter, which is being raised by my good friend, hon. Otto, is actually very important. But you all realise that the government has a full Ministry of Sports. We have designed Sports Policy in this country and it will soon come to Parliament to be debated by Members of Parliament. I think within that time, we should actually come out with a very clear Sports Policy of our country.  

I want to appeal to Members that when this policy comes on the Floor, we should give all our views and concerns so that we come out with a very good policy.  Now that you have raised a very important point, I – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable Minister for yielding the Floor. I speak as somebody who has participated in international athletics on behalf of this nation. I also speak as somebody who is familiar with the current situation.  

I will also take this opportunity to inform my honourable colleague, Sam Otto, that this athletics meeting he is referring to in Switzerland is actually a privately sponsored meeting of athletes who compete for cash. It is not an international meeting of nations competing against each other as we have in the Olympics or Commonwealth Games.  Anybody can go there on his or her own to represent him or herself. However, this does not mean that the country is totally excluded from the onus.  

Furthermore, it does not mean that the country does not support the athletes. In this case, as a matter of fact, that medal my honourable colleague is referring to is given to you as an athlete; there is no mention of your national athletics association, government or country per se. 

However, I would like to support you that the government needs to take interest in supporting our athletes. But the main thing there is that this particular meeting was a privately organised meeting of athletes who could be sponsored, for example, by the manufacturing organisation – (Interruption)

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank hon. Aggrey Awori for kindly accepting to receive this issue on which I am seeking some clarification. Much as he said that the athletes went there in their individual capacities, but in the same event, national anthems were sung and various countries that had people who participated had their flags flying. Was it only the case for Uganda that the national anthem would be sung and that the flag would not be there because these athletes went in their individual capacities?  Can hon. Aggrey Awori please enlighten me on that?  Thank you.

MR ABURA PIRIR: Thank you Mr Speaker. On the point of representation of the country, I am one of the veteran athletes for this country. There are three events where a country caters for the athletes: the Olympics, Commonwealth and International Games. These three are the ones for which the Government gives the attire. For the other competitions where individuals are invited, the country does not cater for their uniform. 

On the issue of the athletes going there naked, it is a blame for all of us that the government has never released enough money to cater for the sporting activities in this country. Even though there is a sound policy on the ground, up to now, the council is still begging here and there to hold even the league. About going outside individually, every four years, there is a uniform the government gives the athletes for that game.

About the national anthem of any country that brings honour to their country, it is sung only if you win a gold medal. Remember in 1972, when the late Akii Bua won a gold medal, there were other Ugandans who also won silver medals, but only the gold medal winner is honoured by the national anthem of their country.  Thank you.  

MR OKOT OGONG: I thank you very much for that information. Mr Speaker, sport actually gives a lot of honour to our country. I would like to appeal also to Members of Parliament that actually, the budget of government is presented to Parliament and it is Parliament that provides money for sports. So, when we present this budget to the Budget Committee for consideration and also on the Floor, I would like to urge you to support and give more money to sports. I thank you very much.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a very important point regarding the procedure of today.  

Yesterday, in my capacity as a Member of Parliament representing Lubaga South, I stood up to express concern over a motion that I have floated together with my colleagues from Mukono District. This regards the need to review the forest reserve allocations done in the recent past. You signalled me with an impression that the motion would feature on today’s agenda, but when I look around I do not see it. How can I continue deliberating when my wishes are disregarded? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think I said what you have quoted. I told you yesterday that we have many motions and business that is not on the Order Paper. However, I said that soon the Business Committee is going to meet and make a programme and the pending business, including your motion, will be the subject of discussion. I intend to convene a meeting of the Business Committee on Monday. That is the position.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER
QUESTION 10 OF 2003 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Badda will be coming –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, unless you have instructions from him, how do you stand in for him? At the same time you say hon. Badda is coming –(Laughter).

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I quite appreciate you come from the same environment but unless you have instructions from him, we shall deal with it next time.

MR FRED BADDA (Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and the House at large. The question -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Incidentally, where were you? (Laughter)

MR BADDA: I was getting more information to help me ask supplementary questions. I apologise for being late.

The question goes to the Minister of State for Fisheries. It says –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You just say out the number of the question.

MR BADDA: Question 10 of 2003.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Dr Fabius Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, the gazetting of landing sites is the responsibility of the Commissioner for Fisheries, as stipulated in rule 12 of the Fish Quality Assurance Rules of 1998. The rule states: 

“The Commissioner may approve official landing sites, which meet such conditions as may be prescribed in guidelines issued by the Commissioner.”  

The guidelines issued by the Commissioner for Fisheries are found in the Manual of Standard Operation Procedures -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in future I intend to have many questions directed to you. I intend to list about ten questions all on one day, so that you answer all of the ten questions at once. The question is: "would the honourable minister inform the House when he intends to at least gazette one landing site as a fish market in the district?" We are interested in whether you intend to do that, and when.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Dr Fabius Byaruhanga): As of now, two landing sites in Kalangala District, namely Mulabana in Bujumba sub-county and Mwena in Kalangala Town Council, have been gazetted. Hopefully in the near future the government is going to develop Lutoboka and Kitubulu. Once they are developed they will also be gazetted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR FRED BADDA: The supplementary question is: could the Minister tell us when these landing sites were gazetted? How do the fish dealers know that these landing sites have been gazetted so that they can pass on their commodity to be approved by those landing sites?

THE SPEAKER: Could you answer the question? Please, answer it if you can.

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: The two landing sites were gazetted on 10 January 2003, after the due process.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether the minister answering these questions is the responsible one. There are two items here; that is the landing sites and the fish market. Landing sites do not fall under his portfolio; they fall under the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications - (Interruption) - Yes, they are responsible for that.

Gazetting the market place is what would fall under his ministry. Mr Speaker, if I am wrong in my assumption, we have a minister from the Ministry of Works to clarify that matter.

THE SPEAKER: The clarification, therefore, if it is as you say, should have been directed to the person who asked the question. The question was framed and directed to the minister and, therefore, he is answering it.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, one thing that we need to appreciate is that many Ugandans get their animal protein from fish –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to ask a supplementary question to the one asked by hon. Badda?

MR WADRI: Yes, thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was just trying to make a small preamble so that the minister gets the point quite right. As I was saying, many Ugandans depend on fish for their animal protein because they cannot afford meat. However, of late you realise that when you go to the shores of Lake Victoria, especially along Mayuge District, you find that certain parts of the waters have been sealed off. The ordinary fisherman is barred from carrying out fishing activities –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have a point but the question is in respect of Kalangala District and, therefore, any supplementary question must be directed to the same. If you have your own question, you could always frame it, and then it will be answered.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I note that for some of us our ears are being “environmentally disturbed”. Could members use the microphone from a distance, as being too close to it is not “environmentally friendly”?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I thought I was still on the Floor and still had the chance to ask the question? Whether it is Kalangala or Lake Victoria, we all stand to benefit from the fishing industry and from the question that I want the minister to clarify on.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have said that you have a valid point but I think we have to be relevant. The question was in respect of Kalangala District. That is the main question and, therefore, if you ask a supplementary question, it must be supplementary to the answer given in respect of Kalangala District. However, if you have a different question, you could frame it, hand it in and it will be answered.

MR WADRI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.  

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague who raised this question. I would also like to ask a supplementary question regarding the net size required for fishing. Of recent, most fishermen use sticks, approximately one foot long, to measure the required fishnets and to avoid being interrupted on the way to the market. 

I want the hon. Minister for Fisheries to actually tell us whether there is a gazetted or recommended net size to be used on Lake Victoria. If we do not have that information, our people will keep on buying the undersize nets. I have been contacting some officials from the ministry and they are not informed themselves. So, I urge the minister to come up with the required size so that our people can really be sensitised, be informed and buy the required size. This business of using sticks to measure the required length is not called for.  I thank you.

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: By statutory instrument, the smallest net size allowed on Lake Victoria is five inches. At the same time, there is a statutory instrument that defines the minimum size of fish to be caught. 

In the case of the Nile Perch, it is 50 cm, and in the case of the Nile Tilapia it is 25 cm. The fishermen will tell you that using a five inch mesh size net will lead you to catch fish that is smaller than the allowed smallest size. Therefore, we have been recommending to the fishermen that when they want to catch Nile Perch they should use a minimum mesh size of seven inches. And usually the Tilapia and the Nile Perch are not in the same waters. So, one could use the five-inch for the Tilapia in the shallow waters, and then use the seven-inch for the Nile Perch in the deep waters.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to tell the honourable minister that the information he has is not on the ground. You should, perhaps in the coming budget, pass a vote for publicity such that this information could actually reach the people. Our people continue to buy the under-size nets because they are not informed. 

You have said the five inches’ net is allowed and you even went on to say that the six inches’ net is also allowed. You ended up by saying that the seven inches’ net is also allowed. So, Mr Speaker, you should actually sympathise with the fishermen. You cannot actually segregate that, “here I am casting my net to catch Nile Perch”; you cannot! Fish keep moving. So, it is better you come up with a recommended size, which could be moderate, to stop catching the young Nile Perch and even catching the grown-up Tilapia. Otherwise, if we keep on speculating that when you go to these waters you target the Nile Perch –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: I think the question should have been; “What measures are you going to take to prevent people buying illegally caught fish?” That is the question.  

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I represent Koome, which neighbours Ssese and also Buvuma. I do not agree with my colleague that our fishermen do not know what to do. Our fishermen know where the Nile Perch is; that is in the deep waters. Normally when you are riding back home in the evening, you find that those who want Tilapia have targeted close to the shoreline. So, these people know. 

Probably it is only in Buvuma where people do not know what to do. But my people in Koome know. They deliberately go to use wrong nets for different purposes, but at least they know what they should be doing.  

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you may be aware, my constituents enjoy very special links and bonds with the people of Kalangala. I have got a fishing village called Gaba and my constituents normally leave Gaba to go and fish deep in the waters of Kalangala. 

My constituents have actually brought me very disturbing information, to the effect that they have established from fisheries officials that the fishing grounds of Lake Victoria are about to be privatised. Mr Speaker, I would like to use this opportunity to seek clarification from the minister himself. Is it true that the waters of Lake Victoria are going to be privatised? If so, how are you going to do it? Thank you very much.  


THE SPEAKER: I think this question need not be answered now because not long ago hon. Kezimbira Miyingo explained it. This issue was raised here and we have on record an answer in respect of the same.

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Minister; how does he intend to prevent the smell that comes out of the bones, the so-called fillet? It is really disturbing people in Kayunga, and I believe even the people in Kalangala have the same problem. Thank you.

DR NKUUHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to clarify this to me. Recently I was in Kisumu on a different mission, and learnt from the people of Kisumu, and Kenya generally, that their fishing industry is almost closing down. I am wondering, what is happening to our fishing industry? I thought it was secure but they assured me that the pollution is so much so that actually, a lot of factories in Kisumu have closed down. Could the minister reassure us that what is happening on the Kenyan side is not going to happen on the Ugandan side?

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question of gazetting landing sites is the prerogative of the Government. It is true that government gets money by way of taxes arising from these areas. What I want to know from the minister is; what are the expected services that the government should give to such areas? At the moment we pay tax and do not get anything from it. 

As far as medical amenities are concerned, people do not get services. Even mere control of cleanliness of landing sites is lacking. So, I would like to know from the minister: one, what constitutes a landing site? Two, what are the services, which the Government should give to such areas, that have been proclaimed landing sites? Thank you.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the minister whether the nets he is talking about are standardised for the whole region, that is the countries in East Africa? Are they the same for Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania? What I do know is that the fish do not carry any flags, they do not carry any passport, they are only moving up and down between the countries. So, are these net sizes standardised for the whole region or is this only applicable to Uganda?

MR BADDA: One other question, Mr Speaker, concerning the nets. In Uganda, nets called double nets are manufactured and are on the market. But when fishermen in Kalangala buy them and start using them, they are caught. They are then told that these are illegal nets, although they are manufactured in Uganda and are allowed on the market. Is it illegal for fishermen to use these nets that have been legally manufactured in Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: Can you answer the questions, please?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Dr Fabius Byaruhanga): Mr Speaker, there are quite a number of questions that the members have raised. I will answer them one by one, but very quickly. 

What she called the bones, or the scrap, is in richer countries turned into fishmeal. After they have taken off the fillet, they push the bones into another machine, which grinds it into fishmeal for animal feed. Unfortunately, as you know, we are still very poor and these things still find a market for human consumption in our population. 

To make it worse, in fact it is not just this scrap but also the skins that are consumed. The skins are rolled and smoked and people eat them even outside our borders. They are even exported to other countries. Now that you have mentioned this environmental problem, I will try to discuss it with NEMA and we see what to do.

Two is about our fishing industry. Kenya in the first case has only six percent of Lake Victoria but they over-invested in processing facilities. Without smuggling they cannot actually feed their factories enough, and that is the biggest problem there. 

Of course you have also mentioned the problem of pollution. It could be affecting their small fisheries industry, but we carry out residue analysis on our lake every three months, and we collect samples every three months. I can assure you that the state of our water is still good. 

Three, what are the expected services at the landing sites? I wish to clarify to hon. Omodi that actually the central government does not get any money from these landing sites. Whatever fees you see being collected at landing sites go to your local government. Unfortunately wherever you go, and this has been the complaint from the local authorities, although they collect this money they do not seem to plough anything back. Whichever fish landing site you go to, they are begging the centre to provide this and that. The local government should, in the first place, provide all these things. 

What should one expect on a landing site? On the ones we gazette, even when it has been developed by the private sector, we insist on the following facilities:

    1. Good and sufficient toilet facilities.
    2. A shade with an easily cleaned and raised platform to enable fishes sorting, weighing and loading.
    3. Clean water source.
    4. An office for the inspector.
    5. A landing jet facilitating the docking and transfer of fish.
    6. Clean containers for the transfer of fish.
    7. A good wastewater drainage system.
    8. A fence around the facility where the fish is received. 
    9. 
We also wish to have a fisheries inspector, if the site is going to be receiving fish.

About the net size, it is standardised. There have been efforts at harmonisation, especially with the recreation of the East Africa Community, and the net size for Lake Victoria is harmonised for the three East Africa countries. Even the size of fish to be caught is standardised. For the Nile Perch, the minimum is 50 centimetres and the maximum is 85 centimetres. That is harmonised for the entire East Africa. But as you will note, in Uganda we have more than one lake and they do not contain the same type of fish. For example, we allow 4-inch nets on Lake Albert because there are some small fish there. We allow 4.5-inch fish nets on Lake Edward and Lake George, but we only allow a minimum of 5 inches on Lake Victoria, Lake Kyoga and Lake Wamala. I believe that is what arose. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET PERFORMANCE FOR THE FIRST HALF OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2002/2003

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr James Mwandha): Mr Speaker, when we presented our report, especially with regard to the impact of the 23 per cent budget cuts on the various sectors of Government, some of the committees had not reported to the Budget Committee. Since that time, the Committee on Social Services has submitted its report, and I think it is important that I report to the House the impact on the sectors, which are covered by the particular committee, for members to appreciate the gravity of the cut.  

Mr Speaker, with regard to the Ministry of Education, the following activities and programs were affected: They are so many and I will not read them all. I have requested for this additional report to be circulated. But I want to mention some of them.  

Allowances other than salaries are being affected. Travel of persons overseas and inland, staff training, office expenses, telephone, telefax, Internet and e-mail services, maintenance of office equipment, vehicles, buildings and grounds, fuel, lubricants and oils and material supplies and manufactured goods. Twenty three percent of the materials will not be delivered to secondary schools and other institutions.

Contributions to international and local organizations are going to be affected. Participation in other programs, for instance, the fourth and fifth residential training programs and other programs will be affected. Committees, councils and meetings, medical treatment abroad, industrial training and payment of living out allowances under the business, technical and vocational education, were scaled down.  

Out of the 12 private universities, only two will receive funding. The regional education sector review workshop will not take place. And of course, inspections of NTCs, PTCs and other schools will be scaled down quite considerably to the extent of at least 23 percent.

With regard to Mbarara University, this will affect the students’ welfare, including food supplies, maintenance and repairs of students’ halls of residence, recreation, games and sports programmes. Academic programmes such as teaching practice for teaching students, science practical lessons, trips, community/field-based training, research projects and students’ faculty allowances were all scaled down. The construction of a physics laboratory and stocking of the book bank and library were suspended altogether.
  
When it comes to Makerere University, students’ living out allowances, computer charges, school and books and special faculty allowances, travel and other expenses are going to be affected. Due to financial constraints, the sustainability of the commitment control system went into jeopardy since the upkeep of the students was paramount, despite the inadequate funds committed. 

Mr Speaker, we have a table there. I hope members are now receiving this particular document, which gives you the situation in terms of figures, and I will not go through those figures.

When it comes to the Ministry of Health, the material supplies and manufactured goods such as medical drug supplies and their related services for Community health, clinical services and national disease control programmes are going to be affected. 

The general repair and service of hospital equipment, allowances other than salaries, travel and transport of persons inland and abroad, recreation, welfare and entertainment, office expenses, internet and e-mail services, vehicle operations and maintenance, fuel and lubricants, research projects and participation and other programmes are all going to be affected.

When it comes to Mbarara Hospital, patients are only provided with lunch, yet meat and matooke were deleted from the menu. Maintenance of vehicles, buildings and grounds were affected.  Purchase and service of hospital equipment, utility bills of water and electricity accumulated to the tune of Shs 52 million, inland travel of officers on official duties and meetings, supply of stationery and cleaning materials were all affected. Again we provide a table to give you the picture in terms of figures.

Under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the affected activities include: Delayed compensation of Ebola victims; partition of the offices of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; travel of persons inland and abroad; staff training; recreation; welfare and entertainment; office expenses and supplies; operation and maintenance of vehicles; allowances other than salaries for entitled officers; installation of internet and local area network for the ministry and failure to buy food for children in the remand homes. Can you imagine, Mr Speaker! 

Annual subscriptions to international organisations, inspection of work places and monitoring of ministry activities, are all going to be affected. Again we give a table to show this in terms of figures. 

Mr Speaker, some of the money that was recovered from the cuts, one of the beneficiaries was the Prime Minister’s Office. And, at the time when we reported, the Prime Minister had not showed us the way he used the money that was allocated to him from the 23 percent cut. Now, the office of the Prime Minister has now submitted to our Committee, and the funds released to that office was utilized as follows: 

    (a) Disarmament exercise in Karamoja took Shs 1 billion. This money was passed to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to implement her activities under the disarmament programme.

    (b) Food for Northern Uganda took Shs 0.96 billion.  Office of the Prime Minister has so far received Shs 0.9 billion in three equal installments to be used for procuring and distributing of foodstuff for internally displaced persons in camps of Northern Uganda and Katakwi District.

    (c) Other activities in the office of the Prime Minister took Shs 0.57 billion and this has been used. I gathered it had been planned that this money would enable MPs from the war-ravaged areas to receive Government assistance in form of benefiting from a pool of transport coordinated by the office of the Prime Minister. However, this scheme never took off and funds were never released to the office of the Prime Minister. So, Sir, those are the additional areas affected by the budget cut.  

With this information, we have only now the committees of Defence - of course they were the beneficiaries, but still we would be interested to know how the money they got was utilized. 

The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Committee on Natural Resources never reported and the Committee on Public Service and Local Government also never reported. So, we still do not know to what extend these various ministries were affected by the budget cuts. I thought I would better provide that information to enable members who may be interested in some of these sectors to contribute appropriately. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you for offering me this opportunity to make a contribution to the report of the Budget Committee. 

First and foremost, I would like to thank the Budget Committee for the work very well done. I think they have proved that the parliamentarians who passed the Budget Act had a point to make. Indeed, the import of the Budget Act was to involve Parliament so that Parliament is never taken by surprise. I think to a reasonable extent, that object has been achieved.

In examining the report of the Committee, a number of issues have come to light, and one of them is that although the Ministry of Finance has shown its full co-operation, there is still a lot of room for improvement. And one of them is to ensure that the routinely presented certificates to the Floor of this House in support of bills of various ministries actually are certificates worth their salt. 

I note from the report of the committee that despite the offering of the certificates supporting the availability of funds for the IGG for the Leadership Code, these funds were actually not available to the IGG for timely implementation of this vital Act.

The report has also exposed that our economy, despite all efforts to make it a self-sustaining economy, has not quite got there, and that is why you see, Mr Speaker, that when the Budget Support Grants are withheld, the budget is definitely adversely affected. This is made even worse in terms of service delivery with the measure to reduce across the board by 23 percent.

Mr Speaker, I was an accounting officer in several ministries. One of the objects of introducing a cash budget was to instill discipline in all ministries. Secondly, the introduction of the mid-term expenditure plans was to ensure that all ministries would have a reasonable degree of predictability in the execution of their plans. But the Ministry of Finance unilaterally cutting across the board, this has affected the service delivery as has been ably demonstrated by the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee.  

Now, when it came to the appropriation of the proceeds of the budget cuts, vital institutions were left out. We are aware about the outcry labeled against the Judiciary. The Executive has raised concerns time after time that cases have not been disposed of timely and, definitely I would have thought that that was a sector that also required urgent attention. Unfortunately, this was not to be. I would therefore like to appeal as a Member of the Committee that oversees - the Legal and Parliamentary Committee - that the Judiciary as the third arm of Government must be given due consideration even where the resources are deemed to be scarce.

Mr Speaker, we are a banana republic, there is no doubt about that – (Interruptions)- you will have your time to say what you want to say, but I think we are a banana republic!  And in doing so, I think we should be bold enough to appreciate that we still need external support to balance our budget.  I am however constrained by some of the utterances by some members of the Executive who have even told the donors to pack their bags and go, and then they come around and say, they are short of funds. I think we should be bold enough. I have read in the paper that we are getting oil, but even if we get oil, we shall still need allies in the world. America is rich but when it has come to fighting the Iraq war, they are looking for support even from weak countries like Uganda. So, we should not become arrogant because of a prospect of maybe sometime striking oil in the future.

Mr Speaker, I have noted also from the report that there are omissions in reporting, particularly on appropriation-in-aid. In my view, the Ministry of Finance cannot escape its cardinal responsibility of issuing treasury instructions to the affected ministries to ensure that they account to Parliament. I would therefore like to appeal to the committee to ensure that actually they obtain compliance on this matter.

Finally, Mr Speaker, as we go to discuss the coming budget, and as for sure we shall be examining a number of bills which are on the Floor of the House, we shall expect that the Ministry of Finance will from now onwards utilise the exactitudes, which they have been presenting on the Floor of the House less extravagantly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Budget Committee very much for the job well done. I would like to ask a specific question related to the Ministry of Education.  When we were approving this budget, there was development budget for the Ministry of Education for the construction of at least four PTCs to be upgraded into core PTCs. I think those PTCs include Lodonga TTC in the North, Busubizi TTC in Central Uganda, Ngora, St. Aloysius TTC, Ibanda in the west and I think Shimoni. 

Observations on the ground indicate that there has been no physical development in those TTCs since the budget was implemented. You can tell the difference between what is a core TTC and what is an ordinary TTC. I have also taken note that even with the supplementary submission today, there has been no mention about the capital investments on core TTCs being cut. What is submitted today is more on the services to core TTCs, which have been affected by training, like inspection. My question, which goes to the Minister of Education, is therefore, what is happening to the TTCs, which were supposed to be up-graded? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR PATRICK APUUN (Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not appreciate the presentation by hon. Mwandha, the Chairman of this Committee. In his first remarks, he said some sectors have not been covered. I would like to refer, particularly, to some sectors, which I want to be very specific on. 

Normally when we present reports on the budget to the House, I do not see where we feature to discuss money, which has been given by our development partners in relation to some areas in this country. I am referring to one sector in Karamoja. We have a Ministry for Karamoja Affairs in the Prime Minister’s Office and we have also within that Ministry the European Union, which has donated to us some money. That money should have been reflected so that we could see how that money has been utilized. 

In the first phase, Mr Speaker, the European Union gave us 614,060 Euros and the project has just been completed; it has had a lot of impact. We have had very many schools in our sub counties in Karamoja region. We also have so many health centres in Karamoja region. 

In this second phase, we have received so many problems, Mr Speaker, and I would like to put this matter to the Minister of Finance to rectify the anomalies, which have arisen. It is our concern that in the May 2002 budget to January 2003, European Union gave us 117,752 Euros. This phase has not been implemented. It is just going to be implemented. But the problem has arisen and I would like investigation on this matter. 

I would like, with your permission, Mr Speaker, to table a report which I have just received, which most of my colleagues have also received, from Andrew Foyle, the Chief Programme Advisor of Karamoja Programme Initiative Unit (KPIU) operating in the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs. This matter has arisen and it has blown off all our expectations in Karamoja. There are a lot of crises; the KPIU is in stalemate. The staff members have been suspended; the chief programme advisor is also in the process of being sacked!  

So, Mr Speaker, because of the fraud, which has been detected in this sector, it has made the chief programme advisor unstable and some people in the Ministry of Finance are in the process of dismissing him. I am sure the Minister of Finance has been sidelined and this actually has a very bad impact to our Government. I do not know what the European Union will see on this one if this very little money, which is supposed to benefit the poor communities in Karamoja will be curtailed by the disappointment of the European Union. 

So, Mr Speaker, because of the fake payment vouchers, fraud was detected to the tune of 20,107,000. Therefore, I would like to put this on the Table for investigation so that the Minister of Finance, the Minister of State for Monitoring, the Minister of Integrity can come in and investigate this matter and bring -  (Interruption)

MR JOHN AACHILLA: I thank you my honourable friend for Bokora County. The information I want to avail to the House is the concern of the districts of Karamoja over the desperate state in which Karamoja Projects Implementation Unit (KPIU) is about to be buried. Right from the start, the achievements of the KPIU have been that capacity of local governments, especially local government III’s to undertake bottom-up planning. These are the basics of the system of planning that we are undertaking. 

The provision of specific services and investments, according to the district development plans, were also initiated under this project. Capacities of local governments to deliver and manage services, to facilitate out-sourcing of services from the private sector were also initiated. 

With all these frustrations encompassing the KPIU, some people have been stealing the funds. The European Union funds intended to facilitate development in Karamoja are being “eaten” by a racket of a few people to the extent that even the Chief Programme Officer, as my honourable friend has said, is about to be fired in order to allow other people to eat. So, it would be very important that as we discuss this budget, some of these anomalies of corruption should be exposed to the Minister of Finance. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR APUUN: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for expounding this point on the extent to which Karamoja is suffering. It is suffering from poverty, insecurity, illiteracy and backwardness. So, it is only through these donors that we can be uplifted to the status civilization has taken place in this country.

Mr Speaker, as I said, I would like this matter to be probed. I would like to table this report to Parliament for the appropriate ministers to take action and report to this House so that we can know to what extent we are going in Karamoja. This is the report, Mr Speaker. I will shortly lay it on the Table.  

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda North, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity (Interjections).  

MR APUUN: Mr Speaker, as I said earlier on that it is our concern, the elders from Karamoja have written a letter to this effect because they are extremely disappointed by some people who are sidelining our ministers in their offices in the form of commissioners. These commissioners are in the Ministry of Finance; they are sitting on that desk. I think there is a desk for monies we receive in this country through donors – (Interjection) – I will name them with your permission, Mr Speaker. I would like to name one – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, have you not finished your contribution?

MR APUUN: Mr Speaker, I think the Minister of Finance knows his staff. He can bring us the report here – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, to who was the letter addressed?

MR APUUN: I beg your pardon?

THE SPEAKER: Whom is the letter addressed to?

MR APUUN: The letter is addressed to the European Ambassador, His Excellency, Sergad Hailie, with copies to hon. Peter Lokeris, Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs, hon. Gerald Ssendaula – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a letter which is written to somebody and we do not know whether what is there is correct or not. Don’t you think we should leave it?  Because it is written to the Head of Delegation, European Union and just copied for information. Do you have to read it?

MR APUUN: Mr Speaker, it was just the concern of our people to show the extent to which the elders in Karamoja have expressed their depression on this issue. This is what I wanted to express here. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that matter.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, this Budget Committee document is headed “BUDGET PERFORMANCE FOR THE FIRST HALF OF 2002/2003 FISCAL YEAR”. In my view, this is one of the areas where Members of Parliament should be spending a lot of our energies in order to dissect and get the anatomy of what is happening, because everything else hinges on the good or poor performance of the economy.

The other day when we were discussing the report of the ad hoc committee on UCB, all ministers were here. Now I cannot see anybody from the sector of Agriculture where 80 per cent of our people derive their livelihood. What does this tell us, Mr Speaker? It tells us that matters that are critical to this country are not given the sufficient attention that they deserve – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Government Business, can you tell us why the ministers are not here?

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I frankly and honestly cannot tell you why the ministers – except Dr Byaruhanga was here, I do not see him. So I do not know why the Minister of Agriculture is not represented – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prof. Kagonyera, it only happened that they mentioned the Ministry of Agriculture because another member will stand and mention the other minister. The question was general; why is it that they are not here?

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, there is an honourable member who is trying to put words in my mouth. The Front Bench is supposed to be very well represented. In my considered opinion, there is very reasonable representation now. We obviously could do better, Mr Speaker.  I therefore take your concern once again and I am going to raise it with my colleagues. Thank you, Sir.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, everyone of us here ought to know that matters concerning the performance of an economy, especially ours that needs daily monitoring like a patient on a drip, is very critical. I can see hon. Isanga Musumba alone here. He is a technical economist. Maybe they are up in the gallery. But they normally sit around. I do not see anybody! These are very important matters honourable members. 

This economy has been growing from 1986 to 1995/1996.  There has been what economists call real growth, and real growth is the GDP minus population growth. There has been some real growth from 1986 to 1995/1996. From 1996 to today, most of the figures are flowery, and I will explain.  They are flowery, defective and to say the least, they do not reflect the reality on the ground, or most of the statistics.  

From 1986 to 1995, we saw FDIs (Foreign Direct Investments) on the increase. You would move in the countryside and see rehabilitation of many valuables that constitute an economy that is recovering. You would even see in the conception style the way of life. All these were discernible aspects of a recovering economy from 1986 to 1996.  

This single digit inflation, which the planners of this country have been telling us, is a defective inflationary rate, Mr Speaker. Defective in the sense that if you subtract the food crop component, the inflation inevitably goes in double digit. So, what does that imply economically to the majority of our people, the 80 per cent who live in the countryside? It means that the majority of our people are producing goods and services whose terms of trade are not in their favour, year in, year out.  

The terms of trade of goods and services of the majority of Ugandans are not in their favour, and I can further explain that this is shown by the absence of what they call “saving deposits”. It is even shown here in the committee’s report – Saving Deposit rate - 2 per cent.  An economy that has been growing at least at the rate of 6 per cent per annum, next to China in the entire globe, cannot have a saving rate of 2 per cent; there should be an increase at least!  

I want to point out that everybody knows, including those who have never gone to school, that there has been a continuous depreciation of our shilling vis-à-vis these hard currencies, especially the dollar. Of course, the Iraqi-US War has exacerbated it. Nevertheless, even the variable of the war is out of the question; there has been a continuous depreciation of our shilling vis-à-vis the dollar. But it will be interesting for you to note that in spite of - because, when a shilling depreciates versus a hard currency, which we use to get all consumer goods into the country; guns, vehicles, suits and everything, you notice that there is no inflation. That inflation remains more or less, and that is a very serious defect in an economy -(Interruption).

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I thank the member for giving way. I would like to inform my colleague and neighbour, actually from Ibanda North, that it is only in Uganda where the dollar is appreciating. All other countries in the whole world, the dollar is depreciating. 

CAPT. GUMA: Engineer hon. Byabagambi, I thank you for your information – (Interruption)

MRS ZIIWA NANTONGO: Thank you very much. I rise to be clarified or to seek some procedural clarification. From the way I read the report, there are many technical issues, which the minister or the ministry has not answered. They remained hanging questions even in the view of the committee. I am wondering whether the minister would be courteous to answer them before the members can debate. Because, as you can see the honourable member proceeding, this question of the performance of the petroleum sector is mentioned, but the minister has not given this House the performance of that sector, which is very important.  

Even when you look at other sectors, like the foreign exchange in terms of the performance within the foreign exchange bureaus - really, when is the minister able to react? Because, if you react at the end, we are also bound again to come back on the Floor, and maybe get – and yet we should have got a written explanation.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the question was asked yesterday and the minister was here. But the question is, when the committee wrote this report, did they have an interview with the minister to answer some of the queries?  Did they write the report without any minister’s comments about it?  Therefore, if there are queries being raised here and yesterday I addressed the same issue: It was said that he was going to answer after he has heard the points raised. But I think this report must have been written with the minister’s input. He must have been interviewed.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to wind up with a few remarks. I want members to take full cognizance of an economy, which they say has been growing and which to a certain extent I agree, but up to 95/96. The saving deposit rates remain miserably low. That it is an economy where the medium of exchange, that is our shilling, is continuously depreciating and yet they tell us that inflation is constant! That is a very serious pointer to a deep-seated problem in an economy, either in the fiscal or monetary instruments. It is a very serious pointer in respect to fiscal and monetary instruments of the Government that a shilling depreciates but inflation remains low.

I have also said that the FDI’s (Foreign Direct Investments) increased up to 1996 but we have seen a sharp decline of real investors. Star Supermarket on Jinja Road closed the other day and they sold its assets; it was liquidated. It should not be supermarkets, honourable members; it should be real investment. If we are talking about 80 per cent of our people relying on land, cattle keeping and tilling of the land, how many factories in this country are geared towards the raw materials that we produce, so that various factory centres can act as pull and push factors for more production? You see, people selling cassettes and they are called investors; which investment! This is trade or commerce but not investment.  

I want to finalize because I can see more interruptions from hon. Chebrot. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member that according to the UNDP Report, the Human Development Index for Uganda dropped by about 40 per cent from the year 1996 up to now. The Human Development Index, which is a very clear measure of what is going on in the economy, has dropped by over 40 per cent.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: You can hear the dropping of the Human Development Index. That is a very serious indication, Mr Speaker. I hope the hon. Isanga Musumba and his technical people have heard. 

When you move in the countryside of this country, which some of us have done anyway - we are not Kampala people -first of all, there is a problem with the entire economy policy package. There are certain problems because World Bank comes and tells the government that you work on the road. It is necessary, but can that road fight poverty? This Tirinyi road, for how long has it been there - this Tirinyi road going to Pallisa and so on? That road on its own or in unison with other factors can never fight poverty. When I go to Mbale, I always see the grass thatched houses by the roadside. Maybe better houses showing higher standards of living and more income deep in the villages. But I think there is need to re-examine the entire economic package policies.  

This question of peoples coming in here and running supermarkets, selling televisions and so forth, and you call them investors! There is a problem, Mr Speaker, of externalization of hard currencies. Of course, this is a problem of capitalizing and liberalizing the capital account.

There are companies in this country, like there is one single company, which externalizes per month an average of 20 million dollars. What do they bring in, in return, if the planners of this country are really serious? Because if I get Shs 100,000, first of all I can load it on my mobile: The question is, what is the net contribution of the mobile to an economy that is 80 per cent subsistence? 

I think there is a big problem. Once the Uganda shilling has accumulated, they go to forex bureaux, buy dollars and externalize them back to their home country. No amount of dollars, I can assure you, will be put in the market that cannot be sucked and taken outside the country. I am told that the foreign exchange reserve is around 900 million dollars.  All those will be sucked.  

What about our import component? To import goods and services that we require for this country we need dollars, but what is the composition of those imports; what are the items we are importing into the country? Are they imports that help the forward and backward linkages? As I used to hear sometimes in the past, about 15 years ago, they are televisions, rotten vehicles, second hand shoes and fridges! What is our import component that drains our dollars out of the country and taken to different centres in the world where we need all these things?

Mr Speaker, there is a very serious - in fact the report of the Budget Committee points it out on page -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But would you like to suggest remedies on how we can go about these problems.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: They point out, Mr Speaker, that the biggest single area where Government gets revenue is what the committee report calls international trade.  It is really business, trading. The import of URA - of course it is also a very serious indicator of the weaknesses of our local economy that about 90-95 per cent of what we require still comes from outside economy. 

I am not saying it was that, but every fiscal year I am seeing a progressive decline of what we need from outside. There is a progressive decline of what we need as Ugandans, and a progressive increase of disengagement of our goods and services that we require from outside. I would be very happy but our import deal is on the increase and in fact it is about twice and a quarter as much as our export component.

Mr Speaker, I should stop there and give other colleagues opportunity. I think that discussing the national budget performance for the first half is an important area, and I think it deserves a lot of attention, input, ideas and a lot of hearing and listening. But when the very people who are supposed – look at agriculture in this report! In the first half it is allocated 1.9 percent. Of the total result outlay, it is 1.9 percent and yet some people turn around and say, “Our economy is agriculture”. It is agriculture indeed! It is not a mining industry; it depends on subsistence. But what do we see in return in terms of funds put aside in order to stimulate that important sector that is much sung about? Thank you.

MRS ANIM ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Budget Committee for their report and at the same time thank the finance sector for cutting the budget by 23 percent, without the consent of Parliament. 

I rise to give a general comment on the effect of the 23 percent budget cut of the 2002/2003 Financial Year, and I hope that this time we are going to have a proper channel in order to effect the performance of the budget.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to page two of the report. When you critically observe the sectors that are affected, under Mbarara University, for example, you find that the budget cut affected the teaching practice of the undergraduates. It makes me wonder whether we shall graduate students from that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the minister should tell us the legal basis of that re-allocation of 23 percent. That way, we shall be informed and get a remedy and also prevent its recurrence in future. This is for general information.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of the 23 percent budget cut is that it was done by the ministries in accordance with the law. It is a point of fact -(Interjections)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I asked the minister to tell us the legal basis. Unless we know the legal basis, we may not be able to prevent the recurrence. I think there is a problem in the Budget Act that we passed ourselves. 

In the Budget Act, we made a ceiling for certain things. They cannot be done. If government wants to increase the budget, it can do so by three percent. If it is more than that, then it will have to come here for approval. We also allowed ministries to re-allocate the approved budget among them, so long as they consented. We never put a ceiling to this. It was just open. Once the budget is approved, they can sit in Cabinet and say, “Okay, we had allocated this to the Ministry of Education, but now there is an urgent matter in the Ministry of Works, so we need to change.” The only rider we put there is that they should consent. 

I think this is something that should be appreciated by us so that we find a cure to it. If we allow government to change the allocations, we should put a ceiling to it. But that is what happened. I do not know what the minister wants to say.  

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker that is exactly what I wanted to say -(Laughter). Section 12 of the Budget Act generally allows for total supplementary. It says that Government can actually incur a supplementary expenditure if it requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament. This provision is derived from the Constitution. It has its validity in the Constitution.

Section 12(iii) does say; “Any re-allocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations.” That is to say, Parliament did authorise, in keeping with the Constitution, government to make re-allocations.

Two, the Act went ahead to say that if this government wants to make re-allocations, all you have to do is consult the relevant ministries, and that is what was done by the law. Therefore, if members are unhappy with the provisions of the law, they have the powers, under the Constitution, to amend the law.

THE SPEAKER: I think we need to revise that law.  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, we are all aware of that particular provision. Indeed government was in order to carry out these allocations without coming to us, but when we passed that law, we never anticipated that government, within a very short time of, say, two months, would simply change the budget around to the extent they did, of 23 percent. So, we looked at this and felt that government did not do this in good faith.

To have done it within such a short time after passing the budget gives one the impression that already they knew what they wanted, and they knew the amount of money they wanted to give to Defence. “Let Parliament go ahead, pass the budget and then we shall come afterwards, use that particular provision in the Budget Act and do what we want,” they must have thought. This is our concern as the Budget Committee.

That is why we are coming up with a proposal, which we hope government will agree with, at least I am sure that we shall get support from the House on this. That particular section should be revisited so that at least there is a limit within which government could make re-allocations. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether this is information or just a statement. Taking into account the provision of the law, which has just been read to the House by the minister, and directing our attention to this supplementary paper that was produced by the Deputy Chairperson of the Budget Committee, I see a long list of items that were affected by these cuts. 

I do not know whether the people who gave out these items were saying, “We accepted that all these items should be affected by this budget cut, that these are not priority”. Are allowances and salaries not priority in the Ministry of Education, or is medical treatment not a priority? 

To me, Sir, much as we provided in the law that these various interest groups should be contacted, I do not think the budget cut was done with their approval. I think it was pushed down their throats.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, the only point of information was to clear the minds of members that technically, this was done within the law. There was no need, in making the re-allocation, to seek the approval of Parliament. When we passed the Budget Act, we allowed it. Other details of whether there was consent or not, is a different matter. 

Therefore, with this information, we now know that this happened so quickly and that in future we should not allow it. We should also put a ceiling like the one we put on the supplementary. It should not go beyond a certain point. When we are discussing this, we should have it in mind. I think that is the reason this information came up. As to how the consent was obtained is a different matter. 

MRS AANIMU ANGUPALE: Mr Speaker, the worst thing that could happen when one is on the Floor of the House is when one is set with words and there are severe interventions. What I would like to say here is that the situation is really pathetic and it is very terrible because of the effect of the budget cut. 

I would like to inform the honourable minister that as I was standing up to contribute, the chairperson of my committee was also standing up. We have proof that the finance sector instructed departments with some particular areas affected by the cuts. I have a photocopy of the instruction but I think the right person to lay the document on the Table would be my chairperson. If it is not with her I know it is somewhere. 

Coming back to my point of chopping the funds for teaching practice for students, I would like to caution the finance department that there are other sectors that are very important for somebody to perform some particular activities, or particularly to graduate in this case, they need teaching practice. Now we can assume that with lack of teaching practice, none of the students from Mbarara University will graduate this academic year. 

On page three, under the Ministry of Health, you will find that there was a general cut to repairs in hospitals, and even repair of equipment was affected. To justify my point, I would like to draw our attention to Arua Referral Hospital. In December 2002, when I was in that hospital, the situation was really pathetic. The Ministry of Health closed the adult male and female wards because they had some major cracks. Now adult patients are being admitted into the paediatric wards, those are the ones for children, and you know the kind of sicknesses the mature people normally go with when they are admitted. The children –(Interjection)- is it information? Mr Speaker  (_Mr Musumba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: You will be given time later, let her –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, thank you. Let me clarify so that we do not debate from a position of absence of clear information. The cuts were not across the board. There are areas that were never affected by cuts; these are the protected areas. Some of these protected areas are, for example, hospitals, universities, drugs, and wages. All these were not affected by cuts. Sir, that is a point of fact.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the minister is that, are we now discussing a paper that is false? Because I can see here the supplementary information on the half-year budget performance in the sectors of health, education and gender, and they have listed the very items the minister is talking of. So, it appears we are discussing a falsehood.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what might have happened, which the minister is perhaps not taking into account, is that it could be that certain votes were also affected by the 23 percent budget cut, even though they were not cut themselves. Those who are running those ministries then had to adjust other votes so that the performance that would have been 100 percent becomes 80 percent. That is why we have that list. Those that were affected probably had to borrow money from other items. 

MR MUSUMBA: That is the position, Sir -(Interjection)- let me add that when somebody says that drugs were affected, that is not true. But it is true that we cut allowances, which probably made it difficult for somebody to go and administer health services or something like that. Since they are intertwined, the explanation you have given is valid and true. But we did not cut certain specific votes.

THE SPEAKER: Continue, honourable member.

MRS ANGUPALE: It is very important for the hon. Speaker to always do consultation with the departments so that when we are debating here we come out with concrete evidence to support our speeches. As I mentioned it, if my chairperson does not have that information, allow me to present it tomorrow. I will lay it on the Table, because it is clear evidence that there were instructions from the Ministry of Finance. 

When we went for a workshop in the Ministry of Health, we questioned the ministry and the answer was that the budget cut in particular areas affected the implementation of certain activities. Today, on the Floor of the House, this is not clearly mentioned by the minister. 

Mr Speaker, I was talking about the situation of Arua Hospital. Patients there have been mixed up - the children and the mature people - due to lack of facilities for admission. I therefore hope that in future, the finance department –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. I had no intention of disturbing you, but you said you have a ward that has cracks in it and the district decided to mix adult patients with children. I understand there is this facility, LGDP, which the districts could use on items that they find are a priority. Why is it that Arua District Council does not find it necessary to use this money to repair that urgent and needed facility for the district?

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my beloved minister that Arua District Hospital is a referral hospital and local funds cannot do general repairs on that hospital. That is why the whole Minister of Finance travelled to Arua to stop admissions in that ward, so that the Central Government could do major repairs on it. If they were minor repairs, I think –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, honourable member. Perhaps the minister should also be informed that the President removed cost sharing from these hospitals.

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much for that information. I believe if cost sharing were there, the funds would have helped to do some minor repairs too. 

Mr Speaker, I urge the finance sector, now that the budget process is being carried through the bureaucracy, the same should happen when there are budget cuts. They should also consult various departments so that some sensitive sectors like health and education are not severely affected by the budget cut. 

Right now there are no medical drugs in the sub-counties and when you ask the medical staff what the problem is, they tell you there is no money. I do not know where the money went. The question is left to the Floor of the House, for us all to find out where the funds travelled. I thank you very much for giving me this chance to contribute.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have appreciated the work of the Budget Committee. I have only three points. 

The first point is to the ministry and the Executive. If the budget cut proposal had been done in the right procedure, we would not be going on and wasting taxpayers’ money in this manner. Parliament passes the budget and so courtesy demands that before any tax cut be done Parliament should also be on board. We as Members of Parliament take security as a priority. I cannot see any Member of Parliament who would vote against this if it were clearly explained. That way we would also participate in this blame, which is going around. 

I am calling it blame because eventually you will find that when you go to different ministries, people are using the budget cut as a guise not to perform. Everything is being blamed on the budget cut. Therefore, whatever has been cut has to be communicated clearly to the people so that we do not have non-performance in this particular year. That is the first point.

My second point is on the issue of amending the Budget Act, section 12(3). I support this amendment in the report where it states that Parliament should be consulted and the law should set a ceiling on the allocation to be carried out with the approval of Parliament, in accordance with accounting instructions. 

Whereas it might be good for us to put this in the law, I think the most important thing is good faith. We do have the law but in most circumstances, you find that there are efforts to find loopholes to use not to consult Parliament. This is not healthy because we are partners in the task.

My third and last point is on the issue of the anti-trust legislation. This proposal came up even when we were discussing the UCB saga. Whereas it might be good to have this legislation in place to avoid monopoly, to curtail powers and also to ensure that we have a free and liberalised market, I note that in most cases it is not even lack of a law of this nature that is hazardous to a nation. I will give an example of the issue of the core-investor. 

You find that this issue is being pushed even in circumstances where management is good, even in circumstances where profit is being made! In those circumstances you wonder why there should be a core-investor, if a particular entity has been doing very well. 

The push for a core-investor is one push that will make us get more private monopolies. Therefore, my argument is that political intervention in the supply and demand forces in the market is what distorts the economy, and so this should be watched, and it should be stopped. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to raise something concerning what the minister explained to be the legality of the 23 percent budget cut. In the committee report, they said that government must explain the reasons for donor reluctance. I believe that if the Executive initiates something and then Parliament also approves it or is informed about it in advance, even the donors could see it as a legitimate cut. 

To this effect, Mr Speaker, I must say that actually, the National Youth Council budget was cut 100 percent. Ever since the cut was effected, the National Youth Council has never received any money for operations. They receive wages but not money for operations, and wages are for staff and not for the operations of councils. 

To me, the most important aspect is accountability for the 23 percent that was cut. In the supplementary information that has been given, it is indicated that over a quarter of a billion shillings was released for the procurement of a Mercedes Benz, a Saloon car and one four-wheel drive Station Wagon for the Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, I would imagine that this money is cut to meet urgent programmes that come up. A vehicle is more of development capital. I would imagine that the Office of the Prime Minister would budget for this in advance, other than deducting from the 23 percent to buy these vehicles.

I will end with the issue of PAF. The committee also recommended that a report on the PAF operations must be put before the House. Mr Speaker, one of the reasons this programme was put in place was to cater for other people, particularly the youth and women. I have moved around in my constituency and in many areas, the youth are complaining that they have never seen anything to benefit from the PAF programme. So, I also beg the ministry to give us this report so that we see how best all people could benefit from this programme. I thank you very much.

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to begin by thanking the chairperson for the supplementary report he has submitted today, and I want to indicate here that the Social Services Committee handles quite a wide sector. We could not get all the information in time, as you have seen from the submission. However, I want to thank members for the spirit, support and speed in accommodating our report, which was submitted. 

I also want to thank the committee for the good work done on the report, and also thank the 6th Parliament, which came up with the Budget Act; although in certain areas the implementation is proving difficult.

In my submission I wish to focus on page six, the Appropriation-in-Aid, as submitted by the committee. The committee clearly indicates some institutions that are autonomous, self-accounting and were allowed by law to collect and use revenue at source. Some of these sectors fall under Social Services and I have some information, given what is submitted here, which I thought I could share with Parliament. 

I am perturbed by the conclusion on this section where the Committee says: “However, no report has been brought to the Floor of Parliament as required by law.” I entirely agree with the Committee, but we should understand that the implementation of this Act - you may have realised that ministries, by giving financial implications on some of these bills, were gradually internalising the law.  

But when you move further to look at the conclusion where the committee says, “It was noted that the transparency in collection and utilisation of Appropriation-in-Aid was still lacking and the Committee considers it appropriate to invoke the sanctions of non-compliance with this requirement”, I feel that this is a very strong statement. The Committee would have recommended that it is high time, as we implement this law, the responsible ministries were reminded to bring the report on this Floor. Mr Speaker, this implies that it ignores other laws, which exist.

I want to address myself to some of these institutions, which fall particularly under education. We have the Makerere University as self-accounting, Mbarara University, and Institute of Teachers Education. These have been established by the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001. And within this Act, there are provisions which indicate that this statement, to some extent other than the last end of the minister coming to tell us how they have spent, is not completely true to say that there is no transparency in the utilisation.

When you read Section 41 of the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, it gives the powers to university councils of public universities to collect the funds and the powers to disburse the funds. But as you go further, Section 62 (1) indicates how the minister responsible has to approve the expenditures of these public universities within a period of three months before they come to the end of the financial year.
 
When you go further, Section 62(3) gives the mandate to Parliament to approve these estimates. And, Mr Speaker, it is on this note that I want to disagree with this statement, because in the Budget Policy Statements of Ministry of Education - as Parliament, we have always received statements from these institutions indicating appropriation, how much they expect to receive and we pass it. For example, last financial year, Makerere University indicated to us that they would collect Shs 15 billion.  

When you read this law further, it gives the powers to the Auditor General to look into the expenditure. So, I would feel that it is only a reminder that this section of the Budget Act which has not been implemented –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much.  Mr Speaker, this question of Appropriation-in-Aid, we still have a lot of work on it because the people who collect the money in many cases are not very willing to disclose the extent to which they receive this money. The Minister of Finance himself came to our Committee and complained about one of the institutions, in fact Makerere University, which the honourable member is mentioning, that he was not receiving the necessary co-operation from Makerere University to disclose how much was being collected. This is necessary because it will give some indication of how much more money Makerere University would require on top of the amount of money they collect.

DR MATOVU BYATIKE: Mr Speaker, first of all, I have to correct the impression. I am no longer the Chairman of the University Council, but I can state it categorically that every cent that is being collected at Makerere is accounted for, and the Auditor General goes through all the Votes. Each year the Ministry of Finance puts that in their report and the Auditor General looks at it. 

To say that there is no transparency, that appropriation-in-aid is not declared, is not true! I can categorically say that the council looks at the finances and the books are sent to the Auditor General for checking. That is not true, Mr Speaker.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I wish my colleague, who once chaired the Council of Makerere University had read Section 17, because it reads: “A Minister responsible for any Vote on Appropriation-in-Aid shall make quarterly reports to Parliament on the manner in which funds from the Vote are expended.”  Quarterly! And the Minister of Education has never submitted a report on account of Makerere University in spite of what the honourable Member is saying. And this is the point we are making that these institutions responsible for appropriation-in-aid should co-operate with the ministries concerned and disclose the amount of money so that reports can be received in Parliament. Thank you.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, my colleague for this information. Mr Speaker, I want to indicate to this House that I am an ex-officio Member of the Budget Committee, by virtue of being a Chairperson of Social Services. I want to inform this House that while the Committee on Social Services interacts with these institutions, these institutions clearly indicate to us, the way Dr Matovu is indicating, and we see this within the Budget Policy Statement. I have indicated that let us invite Finance together with these institutions and we iron out the truth so that we see who is wrong.

What I want to admit here, Mr Speaker is that it is true the minister has not brought the report, but this is a strong statement to give the impression that these institutions are not transparent. There are other sections which are providing that the estimates are approved, there is accountability and the Auditor General goes ahead - It is only the report by the ministry to be brought here, which is not yet implemented, but it should not give the impression that there is no transparency. That is my submission on this. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, my second concern on this appropriation-in-aid is that we have other institutions which are not autonomous, self-accounting and which are obliged by the law, but whatever revenue they collect, they have to remit to the consolidated fund; to the Treasury. Some of these institutions are referral hospitals: the national referral hospital and regional referral hospitals. And many of these institutions and health centres collect revenue from the private wing.

Mr Speaker, I want to submit here that these referral hospitals, be it at national or regional level, are experiencing difficulties because it is expected that when this money is remitted to the consolidated fund it should be given back. But they do not receive this money on time. And I want to submit here that from the statistics we were given, you find that some of these were affected by the budget cuts. They are having difficulty because when there are problems in cash flow and fluctuations, certainly what is given back is not on time and the consultants are getting discouraged. Some of this is supposed to purchase drugs and they have difficulty here. 

On the other hand, some of these institutions have already requested that they should be allowed to spend this money at source, and we need to do something about the law so that it is amended and we allow the referral hospitals to spend this money at source, Mr Speaker. 

As I conclude on this particular subject, I want to indicate that the spirit of appropriation-in-aid, regardless of some of these slight mistakes we have noted which are not yet implemented in the law, we should appreciate the collection of internally generated revenue by some of these institutions. When you look at some of these institutions, which we have been analysing under social services, they have helped us to address many factors. For example, for Makerere University, Government provides 60 percent of the recurrent expenditure and 40 percent is by the institution. 

Some developments like construction have been done by these institutions, and also, the trouble we used to have like some of these institutions going on strike for poor welfare of some staff, this appropriation-in-aid has acted as a stop-gap. 

Recently, Government promised that Makerere University would be given Shs 2 billion for the renovation of Lumumba Hall, but for two consecutive financial years, Government has not afforded this. But when we were analysing the budget of Makerere University and they indicated to us that they would generate Shs 15 billion, as a committee we advised them to use some of this money and renovate the Hall. When we went there recently, at least two blocks of Lumumba Hall had been renovated and this should be commended, Mr Speaker. So, I feel that as a committee, we needed to come out and urge the ministry to remind them by implementation of this.
  
Lastly, Mr Speaker, I want to make an observation on the budget cuts. My understanding of the budget cuts the way it was reported, the way it has been effected is that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, did you say you are a Member of this committee?

MRS HYUHA: Ex-officio. Did I sign?  All the same, does that deny me an opportunity, Mr Speaker, as a Member of Tororo to speak my mind on this Floor?

THE SPEAKER: No that is not the case. I was only wondering that all these comments, which you are making since you are a Member of the Committee, I thought you should have put these in the committee unless you were not present. But you are a member whether you are ex-officio member. You really make your contributions during the proceedings of the committee. I did not realise this until you said you are a member.

MRS HYUHA: I want to thank you and I made it clear that what I submitted there was not taken in. I needed to give a clear picture to this House on appropriation-in-aid, and as a Member of Tororo, Mr Speaker. 

My last submission is on budget cuts - (Interjection)- yes, this is the last. Mr Speaker, the way I understood the budget cuts and reallocation was that they were a way of protecting the lives of Ugandans. Reallocation to defence so that we can protect the lives of Ugandans. I have no problem with that. However, I wish to indicate here that we have certain sectors, which equally protect the lives of Ugandans. When we are handling budget cuts, such areas should be considered so that they are protected. 

My particular reference is to the ministries of Health and Internal Affairs. Mr Speaker, as we interacted with the Ministry of Health, we were concerned. Whereas the minister has indicated here that certain areas like Primary Health Care Fund (PHCF) were protected and 50 percent of those funds are addressed to drugs, which are sent to districts - in education it is UPE mainly - those were protected but there are still other essential areas where we have drugs to regional hospitals. Where certain emergencies are handled like programme 4 item 30, 39. This is about community health, medical and veterinary drugs. This is the Vote under which the Ministry of Health gets the money to address emergencies such as an outbreak of an epidemic like cholera, like Ebola, like meningitis etc. 

Recently we had outbreaks of cholera, many people camped in Mulago and we were surprised as a committee to find out that this particular programme was cut by Shs 128,000,000. And many other programmes concerning repairs of equipment in hospitals; regional hospitals, concerning where the minister uses money to go and purchase, to pay the storage and handling of drugs in National Medical Stores. Such areas were affected which we felt was very unfortunate. 

So, I wish that as we agree and accept to protect the lives of Ugandans, certain sectors which directly deal with protection of lives, like the Ministry of Health and Internal Affairs, should be considered. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to observe that if this Mercedes Benz is meant for the hon. Prof. Kagonyera, and later hon. Rose Namayanja (Mrs Nsereko) managed her displeasure more positively – Now, Mr Speaker, turning to the subject under discussion, the biggest question that economics is concerned with is that of using very scarce resources to meet the unlimited wants of society. One task that every planner or economist is therefore supposed to grapple with is that of choice; of deciding how the scarce resources should be allocated. Any planning function that does not take proper choices will always let down society. 

The planning function of Government has quite often let down this country. If you look at the supplementary statements submitted to this House by the Deputy Chairperson of the Budget Committee, under point 3, “utilisation of additional resources”, you will find that one of the proposals that was accepted by the people responsible for our budget is to use money that had been generated from the budget cuts to procure motor vehicles for Members of Parliament coming from the war-ravaged areas. There is a plan to create a pool of vehicles such that when these Members of Parliament want to go there, I presume they go to the office of the Prime Minister and access those vehicles.

Now, I am just wondering, when none of these MPs is going to those areas, what will those vehicles be used for? Does it make sense to plan to spend Shs 0.57 billion to create a pool of vehicles and cut money that is supposed to be for teaching practice?  Does this make sense? (Interruption) I can hear someone saying that it was never expended, but to even think about it is a serious economic crime.

This morning I attended a meeting of the deregulation project where the Secretary to the Treasury and PS were, and he said that one of the main responsibilities of any government is to create employment, both qualitatively and quantitatively. You know you create jobs but jobs of quality. Now, how can you ensure that there is quality employment if you are killing the inspection function of the Ministry of Labour?  

Many of you honourable members are aware of workers who recently died at Tembo Steel Rolling Mill in Lugazi. This investor usually collects scrap, even from military facilities. These things are not inspected and when the scrap was being put in a furnace, it exploded and three workers died. There are many workers in this place who work under very severe conditions in terms of occupational health. Their work places are not well ventilated; people work for up to 20 hours! 

I wonder why we should be quarrelling about people being kept in ventilated safe houses and we do not care about workers who are working in dungeons? We have people responsible for planning and they do not appreciate that the people who work for this country must have their quality of life protected. I therefore want to invite the Minister of Finance to take the issue of protecting the quality of employment very seriously, and this should be reflected in their economic policy packages. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been very persistent because I thought I should tell this story to the House. The danger of this arbitrary budget cuts. 

We have been told of stories of Mobutu’s Zaire. When Mobutu would go for budgeting, he would summon one minister after another and dish out from his pocket and say, “What do you want for your ministry?” Then the Minister would say the amount and Mobutu would pull out of his pocket the equivalent. 

That way of running state affairs is very dangerous. I can see Mobutism here; because Parliament takes a lot of time - budgeting itself is a balancing act - to balance what should go where and do what, to balance the priorities and the size of the envelope of the country. Now, when you arbitrarily do this - and I think the Committee should have demanded that an account of the money spent should be given to this House, because what we are hearing from the field is also not correct. The soldiers are already complaining that they are not receiving their allowances and salaries, their working conditions have never improved – (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Obviously the Committee on the Budget put that question to Government. But the bulk of the amount of money constituting the budget cut actually went in to classified expenditure. From that point of view it was not possible for the committee to demand that Government give classified expenditure details to the House. Thank you.

MR MWONDHA: What actually is the position of the law? The Chairman Public Accounts Committee told us that no such expenditures should exist on our account books anymore. Expenditures called classified - that is what the chairman said here before. So, I do not know what the position of the law is on this matter, but I am saying that the danger is very pregnant. You see already that it builds, it gets waves, which follow the action. A non-performing official in the ministry would plead budget cuts to a non-suspecting member of the public. You go and ask this and that service and they – (Interruption)

MR ISANGA MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Mwondha for giving way. I want to give information that we have put it before this House that the things that we did that led to the budget cut were not outside the law. However, members have really made the point. I want to assure this House that we will not do it again; we will consult the Parliament if we have to carry out any further changes. 

In the further alternative, we are prepared to support any amendment that will change the law.  Furthermore, we will originate an amendment ourselves, if there is no other source of amendment, to ensure that this does not happen.  I want to be on record on that matter, so that we can progress. I thank you.

MR MWONDHA: I thank the Minister of Finance very much for those remarks, but I hope it will not have another syndrome of Musumba 1, 2 and 3. 

Mr Speaker, for instance, some ministries phase their work plans region by region. We have been told this year that the Ministry of Works has focused strictly on eastern region, to repair the bridges and to repair the feeder roads in that region for this year. 

This same year, the ministry has suffered a budget cut. So, what happens to the programme? Will the ministry come back to the eastern region the next financial year? Because only 10 per cent of what they had programmed to do has been done! Is the eastern region going to suffer specifically as a region out of no making of their own?  

So, these are some of the issues that really complicate the working of Government, if they do not regard what Parliament has said. We do not want to work like Mobutu. Of course, Mobutu had no parliament to work with anyway. We are worried that some people are also starting to have the feeling of Mobutu that they will work without this Parliament. But that is dangerous. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga East, Kiboga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report.  

Mr Speaker, in my simple understanding, this concept of a budget is a financial management control measure. It is a tool to financial managers to control the finances. And I think this concept was brought into this government to ensure that financial management is under control, hence the Budget Act.  

For this control tool of financial management to work, there must be discipline. There must be discipline to adhere to the Budget as approved. But if this law left such a big gap to Government to re-allocate as it so wished, then that was very unfortunate, Mr Speaker - (Interruption).

MR MWANDHA: I would like to inform my colleague on the Floor, including any other person who may come to contribute. Considering that the minister has conceded, and even apologized, and has given an undertaking that this will never happen again - a thing which does not happen very much in this House - is it not better that we accept that, and we discuss other matters of this report?

THE SPEAKER: But saying that this will never happen again is not realistic. Do you think it can be realized? I think, what you can do is to look at the law itself and make precautions by adjusting it and putting a ceiling - two percent, or three percent or something like that. 

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, what will not happen is doing so without consulting the committee. We will come to the committee, and we will tell them about the changes that we want to make.  

THE SPEAKER: You see, it is a matter of courtesy.  As far as the law stands, you may say, “I will not consult”. You may consult because members have expressed regret that this was not done; so it is informal. The law is there, you can strictly adhere to the law and you do not consult. So, for us to make sure that you do not go 23 per cent, it is better for us actually to limit you, rather than relying on your good judgement or concern.

Honourable members, I want to really finish this business, because we have now many reports which have come in today concerning bills, and we have not done much as far as enacting laws is concerned. I want to wind up this business so that next week we really concentrate on a number of bills. The committees have already, I understand, received the reports. Many reports have been submitted in.  So, be brief.

MR ERESU ELYANU: I will be brief, Mr Speaker.  Given your wise guidance and the commitment by the minister, by way of procedure, can I know from the minister when he is likely to bring a bill to this House to the effect that this limitation is put in place?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, we have the Finance and Accountability Bill. In that bill, there is a provision that exactly addresses the problem we are discussing today, and that is a point of fact.

MR MWONDHA: I think it will still be proper for this House to bring the Budget Act in resonance with the Finance and Accountability Act. We will, therefore, need a consequential amendment to the Budget Act, and that is what we are asking for.  When are you coming with that amendment? I am proposing that we do not pass the next Budget before that amendment.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I am at pains, because you tried to labour to inform my colleague, the minister of state. Because you cannot commit yourself, I am at pains to appreciate what our problem is. 

For example, one colleague here said that he couldn't even imagine that money was put to purchase vehicles in a pool for our colleagues who come from war-ravaged areas, to go and mobilise support for our people and the army. Could any of us risk our own vehicles to go and do monitoring work in a war-ravaged area? Would any of us want to go to a war-ravaged area without escorts? Because it appears now that we in the Executive are not really mindful of what our people want, much as we are elected leaders. I am really at pains.  

Secondly, an elected government can be voted out of power and Parliament can retain their seats.  Yes, an elected government can be voted out of power and come parliamentary elections, Members of Parliament can be voted in again. So, I am trying to beg Parliament that let us try to strike a balance. When government finds that this action is appropriate, whether we have come back to you as a matter of courtesy, I would be worried as Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs if our act was illegal.  However, I am so relieved that at least members now realise that our act was not illegal. As a matter of courtesy, it can be done but I do not think that courtesy should stop Government from doing what is right, just and timely. That is the clarification I am seeking.

It appears that one member is asking us to stop the next budget until we bring this law. What will happen if the minister is not in position to bring this amendment? Would the whole country suffer because of this amendment, for purposes of courtesy?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the Budget Act was not a bill that was brought by Government. It was brought here as a Private Members’ Bill. If you feel that you want to amend it, you do not have to ask the minister to do so. You can apply for leave of the House to bring an amendment, and then we allow you to do so. You should not say that you should not deal with the budget, when actually the law was passed by you and you have the opportunity to amend it. The Constitution allows you to do so. Anyway, we shall see what to do.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE: I think we are wasting a lot of time here yet we know what happened. Ministers were called to Gulu and were told what to do and now we are frying and roasting them! Why don’t we do what is quick? We should put an amendment in the law so that we can negotiate. Yes, that is what happened.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, is hon. Nkuuhe, who is not a Member of the Executive arm of government, in order to stand here and mislead this House? Does he know very well what happened? What he is saying is millions of miles away from the truth. Is he in order to mislead this House?

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, I think we have agreed that what was done was within the law, although Parliament was not consulted. We have agreed that the consent had to be given by the owners of the Votes, and calling ministers to Gulu, to Mbarara or to Masaka as the case may be, is definitely not out of order. Cabinet could sit anywhere in Uganda. 

This is not something for us. You know there is nothing wrong with His Excellency the President holding a Cabinet sitting in Gulu. I think we should go on with other matters and finalize this. Have you finished hon. Kiwalabye?

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, I had not finished. As you can see I was receiving information, clarification and so on. 

I was going to say that this control of budgeting also presupposes that things are normal. However, under abnormal circumstances, budgets cannot, of course, be adhered to. You can change; that is true. But we also suppose that in the process of making budgets, many of these variables should have been taken into account. We should not have underestimated, say, the war in the North and asked for a small allocation of the budget, because that is one of the reasons there were these budgetary cuts. 

The war should have been estimated properly, as somebody was talking about unforeseen disasters and so on. There is a ministry for that, and it should make estimates of what would happen in form of disasters so that all these variables are put in the budget. Not every new item that comes about should affect the budget. If you do that, then the concept of budget control is lost.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to say that even this new concept of ROM, Result Oriented Management, which is being introduced in Government dealings, is also undermined. If the budget is changed, then it is very difficult to assess the results according to the allocations you make to each ministry. So, there are already problems with these budget cuts and re-allocations.

Now that the minister has said he will support any move to rectify this anomaly in the law, then it is okay. I think we should go with that. Otherwise, Mr Speaker, it was very unfortunate that these cuts affected so many things. They even affected the road, the Busunju-Kiboga, Kiboga-Hoima road. The people have been promised, since the days in the bush, that this road would be repaired for them. Up to now it is still not done. Work on it has stalled and one of the reasons for this is the budget cut. We are also tremendously affected in other areas too. So, in order to rectify this, we should bring the law in conformity with that. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, don’t you think that we should end this debate now? We should hear from the minister, the chairperson and then we wind up.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I will be brief and I have only three points.

The first point is on privatization, on page 15 of the minister’s report. I see that among the major transactions to be completed is Kinyara Sugar Works. Really, this is a problem of departing from an agreed and good principle. I would like to assert again that in Kinyara we do not need a core investor. We have enough resources but government is fidgeting, going around our resolution, and bringing in a core investor! I would like the honourable minister to take this point seriously.

Two, it is unfortunate there is no minister from the Ministry of Agriculture here. We are aware this is supposed to be a productive ministry and it is even in the report. We have been talking about budget cuts. On page 11 it is said that the development budget, with the exception of PAF activities, suffered budget cuts. For instance, tea seedlings, coffee seedlings, and many others were affected.  

I had a meeting today with stakeholders in the coffee sector, and people are lamenting. Much as in this statement of the minister, Shs 2.1 billion was authorized, it has never been paid out. The farmers are crying. 

Even of the Shs 3.6 billion that was supposed to be given out in cash, only Shs 2.6 billion was given. Mr Speaker, as I talk now, the rains have started and yet the money is not available. As far as agriculture is concerned, timely intervention is very important. I can see the hon. Minister of Finance noting this. I hope he will address this issue expeditiously.

In the meeting we also proposed that UCDA should be allowed to spend even before the budget is approved for the following financial year. This is because the rains come in August and by November they are finished, yet the budget is passed in October. So, we miss out on this particular issue.  

Lastly, the issue of education: I am really perturbed. We have a very good policy of UPE but it seems Government now is not paying due attention to post-primary education. I will just give one example, which is cited in this report. The post-primary education and training report recommended that about 98 seed schools should be constructed. But the ministry is telling us that last year they constructed about eight, which could not even open doors to the students because of the wage bill.

As if that is not enough, they are saying this should be halted and I am sure you will come back to us and say they have nowhere to put these UPE "graduates”. What will happen? 

I would like to appeal to our government and our ministers that they should learn to plan properly. We have had seven years since UPE started to prepare for these children, but as I see now we are going to have a problem when these children are offloaded onto the economy.

The last one, kindly, I would like to request that when the budgets are being cut, due consideration is taken. Sincerely, when you cut out the inspection of schools - no wonder the standards have gone so low, especially in UPE schools. I know there are very few of them around Kampala that performed well but in my constituency, and in Masindi in general, the teachers are not being supervised enough. Therefore, they are not teaching enough and hence the standards are going down. So, I would like to say that supervision of schools should also be given enough funds. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t you really think we have covered this? Anyway, I now give you just four minutes to make your point.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I want to seek from the minister is on page five, about taxes. Parliament does appropriate, during budget time, the money for paying taxes by the different ministries. But on page five, the committee has noted that the money has not been paid for the last year, and even for the previous years to the extent that we have arrears of over Shs 18 billion. 

We have been meeting Uganda Revenue Authority in the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on this and it is one of the areas in which we need an explanation from the minister. Where does this money go? Currently, the list that we got from Uganda Revenue Authority is to the tune of Shs 25 billion in tax arrears. I think we should lead the other taxpayers by example. Could the minister explain where this money goes, which we appropriate here?

In appendix 3 of the report, the committee notes that all local governments were exempted from the budget cuts. However, I am surprised that for the District of Soroti, concerning the LGDP money as of February, they got a letter from the Secretary to the Treasury that the money was cut. More so, the money for Soroti District Council had been earmarked as donor funds by the Netherlands Government, and so cannot be re-allocated to other uses without the formal approval of the donor. How did this money get re-allocated? 

To date, Soroti District has only received Shs 200 million, out of the Shs 600 million. This has hampered the development of the district. Could the minister explain to me how this happened? Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I agree with those who initially focussed on this report. To me it is important that we focus more on this report in the context of the fact that it is the first of its kind. However, it is unfortunate that this 23 percent budget cut derailed us, and we spent a lot of our time on that. I will also add one small thing to the discussion of that 23 percent budget cut. 

What is its implication to the medium-term expenditure framework, which you have been using for planning your budgets and the macro-economic stability? That is where I have a problem. If you have a structured system and you disorganise it, you destabilise the whole set-up. 

Nevertheless, Mr Speaker, I went through this report comprehensively and now I ask myself, what can we do to improve budget performance? It is this question that I have been grappling with, particularly in the context of the fact that when releases are made, as already indicated that 80 percent has been covered in this Vote item, then what normally happens? And it is year in and year out. 

In the last month of the financial year, huge sums of money are taken to local governments and they do not have the time to spend the money. This is the biggest problem. It is not the extent to which we have released the 80 percent in this quarter, but making sure that the releases are on time, and they are used for the purpose for which they are given.

I will quickly run through a number of points that I picked from this report, particularly on page two. The committee talked about the large disparity between the savings and lending rates, which was illustrating the inadequate competitiveness of our banking industry and its inefficiency. We still get very sentimental even when we have resolved this matter. 

I just passed in front of what was Uganda Commercial Bank (UCB) this morning, and I found blue symbols of Stanbic Bank. That means UCB is no more, and yet the privatization of the bank was supposed to enhance the banking sector. So, some of these things bring bad memories to some of us.

Then there is another element, which I was worried about, and which probably reflects what Capt. Guma said about our economic figures. On page 2, they said that the GDP projection was revised from 6.6 percent to 6 per cent. The explanation was that the Bujagali Dam Project was not implemented. This is incredible! 

The dam is a five-year project, its injection to GDP, in spite of the total cost, is spread over that period. How can a single project like that so adversely affect our GDP? And what is our GDP then hinged on? This, I thought, was worrying. 

Of course, as an agriculturist, I would like, again, to reassert the fact that every time you look at inflation figures, it is hinged on the price of food and agricultural commodities, and yet the ministry and Government consistently pay lip service to agriculture. 

You know that policy and conducive environment do not create change in agriculture; it is resources. You have to put money in agriculture. It is so pathetic that agriculture, which has 1.9 percent of the budget, still even suffers budget cuts in its development area. I thought this should be brought out for the minister to consider.

The committee had three very good observations: One was the one I have stated. The second one was really the persistent depreciation of the Uganda shilling, which is indicative of capital crime.  Given the reality that we are in, we in this country should begin to exercise a lot of restraint on political matters that will merely accelerate capital crime. 

When political pronouncements that create more uncertainties emerge, you can be sure the economy will suffer. I am begging Government and the political leaders of this country to save us from the impending chaos. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this report, and particularly for the concern of the very low food crop prices. He has just mentioned that problem, but as a person from a predominantly agricultural area, all along I have been trying to find out why my people are not producing. 

The reason they give, actually, is that when they produce sweet potatoes, for instance, they put in a lot of effort, labour and sometimes cash. But when it comes to marketing their produce, it becomes a problem, and that is why they have no incentive for working very hard. Now, I wonder whether Government has any policy in place, like what they did to control the prices of maize. I wonder whether they are considering how they can control the prices of some of these crops.

Secondly, capital flight: Mr Speaker, we have a problem, and I combine this with observation number three, on page 2. We have investors who come to invest mainly in services and consumable activities. I wonder whether a company like MTN could produce airtime cards in Uganda, so that we save the money that goes to purchase these airtime cards. 

Companies like supper markets - I am sorry to say, but we are enriching our brothers and sisters in South Africa. You go to a supermarket like Metro and you find even chicken is imported from South Africa and chicken gizzards are imported from South Africa! Now, what will the people of Uganda do? How will they gain from that? Mr Speaker, I think we should –(Interruption)

MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. On the case of South Africa bringing chicken here, the reason is that we do not produce enough chicken. Otherwise, if we had enough, they would buy. I want to tell you that they are even buying local products. 

On the issue of the service industry, I would like to inform my colleague that in economics, service industries like communications, supermarkets and so on are also very important sectors in the economy. Actually, it is one of the best or the highest levels of investment in a developing economy. So, in some way, it improves or it promotes development in that it provides jobs and they even buy and sell some of the locally produced products.

DR NKUUHE: I would like to inform you that South Africa’s trade with Uganda is so skewed in favour of South Africa that they bring us seven times what we take to South Africa. In fact, we have to do something and force them to buy something from here because there are things here they can buy. We are just not putting pressure; that is all.

MR MUTULUUZA: I thank the honourable members for the information. Mr Speaker, I think these supermarkets, which are coming in, should also help us improve on our own local poultry projects, so that we do not rely on their imports. This is the same as fruits, for example. 

We have areas in Uganda where we can grow fruits, which are imported from South Africa, like grapes in Kabale. I think the land is fertile and we can get those fruits from there. But the problem is that I do not know whether Government has a plan to encourage these people to develop our farmers also. 

Fluctuation of the rate, I think is caused by this same problem - the service and consumption sector, which most of the investors concentrate on. They get our little money, then they buy all the dollars we have and they just go to buy these products they sell to us. So, I think the government should try their best to also encourage these investors to make sure that what actually can be produced here is produced, so that we save that foreign exchange.  Thank you.

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this elaborate report. I feel that maybe if we had a little more time, we would have been able to have a little more understanding of some of the issues the committee has raised.  

Notwithstanding that, and in high anticipation of the response from the minister, I want to raise additional concerns to those raised by the committee. I think I should start with the very one they started with, on page two - consistent or persistent depreciation of the Uganda shilling, which has been related to capital flight.  

I want to find out from the minister; since, I think, 1989, foreign exchange was liberalized and there was enactment of a law, which gave liberty to foreign forex bureaux to start operating. Since then, I want to find out whether the ministry has made any assessment of how much money has been transmitted out of this country through the foreign forex bureaux, and how much money is earned in terms of differentials. I would like to find out in terms of volumes of capital. 

Some of the allegations that have been put on the Floor of the House are that, in most cases when there is a lot of capital flight, Bank of Uganda comes in and puts some money in circulation. But more than often, it is bought. For instance, about two weeks ago when there was this problem, about 200 million was put on the market, I think to control the dollar at around Shs 1,870. But today when you look at the rates, it has gone up to almost Shs 2,000. It is barely two weeks! So, what is the problem? I think we need sincerity in this situation.

The second one is also a concern, which has been raised. His Excellency the President mentioned that lately, there is a lot of concern about indicators like inflation, GDP; that is why the real production sectors have not been addressed. 

I heard a concern raised by the committee where they were saying that the impact on the real production sectors - seedlings of coffee, tea and others - has been drastically reduced.  Really, aren’t we contradicting ourselves? If we talk in terms of improving the real development or growth sectors and we know certainly that agriculture is one of them!  

Some time back, there was a feeling that we should not really go with what the Western World is saying, that we should not subsidise the agricultural sector. I think there was a move to go into this sector and grow the seedlings, give them to the farmers, and of course bring in also some other insecticides and other things that can actually result into the growth of the sector. When this 23 percent problem came in, definitely it affected the sector. Aren’t we contradicting ourselves? 

As I wind up, may I also know if we do not have another contradiction? We know that in the medium term economic framework, some of the pillars are governance and democracy. But when you look at the performance of this sector, I think democracy and governance are the most affected, to the tune that even the very institutions of governance have not been put in place. 

Some of the institutions, I will not mention, are affected. But you can even look at the postponement of local council elections, and even those at the district levels - some of those organs, which should actually strengthen governance and democracy. And all this notwithstanding that one of the conditionalities, which is being given to us by our donor partners, is exactly in that area. They are not satisfied with the way we are doing our things. So, may we not start to rationalise? 

When you look at the figures in the last bit, there are some sectors, which have not been affected at all. What is the rationalisation?  What is genuine? I think I will end by re-echoing what the committee said; we need to be sincere to ourselves and we need to respect each other. 

The Executive should also have the courtesy to respect this House. Some of the dissatisfaction, which is being expressed here, is because there is no respect. We should not waste more time on budgeting; let us just leave this as a function of the Executive, and you will go your way. And I am saying this out of frustration. Thank you very much.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief. Mr Speaker, this 23 per cent Budget cut is a fait accompli, and I believe that it was done for a noble cause. But my concern, Mr Speaker, is the various cuts carried out by various ministries. 

When you look at this supplementary information they have here, the July to December Budget performance on Gender, Labour and Social Development there is one item there which mentions failure to buy enough food for children in remand homes. 

Mr Speaker, I am concerned because there are some remand homes in the country, and these are not normal schools. They are schools for vagabonds, they are schools for children who have left their families, and there is that problem.  Some of these are victims of HIV/AIDS, and yet they say there is a cut, they are not going to get enough food for the children in remand homes!  

Mr Speaker, I am appealing to the ministry concerned to revisit this issue and try to re-allocate enough money to buy enough food for these children.

As one member said, there is a big problem because people are using this budget cut. They are saying, “because of this budget cut, there is this problem, because of the budget cut that is why things are not being done properly”. Mr Speaker, many people are using it, even in connection with the road from Kyenjojo to Kyegegwa; they are using it.  

We have seen what this budget cut affects, but we have not seen what it has left out. We would like to know whether the road is still on in the Budget, whether it is going to be worked upon within the period stipulated. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, first of all, I want to thank the committee for this report, and I also want to thank Parliament, which has enabled this kind of discussion to come as a consequence of the Budget Act.  

Mr Speaker, hon. Guma did raise the point of the Front Bench taking a very keen interest in the debate of the economy. I agree. I just want to appeal to the House also to mutually, along with us, take an active interest in this debate. 

Hon. Guma gave an example of the UCB debate. Yes, it is true during the UCB debate some of us could not find space to sit. So in this matter, which is more important than the UCB debate, active interest should be on both sides.

The majority of the concerns that the members have raised, we have taken note of. The purpose of this mid-term review is for the members to inform us, to pinpoint where the shoe is pinching in our development process, and we then take them on board in consideration of our next steps, especially in the forthcoming Budget.  

Therefore, I will not spend too much time of this House, to answer query by query or concern by concern. I have taken extensive notes on the concerns that have been raised and they are going to be addressed.

I just want to emphasize two things, however. One, hon. Margaret Zziwa said we should respect this House. I want to repeat what has already been stated in this House, we respect this House and we shall continue to do so. The purpose of this interaction is for us, mutually, to be able to compare notes and make a way forward for this country.  

The other issue of the 23 percent, I have already made a commitment here, and I want to say that we did not do anything outside the law. The law allows what we did. But by way of procedure, I have admitted, I am going to write to all ministers and heads of departments and tell them that an undertaking has been made, if there is a reallocation, let us go and discuss what we intend to do with the Budget Committee. There is no harm in doing that. I am going to communicate to that effect, Mr Speaker.

The other thing is that the instruments are before you, the Finance and Accountability Bill is with the committee; it is an avenue. If this House wants to amend its own law to the Budget Act, we have no objection. We will listen to them and where necessary, support will be given.

Finally, Sir, there are specific issues that have been raised: the roads to Kyenjojo, privatization, and coffee for UCDA. On Coffee for UCDA, I want to say that we have given authority for this organization to receive coffee from farmers. We shall pay them in due course, so that we do not plant out of season. The instruction has also been given for this other season. That instruction has been given, and we are on course. 

We will take care of all the concerns that have been made, and I want to thank the committee and the House again.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, do you have anything to say?

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I want to just make a few remarks, mainly to thank my colleagues for the appreciation of my committee for the report that was produced. I want also to say that I think this debate has proved that, indeed, it was a very good idea to have the Budget Act. I believe as we move forward, we shall be perfecting our way of planning and budgeting together with the Executive.

I want to make an appeal to my colleagues, chairpersons of sessional committees. We still have some four sessional committees, which never responded to our request to carry out an analysis of the impact of the budget cuts, so that they can be included in our report. 

As you know, this is going to be a continuous process, and when you read this document, which was laid on the Table by the minister yesterday, you immediately see that this business of budget cuts is likely to feature prominently again in the next financial year. You will see for yourself that there is, for instance, an un-funded gap of over Shs 47 billion in the security area alone. And if you consider the commitment of Government to spend more money on security, you can almost assume that there are bound to be further similar cuts to ensure that these un-funded gaps are actually funded.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, once again, I want to thank my colleagues, and particularly the honourable ministers who have sat all through, and even participated actively in this debate. I think this is a plus on their part. I hope that when we come round to a similar debate, more of your colleagues will be present as indeed more of the other colleagues, the Backbenchers, I hope will be present. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson, and I thank honourable members for your contributions and time given to this motion. 

Honourable members, the motion is for consideration and adoption of the report on the national budget performance for the first half of the Financial Year 2002/2003.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are coming to the end of today’s business, but I will take this opportunity to remind you that tomorrow and Friday there is a symposium on NEPAD. NEPAD is one of the programmes of our missions under the African Union. It is important not only to Uganda but also to the entire continent, because we want to uplift ourselves economically and politically. Therefore, I appeal to you to attend because this was arranged for you, Members of Parliament. It is supposed to start at 8.30 a.m. at the International Conference Centre. Therefore, you are urged to be prompt so that proceedings can start as planned.

As I informed you earlier, a number of reports have been coming out, dealing with a number of bills that have been pending in the committees. These reports will be distributed so that next week on Tuesday when we reconvene at 2.00 p.m. we start business of legislating for the country. But we intend to issue a notice for Members of the Business Committee to meet on Monday so that we can make plans for the rest of the period remaining for this third meeting of the second session. I thank you very much. 

The House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m. on Tuesday, but you are urged to attend the symposium tomorrow at the International Conference Centre.

(The House rose at 6.18 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 April 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)






