Wednesday, 9 April 2003

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, many people are interested in what you are doing here. That is why of late we have received many guests in the Stranger’s Gallery. Today, we have our children from Sir Apollo Kaggwa Boarding Primary School, Old Kampala, Rubaga North Constituency. You are welcome -(Applause). 

Honourable members, today, on your behalf, I received a statutory report from the Human Rights Commission covering the period June 2001 to September 2002. I hope now you have copies of these reports in your pigeonholes. You are requested to read them, so that we can see how best to assist and compliment the work of the Human Rights Commission.  

I want also to use this opportunity to thank hon. Frank Nabwiso for his publication of a paper entitled: “The Changing Role of Ugandan Members of Parliament since 1945 to-date”. Congratulations -(Applause). I hope it will help our constituents and us to understand our role so that certain problems do not arise. Thank you very much.

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is arising out of the communication from the Chair. The Business Committee under your chairmanship sat on 8th and came out with a good programme of the Parliament before we go to recess.  

Mr Speaker, you will remember that some time back this House was thrown into confusion by outsiders calling us corrupt people; that we were abusing our offices and misusing our rights. In your wisdom, you empowered the Committee on Rules to see into these cases of corruption whereby Members of Parliament could clear their names.  

When I looked at the programme, I found that the committee sat and finished its business and our colleagues since then have never enjoyed their sleep.  Whenever they pass, they are being referred to as corrupt people. But I am surprised to see that on the list that has been circulated to us, the Committee of Rules is not given the provision to tell us the fate of our colleagues; whether they are corrupt or not. Should I assume that the corruption went to the committee concerned or the committee decided to abandon the task that was given to it by this honourable House? I beg to be clarified on that.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. It is true that I referred the complaints made against honourable members by some quarters to the Rules Committee to investigate and make a report to the House.  It seems that what is going on is a judicial proceeding and, therefore, we give the committee time to finish its work and present the report.  

There is no way we would plan for this committee because we do not know how far it has gone with these proceedings. But as soon as they conclude - because it can make a premature ruling! So they have to complete and give us a reasonable ruling. As soon as they finish, I will find time to accommodate the committee so that it presents its report. But we could not give a date because we do not know when they are going to complete the work.  But I appeal to the committee to expedite their work and present the report. I will be able to accommodate this committee when it presents the report.

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to inform the House that we are in the final stages of completing our report. Most probably before we break off, we shall have the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. So, honourable members, we will be able to adjust the programme to fit in the report.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want also to refer to the programme of work. I can see that the programme is really congested. As I look round, my Chairman of the Committee on Election Violence is not in the House. You guided the House yesterday that you need some statement from him before we can put this report on the programme. The programme being so crowded, I fear that this report may not be discussed during this session. I hope that if this happens, this report will be saved for the next session, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, since the report has not been presented, I think the rules are clear. We shall save that report. But we shall try to receive it as long as the chairperson clears us. We can adjust our programme and have it. But if we cannot, it will be saved; I assure you.

MS ERIYO JESSICA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I should bring to the attention of this House some unfortunate happening yesterday on the road from Gulu to Adjumani where the LRA ambushed the convoy that was going to Adjumani, and nine people have been reported dead.  Five others are very seriously sick. I do not know whether by evening they will not also die. 

The situation is not very good because as peace talks are going on, we hear some reports that the LRA leader is saying if Government is serious with peace talks, they should cease fire from the whole North. On the other hand, he is also asking his commanders on the ground to start diverting the attention of the army.  

This is a very sad situation for our people because as they ambushed the vehicles on Adjumani road, they are also planning to attack on all the roads in the North. As we speak now, abductions are also taking place in some of the areas in Kitgum, Pader and some parts of Gulu. Mr Speaker, I thought it would be important to pass on the information as we mourn in Adjumani. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: It is very sad, indeed.
 
CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: On the same issue, I would like to inform members that our honourable member, Dan Kidega, was about to die on Saturday last week. He also missed an ambush; so, he is here and we thank God for having survived. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and my colleague, Captain Basaliza, for your concern. Definitely the situation in the North is still very worrying. The people who travel to and out of the North are very unsafe as we speak now.  

On Saturday evening, I left Gulu at about a quarter to six trying to make my way to Kampala. I almost joined an on-going ambush. The rebels had attacked a lorry travelling to Gulu carrying food, specifically beans, and of course I sighted it before I entered there and I reversed and went back to Gulu.  

What is very important here is that we should urge Government, and the UPDF in particular, to make sure the security of the main roads leading to and out of Gulu are heavily protected. There must be heavy deployment. Because in a situation where people travelling from Gulu to Adjumani always travel by convoy, if the convoy is now being attacked and people are dying, this tells us that in time to come, it might be very difficult for people to travel in that sub-region. 

So, my request to the Ministry of Defence, and Government in particular, is that the roads from Kampala to Gulu and from Gulu to Adjumani and any other outlet should be properly protected, and there must be heavy deployment of UPDF. 

On a very serious note also, Mr Speaker, I must air this out. While I was trying to exit out of that situation, I was in a very embarrassing situation because as I was driving away, I saw other armed people, who I imagine were UPDF but it was very difficult to distinguish whether they were UPDF or the rebels. The dress code was very undefined. You find the lower part is in the ordinary wear of a civilian, the top is in the military fatigue and the guns look very rusty. So, the situation of people serving in the armed conflict areas like the northern part of the country should be looked at very critically by the people concerned; mainly UPDF and the policemen because they are faced with the same situation. So, their situation should be critically observed, and if possible, they should be given affirmative action.  

I consulted with UPDF Officers and I was told that the soldier, the ordinary man and woman of UPDF is supposed to be supplied with army uniform twice a year.  These are people moving in the bushes; the dew is constantly on them and you give them uniform twice a year! You are just condemning this man and woman to walk naked throughout the year! So, I think UPDF should try to address the plight of the sons and daughters of Uganda serving in northern Uganda. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a report of the death of fellow Ugandans has been made officially in the House. I suggest that we observe a moment of silence in respect of the deceased persons.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Mr Speaker, honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table the report and opinion of the Auditor General to Parliament on the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the year ended 30 June 2002.  I beg to lay the report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the appropriate committee handle the report and then make the appropriate report to us. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAND AMENDMENT BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled: “The Land Amendment Bill, 2002” be read a second time.  

This bill was introduced last year towards the end of the year and I have had, on four occasions, four meetings with the Committee on Natural Resources to discuss its content. 

The object of the bill is to reduce the land management institutions, namely, the Land Tribunals and the Land Committees, so that the Land Act is implementable within the financial resources of Government.  

The Land Act as it is now requires Shs 22 billion to be implemented, but the amendments I proposed in the bill, which are aiming at reducing the institutions, will reduce the cost to only Shs 9 billion, which is affordable within the Medium Term Expenditure Framework of Government.  

The details are only two, Sir: that instead of having 4500 Parish Land Committees all over the country, we rather have this institution at the sub-county level, and only in those sub-counties where there is work for them to be done. So, they will be put in place as and when the district local governments see the need. That is one.  

The second institution is the institution of dispute resolution, the land tribunals. The Act as it is established sub-county land tribunals, in all now totalling over 1000 including the urban areas. In addition to the sub-county tribunals, there are district land tribunals. 

When we worked out the funds required to operationalise these institutions, we found out that even in the next Medium Term Framework structure of Government spending, we cannot finance these institutions. That is why I am proposing in the Bill that we do away with sub-county tribunals and only remain with district land tribunals. That is the gist of the bill, Sir.  

The other amendments are only operational changes to make the law implementable. At a later stage, I will be making my comments regarding the recommendations from the committee. So, I will come up again at that stage to express the Government opinion about what the committee has proposed.  

I am calling upon colleagues to give maximum support to this bill, so that being a fundamental law of the land, it is implemented to confer ownership of land on the citizens, to remove and solve the land disputes that are retarding social and economic development of individuals and communities for our country to move forward. Sir, I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Can we receive a report from the chairperson of the committee?

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE OF NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Ndawula Kaweesi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to submit the report of the Committee of Natural Resources on the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2002. 

The Committee on Natural Resources considered the Land (Amendment) Bill in consonance with Article 90(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and Rule 124 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. There is a minority report by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi appended to this report.

Method of work

The Committee used the following methods of work on the bill. We received memoranda from individuals and organisations and these included: 

    1. The Youth Analysis Board
    2. Chairpersons of District Land Tribunals
    3. Uganda Tenants Association
    4. Uganda Land Alliance
    5. Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi
    6. Hon. Adolf Mwesige
    7. Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba
    8. Hon. Ssekikubo Theodore
    9. Hon. Nsubuga Nsambu

I sincerely thank them for their submissions.  

The committee visited four districts, namely; Soroti, Bushenyi, Kasese, and Mukono for customary, Freehold, Leasehold and Mailo Land Tenure systems respectively, to seek views of the people who are living on the land under the mentioned systems.  

We attended seminars and workshops organised by the ministry in Entebbe and Jinja to enable members internalise the bill.  

We met the Minister responsible for Lands with his technical team. Thereafter, the committee considered the bill.

Background to the Bill

Mr Speaker, and honourable members, when the Land Act came into force on 2 July 1998, it was meant, inter alia, to regulate the relationship between bona fide, lawful occupants and registered owners of land, and to provide for the acquisition of registered interest in land by the occupants.

The Act provided for a decentralised system of Land Management throughout the country. It created structures at parish level, at district level and at sub-county level. 

The structures were found to be very expensive in terms of money and personnel. Approximately Shs 20 billion per annum was required to run the systems framework. The ministry did not have sufficient funds to operationalise these structures. It, therefore, developed proposals intended to put in place an amendment to the Land Act.

Objectives of the Bill 

The bill is to effect amendments, which have been found to be necessary in the course of implementing the 1998 Land Act. It also provides for other related and incidental matters to the implementation of the Act.  

The committee considered the bill in line with the above objectives. The following pertinent issues arose in the course of discussion: Observations and recommendations have been made accordingly.

    1. The relationship between tenants and landlords.
    2. Landlessness
    3. Operation of District Land Tribunals
    4. Family land rights
    5. The former crown lands, including 9,000 square miles of Buganda
    6. Jurisdiction of LC courts.

Observations

    • The relationship between tenants and landlords 
    • Rights and obligations

The committee noted a number of controversies and conflict in the relationship between tenants and landlords as a result of rights and obligations provided to “lawful occupant”, “bona fide occupant” and “the registered owner”.  

The Land Act, 1998, under section 32, created tenants by occupancy and provided them with the following rights:

    1. To enjoy security of occupancy on the land
    2. To obtain a certificate of occupancy, which is registered as an encumbrance on the certificate of title of the owner of the land.
    3. To assign, sub-let, pledge and create third party rights with the consent of the landowner. Where the landowner refuses to grant consent, it will be granted by a land tribunal
    4. To inherit the tenancy making room for occupancy in perpetuity.
    5. To assign the property to the owner on a willing buyer/willing seller basis.
    6. Through mutual agreement, to obtain exclusive occupancy of ownership of an agreed portion of land or become a joint tenant with the owner.
    7. A right to voluntarily abandon his or her property 
    8. To acquire a freehold, Mailo, lease or sub-leasing the land.

It is the view of the committee that the rights granted to the tenant by occupancy under the Land Act, 1998, far exceed the rights of the registered proprietor. The rights stretched beyond the precincts provided by Article 237(8) and (9) of the Constitution. By granting the tenant such a range of rights, the landowner’s rights were diminished, contrary to Article 26(2) of the Constitution, which provides for protection from deprivation of property. As a result, landlords feel unfairly treated by the law.  

On the other hand, tenants cry foul because of the rampant evictions of lawful or bona fide occupants of land since they do not possess certificates of occupancy or pay ground rent. These evictions are sometimes done without due regard to the law, using armed forces.  

The committee received numerous complaints of evictions and threats of evictions from Kawempe, Makindye, Busiro, Lwemiyaga, Sembabule and Busega, among others. 

Mr Speaker, you may recall that the House has passed two resolutions in this regard. This matter has been brought to the attention of the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment, who promised to have a thorough study and provide a solution to the problem. 

Ground rent: 
Another area of contention has been the annual nominal ground rent of Uganda Shs 1,000 to be paid by the tenants to the registered owner of land. It has remained impractical since the coming into force of the Land Act, 1998.  

The law ignored the size, location of land and nature of activity undertaken by the tenant while considering this figure. This has greatly accelerated animosity between landlords and tenants and needs to be addressed urgently by the minister using section 32(8) of the Land Act.

Landlessness:

The committee observed that problems of squatters/illegal occupants have been exacerbated by landlessness. Many people have been rendered landless as a result of war, poverty, population increase, historical imbalances, public projects and other social-political pressures. In areas visited by the committee like Kasese District, public projects occupy as much as 63 per cent of the total land area. 

The committee observed lack of a clear land use policy by Government, and recommends that Government put in place right mechanisms to address problems in the land sector.

Operation of tribunals:
  
Mr Speaker, the committee looked at the operations of land tribunals. It was, however, noted that ever since chairpersons of tribunals were appointed in November 2001, no single case has been heard. The committee was informed that this has been a result of logistical problems and delay on the part of the Public Service Commission to recruit the tribunal secretaries. The effect of this has been accumulated disputes that continue to be unattended to.

During the course of the discussion on the operations of the tribunals, a contentious issue arose, the appointment by the parent ministry of tribunals. The Minister informed the committee that the rationale of creating land tribunals was to create institutions with fewer ambiences than ordinary courts, which have been slow, expensive intimidating and inaccessible to ordinary people

He argued that tribunals are composed of both lawyers and lay people, thus enabling them to blend law and custom. He stated that in countries like South Africa, Botswana and Zambia where land tribunals exist, they belong to the Ministry of Lands. The committee disagreed with the Minister on this matter. We noted that in the above-mentioned countries, land belongs to the state, not to the people as the case is in Uganda. 

The Chief Justice, on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, has already appointed the existing tribunals. The Minister's amendment would create two hierarchies and categories of judicial officers holding the same office on the same terms. 

The committee observed that the appointment of judicial officers by the minister would compromise the independence of the tribunals. Members noted that in the majority of land disputes, the Land Commission, the Registrar of Titles, the district land boards, which fall under the administration of the minister, are potential litigants.

By appointing tribunals, the minister will be “a Judge in his own case”. With this in mind, the committee resolved that tribunals should be under the judiciary to enable them administer justice.  

Tribunals are specialised courts, weaknesses of ordinary courts mentioned above, should be taken care of by the land tribunal rules and procedures as issued by the Chief Justice.

Family land rights, Mr Speaker, was another issue of contention. Family rights over matrimonial land also featured among issues of concern. It was noted that family rights under Section 40 of the Act are inadequate.  Though it protects the family from being deprived of land where they ordinarily derive their sustenance, it does not provide for family ownership of land.

In case of loss of family heads, children, dependants and spouses are deprived of their land. An amendment seeking to put in place provision for family ownership of land has been provided by the committee to fill this gap.

Former Crown Land:

Another issue of contention, Mr Speaker, and honourable members, is the former crown land in Uganda, including the 9000 square miles of Buganda.

As you may be aware, there is an ongoing debate regarding former crown lands, including 9000 miles of land belonging to Buganda Kingdom. Government should thoroughly study these lands with a view to ascertain the location, size and economic activities on the land. This will be a way forward in resolving disputes pertained to crown lands. The committee noted that this matter has actually been forwarded to the Constitutional Review Commission.

Jurisdiction of LC Courts:

The committee observed that LC I and LC III courts play an important role in the governance of this country and are vital in handling land disputes. They have, however, been cited among those creating discord in some areas.  Concerns were raised to the committee that LCs connive with landlords to cause illegal decisions affecting tenants. The committee was also informed that they side with reckless husbands to defraud families.

Recommendations:

Mr Speaker, at this point I wish to submit the recommendation of the Committee:

    1. The committee recommends that the ministry conduct a study on the relationship between “landlord” and “tenant” with a view of amending the law to harmonise their relationship. The study should be given urgent attention to mitigate the ever-souring relationship, in any case, not later than 2 years after the reading of this report.  A progress report on the study should be presented to Parliament within one year.

    2. The minister should take note of sections 32(8) of the Land Act and revise annual ground rent taking into consideration size, location and nature of activity being undertaken on the land.  

    3. Tribunals should be operationalised under the judiciary to handle social strife currently prevailing in the country. The committee is in agreement with the minister that 18 zonal circuits be put in place to enable land tribunals operate. 

    4. The land fund should be extended to cover all areas of Uganda in order to correct historical imbalances and alleviate the suffering of landless people of this country. Quarterly progress reports on the implementation of the fund should be presented to Parliament.

    5. Government should come up with a clear land use policy to streamline the land sector. 

    6. Relevant authorities should ensure that evictions are carried out with due regard to the law. Court orders should be subject to thorough scrutiny to ensure authenticity. 

    7. The local council courts should stick to their areas of jurisdiction as stipulated in the law when handling land issues.

    8. Government should make a situational analysis of former crown lands.

In conclusion, land is a prime means of production. It is a direct source of livelihood for the majority of our people.  Laws governing the ownership, management and use of land have a direct impact on the economy of this country, which largely depends on agriculture.

The committee has visited four districts, each representing one of the four land tenure systems of this country, collected views from individuals and civil society and thoroughly scrutinised this bill. I beg to move that the bill be passed into law with the proposed amendments. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee.  

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, the Chairperson of the Committee of Natural Resources, for reading the report elaborately. However, as a strong believer in Government by discussion, I thought it was worthwhile for me to equally be given an opportunity to express the concerns of the people of Lubaga South, whom I honourably represent in this House, as well as the interests of the Kingdom of Buganda, which I greatly harness.  

This is my first time to present a minority report for the long time I have been in this Parliament since the 6th Parliament. This means I must be having very strong reasons for presenting these views. In light of that, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg you to lend me your ears. 

I was one of the people consulted by the Natural Resources Committee, to which I belong, on the merits and demerits of the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2002.  I was also a member of the Ad hoc Committee, which specifically had consultations with the people of Mukono District on the relevance of the Land Act amendments in regard to the mailo land tenure system.  

The amendments to the Land Act, 1998, as proposed by the Ministry of Lands, right from part I to part III hardly addressed the prevailing discontent on the ground. They lack seriousness and they address non-issues. While it is true that for matters of improving the management, sectors like the District Land Boards, Parish Land Committees may need restructuring, it is not correct, Mr Speaker, to say that this is the source of failure for the operation of the Land Act.  

The imposition of an annual nominal rent of Shs 1,000 is the main source of discontent among the registered owners of land. For as long as such a fee does not address the market forces of the occupied land in line with the areas of location and sites, we will endlessly be amending the land law from year to year. I submit that what the Land Act (Amendment) Bill addresses are non-issues on the ground, as I will elucidate.   

On the conception of the amendment, what is the cornerstone? The Land Act came into force in 1998 and aimed at regulating the relationship between the bona fide lawful occupants and registered owners of land, as well as to provide for the acquisition of registerable interests in land by the occupant.  

The same amendment endeavoured to reduce the divide between the landlord and the bona fide occupants of land created by Idi Amin Dada in 1975, through the Land Reform Decree, which scrapped the Busuulu and Envujjo Law.  

The land occupants the two declaratory state laws wanted to assist were left hanging at the mercy of pronouncements like “the people own power - land belongs to the people”. The two proclamations wanted to appease the peasants so that they look happy. The reasons for doing so are well known - in search of votes. Idi Amin wanted more support from the people and the person who instituted this framework of the Land Act too wanted support.  

What is the source of this discord? I am going to be brief, but I want to call a spade a spade so that you understand, honourable members, why I have brought a minority report. What is the source of discord? A wide cross section of people expressed discontent about the Land Reform Decree. Idi Amin was silent and in realisation of his great error, he never put in place any enabling law to implement his ambition. The Decree just removed the “Envujjo and Busuulu,” but the relationship between the landlords and the “Bibanja” holders more or less remained intact in a number of cases.  

In other words, the relationship between the landlords and the lawful occupants of land took a new shape and found a new direction. Bona fide occupants did not celebrate for that matter; they instead found new grounds to sustain their relationship. That is why the evictions were not as sharp and as brutal as has been the case with reference to the Land Act of 1998 effects. Hence the 1975 Land Reform Decree was never enforced. Things were like that and they remained like that. 

What is the source of discord? The Land Act in 1998 did not only extend the divide between the landlord and the “Kibanja” holder, but it launched a revolution intended to enable the Government to nationalise land for the benefit of the “Bibanja” holders.  

Why am I saying that? People like me who had the opportunity to attend the early cadre courses of the Movement always heard the teachings of the Movement hegemony to reflect the need for the “wanainchi” to gain their land rights. Maj Kakooza Mutale and Lt Col Katirima were some of those early Movement teachers who were advancing that thought, and I used to be a celebrated student of Maj. Katirima -(Laughter).

It is on record that Major Mutale used to incite the “Bibanja” holders to hold machetes and pangas to fight landlords who would disturb them. Hon. Nsubuga Nsambu, a Member of this Parliament and I were dragged to court on charges of inciting violence on matters of land.  Government, however, lost the case in a court of law and we went free. So the points I am making are genuine since I was never dragged into a court of law.

Hon. Ben Mutyaba who chaired the Committee on National Resources in the 6th Parliament, which passed the Land Act, lost popularity in Makindye East and he had to stand down during the 2001 Parliamentary election campaign - (Interruptions)- at least he assured me in his own words.   

Why am I saying that the Land Amendment Act is bad?  These are the salient reasons why the Act or the amendment floated by the honourable Minister of Lands is bad. The proposed law does not address the problems of the ordinary occupant of land. It basically addresses the operational arrangement of the land committees and related aspects of the Act. On the ground, people want to strangle one another because of land. You cannot postpone a problem. The minister will want to spend a lot of money on these amendments, but to do what, if he cannot address discord on the ground?  

I was privileged to have been part of an ad hoc committee, which conducted enquiries in Mukono under the direction of our good chairman, hon. Eng. Kaweesi, on how the Land Act was working under the mailo system. In the brief study we conducted under the chairmanship of hon. Nsubuga Nsambu, the people stated as follows: 

    1. A good number of landlords have started grabbing people’s bibanja without compensation.

    2. Since July 1988, when the Land Act was passed, no landlord has ever bothered to demand Shs 1,000 from any occupant of land as nominal ground rent. And it is not recorded anywhere that a bona fide occupant of land has ever paid out any money related to the same to his or her landlord. There is a stalemate. That being so, Mr Speaker, how do you expect the Land Act to work.

The people of Mukono, where the brief Mailo system study was based, unanimously recommended that the entire Land Act, 1988, be repealed; it has failed to address the discontent on the ground. The totality of the group witnessed that, and they nearly chased us away. They said, “If you are not scrapping the Act, you better go back to Kampala”. We resisted with courage.

    3. The occupants of land who want to acquire registerable interests find it difficult to convince landlords to accept part payments for their land.
    4. A number of Bibanja holders in a country, which has had so many wars are unknown to the landlords, for they do not possess any records to show that they are lawful occupants of land.
    5. Landlords and the lawful occupants of land respectively sell land without advance notice to each party, so there is confusion. And how can you afford to tolerate that confusion in an independent nation, Uganda? We should all be proud of our country with dignity and joy and love. That insecurity impacts greatly on the nationhood of Uganda.
    6. The last reason they gave is that, some unscrupulous squatters take advantage of the Land Act to grab and sell land, which does not belong to them.

Mr Speaker, what are the serious observations before I give the recommendations? There are also some serious observations, which I would like to float to you.

    1. The rights and privileges a bona fide occupant of land is supposed to enjoy as per Section 32 of the Land Act 1998, are nightmares. Very few people today enjoy security of occupancy of land due to the failure of the operation of the ground rent of Shs1,000 per annum regardless of size and location. Even if the land is in Lyantonde, you still have to pay Shs1,000. Even if it is in Ndeeba, Shs 1, 000, and Lubaga - I do not know what to say.

    2. The second observation of a serious nature is through a motion moved by hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba, MP for Kawempe South - and I hope he is here - on a tragic occurrence in Bwaise, which led to the digging of the graves of one bona fide owner of land from the ground.  Parliament was convinced that there was discord between the lawful occupant of land and the landlord.  

In my capacity as a Member of Parliament for Lubaga South, I moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament seeking the protection of bona fide occupants of land currently being evicted by some landlords in open disregard of the law, with reference to one, Mary Nansubuga, aged 103 years, residing in Kitaka Zone in Busega, which area I represent. The two resolutions were unanimously passed by Parliament. If the two resolutions were unanimously passed by Parliament, then Parliament recognised the discord on the ground -(Interruptions).

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you continue with your report?  (Laughter)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the third observation: The Ministry of Lands knows that the Land Act has failed to operate. If it were concerned about the problems currently undergone by the people, it would not have come out with amendments, which do not address Section 32(8) and section 94 of the same Act.  

The study case perceived by the committee - and this is where I greatly differ. The study case perceived by my committee would have been carried out by now. It is unfortunate that such a study has not been carried out up to now, and yet the law was passed in 1998. It has not worked, nobody is moving and we are celebrating! Why cause amendments, which do not answer the problems on the ground? Land problems have been on the ground for quite a long time.

Lastly, I do not agree with the committee - See Page 7, Operation of Tribunals. I do not agree with the committee that logistical problems are the main cause for the failure of the law to take effect. The attractive force for the operation of the Act and the components attached is the fee, which the landlord periodically collects from the bona fide occupant of land.  

I would like to propose that this is the gist. For as long as the fee is economically unrealistic, as is Shs 1,000, one may expect no life out of the whole exercise. If a law is to operate sustainably, it should be distanced from heavy operational expenses, and should not be seen to be indirect nationalisation of property as is the case under the Act.

My recommendations - and honourable members, I beg you to listen to them very cautiously because they are very important aspects.

Mr Speaker, past governments repealed the Busulu/ Nvujjo of 1928 without providing an alternative. This is why we are suffering up to now. That is evidence that the Land Act of 1988 was not passed in good faith, because it was trying to do exactly what Idi Amin did without providing a meaningful alternative. It assumed that whoever had a kibanja was fully protected by the law, in complete disregard of the market forces involved. I propose as follows: 

    1. Government is urged to review its land policy in line with what is stated above because there is still a continuous gap.

    2. Uganda’s economy is predominantly agro-based. The Land Act, 1988, presupposes that every agricultural producer must be a landlord. The Act is therefore a hindrance to development for as long as it does not clarify what is referred to as security of occupancy. Most farmers in Uganda produce on small scale. Therefore the objectives of the original Act need serious revision.

    3. There is need for the government to re-examine the role of the annual ground rent, and I have not heard any serious mention of this in the previous report. I did not come to debate the report, but I hope you understand. That rent was meant to replace the Nvujjo/ Busulu. It is however miles away from what would be the role of the Nvujjo/Busulu as a unifying force between the landlord and the bona fide occupant of land. The Act in 1988 damaged the good relations between the landlord and the bona fide occupant of land. It gives an impression that the land has been nationalised in public interest. No land occupant has ever paid that ground rent of Shs1,000 and I challenge any honourable member to produce a receipt of that payment in his or her respective constituency; and no landlord is interested in the fee. I therefore propose that the fee be scrapped until an appropriate fee, taking into consideration the size and location of land, has been approved. And that is a very serious recommendation.

    4. The 9,000 Sq. miles of land: It is common knowledge, Mr Speaker, that the management of the 9,000 sq. miles of land was entrusted to the crown government for protection and development purposes under the 1900 Agreement. The Kingdom of Buganda at independence in 1962 regained it.   

It is on record that Buganda reserved that land in its form for the future generations. I see no constitutional default - and I can even challenge the lawyers - I see no constitutional default in returning the property rights attached to that land on the strength of Articles 26 (1) of the Constitution, and Article 246 of the Uganda Constitution, to the rightful owner. 

For as long as we have a reigning king in Mengo, we see no reason why properties attached to the establishment cannot be returned and held in public trust by the Buganda Kingdom. 

A lot of that land is forest and wetland, and Buganda is known for its spectacular care for the natural environment in its history. The main report, Mr Speaker, showed no seriousness on that issue. It left it a passing issue and I am making it an issue.  

Finally, the Land Act is cynical and neither endeavours to assist the landlords nor the bona fide occupants of land. Those of you who have read Shakespeare will agree with me in that formation with reference to Casius, one of the character sketches in Julius Caesar.  

Mr Speaker, the Act abuses the rights of the landlord and merely excites the bona fide occupant of land. The Act does not define the relationship between the two parties and this, in many people’s view, causes constitutional discontent.  

Land ownership is part of the human rights referred to in Chapter four of the Constitution of Uganda. The Land Act should therefore be in consonance with the said constitutional provisions. I do not see how any one would float Land Act amendments, which lose track of what is stated above. Until we have renewed the good relations that prevailed between the landlord and the Kibanja holder during those good golden days, as was the case during the envujjo/busuulu days, I do not see how the Land Act can work. Mr Speaker, whatever I am saying is said for God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi.  Now honourable members, I think before we start the debate, I detect something, which may require clarification from the committee chairperson so that members start debating this matter well aware of what you mean.  

This is on Page four of your report. You said the Land Act under section 32 created a tenant by occupation and provided them with the following rights: and you mentioned them. Then in the second paragraph, you said: 

“It is the view of the committee that the rights granted to the tenant by occupancy under the Land Act 98(4) far exceed the rights of the registered proprietor”. 

Then you added, “The rights stretched beyond the precincts provided by Article 237(8) and (9) of the Constitution. By granting the tenants such range of rights, the landowners rights were diminished contrary to Article 262(2) of the Constitution which -“ 

Now what do you mean here? Is it your view that there is contravention of the constitutional provisions? I think you need to clear this so that the members know how.

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With your permission, allow me to read the relevant Article 237 (8) of the Constitution: 

“Upon the coming into force of this Constitution, and until Parliament enacts - I wish to repeat - “until Parliament enacts an appropriate law under clause 9 of this Article, the lawful or bona fide occupants of mailo land, freehold or the leasehold shall enjoy security of occupancy on the land.”  

(9) “Within two years after the first sitting of Parliament elected under this Constitution, Parliament shall enact a law – 
    (a) regulating the relationship between the lawful or bona fide occupants of the land referred to in clause (8) of this article and the registered owners of that land.  
    (b) Providing for the acquisition of registerable interests in the land by the occupant.” 

Mr Speaker, what the committee intended to bring out here is that the provision of the Constitution gave the security of occupancy to the bona fide or lawful occupant until Parliament makes a law. So, as per the Constitution, there was no problem between this article and Article 26(2) that protects property. However, the Land Act, as it stands now, gave occupancy in perpetuity in legislation. That in a way was seen by our committee to mean that the rights of the landowner got diminished by enacting that law, because now if someone’s land is occupied he or she cannot enter it.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think in a nutshell, you are saying it is unconstitutional. Because when you say it exceeds, therefore you are saying it is contravening two provisions of the Constitution. Now what do you mean; do we continue to discuss it in that form? That is my question.

MR KAWEESI: Mr Speaker, in light of that, that is why there are proposed amendments that bring it in line with the Constitution. There are a number of proposed amendments which are attached to this report and which the Minister - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you curing the defect?

MR KAWEESI: Yes, we cured the defect by proposing amendments. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, we have received a committee report and a minority report, and the minister indicated that he wanted to respond to this report. It would have helped greatly if the minister has any strong views over the matters that have been reported upon, to give his report at this material time so that when we debate, we take into account all the views expressed in the report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to say something about these reports?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Speaker, I need your guidance. By our rules, do we begin by the minority report?

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not a question of minority report; we have got the committee’s views and somebody’s views; we shall consider them. 

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: All right, Sir. I choose to begin with the minority report; in fact, it is a singular report by hon. Ken. Lukyamuzi. 

Sir, I thank hon. Lukyamuzi for highlighting a problem, which is real. There is a problem of locking horns between a tenant by occupancy and a registered owner of land, particularly in the central region where there is mailo land. Elsewhere in the country - East, North, West - this is not the situation; but it prevails here in the central region.  

As he analysed, the problem revolves around the annual rent of 1,000 shillings, which some tenants have refused to pay, and which the landlords are hesitant to collect, because it is not meaningful.

Mr Speaker, Section 32 of the Act provides as follows: “The maximum annual ground rent referred to in subsection (5) may be revised every five years by regulations made under section 94 of this Act”.  Those are regulations made by the minister. It is now coming to five years. By July this year, it will be five years, and I will be coming up with a set of regulations indicating the compromise rent that has been agreed upon between the tenants by occupancy and the landlords. We shall not have this problem after July.

Now, the process of consulting the parties is not an easy one, because we have got to go through so many workshops in so many districts of Uganda. But by July, there will be a new set of regulations, including ground rent, to cure the locking of horns between the two parties. Gazetting regulations cannot make this.  

The minority report is alarmist, in part. Mr Speaker, look at page 3. The sub topic there is “Why the Land (Amendment) 2002 is bad”. Really, the Land (Amendment) Bill is seeking to establish affordable land management institutions. Is this bad? Rather, the member should have said it is inadequate; it is not addressing all the problems on the ground as they are right now.  

Mr Speaker, the report, which I have just got as the member was reading it, touches on constitutional issues. One of those issues is the crown land; the 9,000 square miles of land, known as crown land before independence and at independence, known as public land.  

The committees report also touches on the same issue, on page 9, but does not say much. Really, this is a constitutional matter, and when time comes, an appropriate forum will have a cure to the many voices that are arguing one way or the other about the 9,000 square miles.  

But I have to request colleagues to study the 1900 Buganda Agreement, and to take note of Article 18 of that Agreement. Article 18 indicates where the 9000 square miles went. I do not have the agreement here, but when time comes to debate this particular issue, all these documents will be laid on the Table.

Mr Speaker, now I go to the committee report. I thank the committee and its chairman, the hon. Kaweesi Ndawula, for inviting me for a face to face meeting on more than four occasions, here in Parliament and also outside, in seminars and tours.  

Last year, as I introduced this bill to Parliament, I also distributed the text of the Land Act to every Member of Parliament, so that we carry both books with the committee recommendations, so that we know what we are amending. I am appealing to colleagues to check their libraries and retrieve the Land Act, 1998, so that we use it in amending the 32 clauses that I have proposed.

Mr Speaker, there are only three issues where I have some disagreement, and where Government has disagreement with the committee. The first one is on the home of land tribunals. I wish to remind colleagues that land tribunals are a creation of the Constitution, Article 243.  

The Constitution is structured in such a way that matters for the Executive are under “Executive”, the Legislature have their chapter, the Judiciary their chapter, and land and environment their chapter. There is a purpose for that. Article 151 of the Constitution defines a judicial officer, which definition the committee is now giving the land tribunals. These land tribunals are a blend; they are a hybrid of the customary dispute resolution institutions, the LCs, and the legal courts. 

In the tribunal, we have got a chairperson who is a person trained and qualified in law, with a certificate and a degree in legal practice. This person sits together with two elderly people. The law provides for a member to be above 35 years old. This is an elderly person in our community. So, that custom –(Interjection)- yes, in a society where life expectancy is below 50, 35 is an elder. I would qualify to be one. So, that custom blends with the written law. But that is not the final stage of dispute resolution; the final stage is the High Court, and the appellant court high above it. 

At the time we held the fourth meeting with the committee, our understanding was as I have explained. But now when the chairman read the report, he is suggesting that this organ, the land tribunal, go to the Judiciary. 

Surely, we should have not made another law to provide for land tribunals. It would have been a management case, establishing a special land court within the courts of judicature. But because the people’s views expressed in the Odoki Constitutional Report of 1993/1994 – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, why did you quote Article 151, for purposes of your argument?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: For the definition of a judicial officer, which definition – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But look at the definition of a Judge. What does it say?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: It starts like this, “In this Chapter…” and tribunals are not in this chapter. It only applies to the judicial chapter. So, tribunals are not judicial institutions in the traditional sense of the term. When time comes to consider the appropriate amendment, I beg colleagues to bear that in mind.  

Sir, the second point where I departed from the committee recommendation is on family land. The committee seeks to protect family interests by proposing that every member of the family – family heads, children, dependants and spouses - are registered on the same title. 

The committee has laboured on the subject. What they recommend is good, but it is not adequate. There are questions that are not answered, which could best be answered under another law called the family law. What are these questions? One of the issues to consider is the equity of each member of family.   

The second one is; considering a polygamous family, will all the spouses be registered on that title? And if it is a lease, do all the registered co-owners pay the requisite rent and other statutory fees? What is the equity of each person registered? The committee has not proposed a model certificate of title. How will the registrar register all these people on one title? 

Through studies we have made in the ministry, we have found that one country, New Zealand, had a way of registering all people who have interest on a piece of land on the same title. The register was a very huge document for each family. But a year ago, this law was being revised to provide for only the head of the family to be registered on the title, in order to do away with clumsiness. Because when somebody dies, or there is a separation, the land registry is such a busy place, and in practice, it has been seen that when there are so many processes of, say, registering a vehicle or registering land, you render valueless the property you are seeking to protect. Even the people you are seeking to protect may not derive the benefit that you are seeking to give them.  

So, in the circumstances, the family is well protected under the present section 40 of the Act. What the committee proposes, which I support in principle, should go to the family law, that is, the Domestic Relations Bill.  

The committee has not also addressed the question of inheritance. Because, it is not only biological children in the family that have got a right to inherit that family land, given our cultural setting. So, this subject is a very broad subject that is best handled under the Domestic Relations Bill, which I know, two months ago, Cabinet approved its principles. I believe it is now at the stage of printing the bill, and the Minister of Constitutional Affairs will be presenting it to Parliament before we go on leave.

Sir, the third issue was on the 9,000 square miles. As I said, when I was giving my views on the minority report, this is a constitutional matter that shall be debated and determined at an appropriate time, by an appropriate forum. 

Lastly, Sir, there are certain actions I am presently carrying out in my ministry. One of them is a consultancy that is considering studying the issue raised by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi in depth. We want to come up with an agreed ground rent, to harmonise the tenant by occupancy and the landowner. Also, on other matters related to whether the certificate of occupancy could be pledged for a loan or mortgaged, in the traditional sense of mortgaging property.  

All those questions are being studied. And as I said, at an appropriate time I will come again to tackle how to harmonise those areas, since they have attracted a very protracted debate, especially within the central region.

I will be giving other comments on particular amendments as proposed by the committee as we go on. For now, those are my comments on the two reports.

MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a comprehensive and clear report, for which we have been waiting eagerly. I wish to also express my full support of the report of this committee. However, Mr Speaker, much as the Land Act was meant to regulate the relationship between the bona fide occupants and the landlords, the law has not captured this very well. In other words, it is not complimentable. 

Mr Speaker, about the family land rights, it is true spouses and children have, in many incidences, been deprived of their property, especially land.  The committee has recommended a provision to fill the lacuna in the Act, and I believe we shall support it to protect the aggrieved members -(Applause).

Mr Speaker, there is need for creation of stable families. Where the family derives sustenance, I think they should be rightful owners, and the title should bear a corporate name. 

I would not like to agree with the minister when he refers us to the Domestic Relations Bill. When will this ever come? He has just told us that he wants this to come in the Domestic Relations Bill, but what I wanted to point out is that the Domestic Relations Bill is not coming now, and yet our people are being oppressed. This is what I wanted to say, and it is true that the sour relations and problems about the land issues are largely a result of ignorance about the Land Act. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that if our people are properly educated about the Land Act, and the Government provides the Land Act to the leaders in their languages, I am sure this can really be effective. I know there would be a financial implication, but I am sure that if it is done, to some big extent, it can help in the implementation of the Land Act. 

Mr Speaker, the annual ground rent of Shs 1,000 is very unrealistic. The minister should really address this, and that is why it has not been practical. I would like to agree with the committee that this should be in consideration with the size and the activities that are carried out on that land, though it should not be oppressive.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I am glad that the committee has recommended that the tribunals be operationalised under the Judiciary. I would not like to agree with the minister, when he says that he would not like the tribunals to leave their current home. In my opinion, where the tribunals are now, they have not been effective. They have not really helped our people. Otherwise, we would not have such problems arising. 

Mr Speaker, when the tribunals were constituted before, we thought the problems about land were going to be solved. But we have not actually benefited from the land tribunals. In my observation, this has been a result of lack of funds.  It has been a result of the fact that the people were not properly educated about the functions of the land tribunals.  

So, Mr Speaker, I believe that if they are operationalised under the Judiciary, the Government will consider the problems that failed the old tribunals, so that rich landlords and corrupt authorities no longer oppress our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you so much. I am very aware there are no land disputes in the North. I would like to thank the committee members and the chairperson of the committee, the minister, and most specifically, hon. Lukyamuzi for his in-depth dealing with the problem.

Mr Speaker, I have risen on a matter concerning the composition of the tribunal. The purpose of my sitting in this Parliament is to make sure that the legislation that goes through this House is youth-friendly. 

The minister has just stated that you must be 35 years of age to be considered an elder. I am also aware of meetings where people who are about the age of 35, have been chased away for not being elders. I would like to know from the minister whether the legal definition of an elder in this country is the age of 35, such that we can work within that boundary.  

Mr Speaker, I am also aware that the young people of this country - the majority of this population - are living in a glass cage, in terms of the many missed opportunities due to youth-unfriendly legislation. These range from the provision of who becomes the President, who becomes the chairman LC V and so many other issues. 

So, it is my interest to know from the minister, and the person working on this law, whether the definition of an elder is the age of 35, and also to give me the rationale. What is the difference, in terms of understanding issues, between a person of 35 years and that one of 25 or 18? I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

MR TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO (Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a job well done. I thank hon. Lukyamuzi for his minority report, and I thank the minister for the response he has given before this House.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to say that land is the most important asset that one can have on earth. Land, in this country in particular, is the source of conflict, which has often led to death. That being the case, I believe Government should take land as a very serious matter. So, when I hear the minister saying that there is no money to cater for land tribunals, and all other organs concerning land, I feel that there is something amiss. I urge Government to consider land to be important and to make sure that matters pertaining to land are handled adequately. 

Permit me, Mr Speaker, to address some of the concerns I have about the report. The report has come out with the issue of landlessness, and I beg to support the committee on that. 

It is apparently because of lack of a proper government policy that our people have continued to be landless. People are squatters, people are chased away from land by government, and yet there is no appropriate law to provide for where they should go. For example, in 1993 and 2001, people in Bunyaruguru County, in Katera Sub-County in particular, were chased from Kyambura Game Reserve. To-date, these people are still wandering. I have raised it before this august House, there is nobody concerned and yet our people are suffering. And that is all because there is no proper government policy on land.

Mr Speaker, I will also address myself on the issue of ground rent. The Shs 1,000 that was laid down in the law books, that is the Land Act, is really something that you cannot imagine. First of all, Article 237 of the Constitution gives ownership of the land to the citizens of this country. Now, if land is given to me, why do you have to dictate what price I should get out of my land? This defeats the doctrine of freedom of contract. I wish the law could allow the landlords and the tenants to discuss the affairs pertaining to the land in issue.  

Permit me, Mr Speaker, to also address Section 30 of the Land Act. Section 30 provided for lawful and bona fide occupants. I am in agreement with the committee when it says that to some extent, the rights of the registered owner were taken away. 

For example, you find that the Limitation Act limits land matters to 12 years. I think the lawmakers who made the Land Act borrowed that 12-year period to provide for lawful occupants. But the Limitation Act, in Section 22, goes on to provide that when one is under a disability, he will not be barred to claim his land.  

Section 30 of the Land Act does not go ahead to provide for people who have disabilities. For example, supposing I am in exile today and tomorrow I come and find our land has been occupied for more than 12 years, am I to lose? So, I wish the law could address that lacuna.  

The minister has told us that he objects to the land tribunals going to the Judiciary. I thought that the matters being handled by the tribunals are legal; they are not administrative but they are judicial matters. So, for that reason, I do not see how these courts should be under the Ministry of Lands. 

First of all, as noted by the committee, there are cases where the Registrar of Titles is a party to the cases. How then will the Ministry of Lands handle such a case? Mr Speaker, I wish to urge members of this honourable House to agree with the recommendations of the committee. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to add my voice to those who have congratulated the committee, hon. Lukyamuzi, and the minister for his response. 

Mr Speaker, I want also to start with the issue of landlessness. The report has enumerated the causes of landlessness as war, poverty, population increase and so forth. But I also want to add on that, specifically, the issue of unemployment. 

When somebody is employed, at least for some time you can survive by renting where you are staying comfortably. But because our people have no jobs, consequently they have nowhere to live. So, you end up getting this mass exodus from rural areas, transferring the problem from rural areas to the urban areas, where they think they can earn a living.  

Then there is the issue of land deprivation: People have been deprived of land mercilessly, and the committee has tackled this. It is worse in Buganda, where we have mailo land ownership. As my colleagues have stated, because of the embarrassing token of Shs 1,000, definitely to a landlord it is an insult. For example, for somebody to have somebody’s 20 acres and you are paying Shs 1,000! 

What the mailo landowner has done is to mercilessly sell off the tenants without telling them. Now when they are sold, he or she buys another piece of land elsewhere, settles and leaves the problem to the tenants. We have experienced graves being exhumed. Even if the people are dead, here in Buganda we respect the dead. But those people who buy land from here and just exhume bodies from graves, 30 of them, and just throw them away as garbage. Honestly, that is very unfair. And the law we made ourselves created it! 

So, it is good that this issue definitely will be handled so that there is an amicable relationship between the landlord and the tenant here in Buganda.  

Mr Speaker, we have another issue of the men selling off their women and children. With due respect, when some men are sick, they want to eat their money and die off. So, they leave the children and the women destitute. Definitely, after the man has died off and he has sold off some land, the little that is remaining is claimed by the clan or members of the extended family. Again, we have a problem there. 

So, Mr Minister, it does no harm having this provision of the family problems in the Land Act as well as in the Domestic Relations Bill. When both come, the other one will be just an emphasis but the primary position is in the Land Act. 

Mr Minister, we should negotiate on this one. We, women parliamentarians, let us come together and negotiate on this issue. I have a very live example here in Kyanja, in Nakawa, where a man who was not feeling very well sold off his land. He requested Property Masters to sell the land. The wife came to know that the man was selling the land, so she went to Property Masters to retrieve the land title and they had to pay one million shillings in commission to the Property Masters. This had to be paid by the woman and the children so that they would retrieve the land title, and now there is enmity between the woman and the man. The man is claiming that the woman is a thief, she is trying to sell his land. And the woman is saying the man is unreasonable because he is trying to sell her and her children because once they go, the man will take over even the whole property and so forth! So, all those issues definitely need to be cleared.

About the issue of population growth and problems of land, I think this also hinges on the problem of the land use policy. Our culture encourages land fragmentation, but if we have a comprehensive land use policy, perhaps this issue of land fragmentation would be solved. Where we know that when somebody dies, how do we tackle the issue of the land rather than being sub-divided into small pieces until one is on 10 feet, which definitely cannot do anything.  

Again on the issue of land policy, so far as we have them, they are too fragmented. You find one in Forestry, another one in wetlands, and another one in rangelands and so forth. If we had a comprehensive one, we would not talk about people encroaching on wetlands, we would not talk of these wrangles we have been handling, of Government selling off forests when people do not know that forests should not be sold. It is because we do not have a comprehensive land use policy. We need it so that all those will be sub-sections of that policy including land fragmentation. 

The issue of industrialisation and the private sector should not be removed from this issue we are discussing, because we are using the land as our major source of livelihood. In Uganda we know we are using the extensive type of land use and intensification, we do not have the technology. So, if we remove some people from the land and they remove themselves voluntarily and they get employed in industries, definitely there will be less demand on this land. There will be vertical development instead of the horizontal development. So, one will be earning the same amount of money on one acre or even more than somebody who is using 10 acres will. All those are issues on the land use and how we invest for development. So, this industrialisation, even if it is small scale, even if it is aggro processing, will definitely have an impact.  

Respect for the Will: That means peoples’ Wills when they die in respect to the Administrator General’s Office: With due respect, Mr Speaker, the Administrator General’s Office method of work leaves a lot to be desired. People line up to have their problems solved. I know the issue they are handling may be only for the bereaved but I believe when one dies, he leaves the problem on the living. So, in as far as the problem of sharing resources is concerned women are really disadvantaged because they miss both the cultural and the legal aspect. 

The LC will be in favour of culture, the Administrator General’s Office is in favour of the legal perspective. Then you find a conflict between the two where each one would claim that they are right. So, women are deprived. Even if they say that a woman is the heir to the father’s estate, definitely the culture can say, “no, no, a woman cannot inherit her father’s land; she cannot even sit on the chair.” I know those are not part of this one but they are implications of a bad law. They are implications of not taking women as part of society, as primarily members but as secondary members. Time has come for us here - when I am in Parliament I am respected 100 percent, we are at the same footing but let me go out there, I will be a woman and I will be labelled and deprived of my property. 

Lastly, as emphasis, we would like this aspect of solving family problems both in the land law and the Domestic Relations Bill. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BADHUL KATONGOLE (Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Chairman and his Committee for this precise report. And I would like to thank the committee for having realised among the pertinent issues discussed as, 
(a) the relationship between tenants and the landlords and (b) landlessness. 

Mr Speaker, these are the two issues that I will touch on. On the relationship between tenants and landlords, the committee says that the rights granted to the tenant by occupancy under the Land Act, 1998, far exceed the rights of the registered proprietor. While the chairperson has said that the provisions of this Act will be harmonised with the constitutional provisions, I want to point out that I think the framers of the Act were looking at the manner in which most landlords acquired a title to these lands. For example, the acquisition of title to land by some landlords is questionable. I have got a case in my constituency where I am told a surveyor came to survey land for a public project. After about 10 years, he came back with a land title claiming land where they had occupants earlier on, and they have never known him to have any land interest in that place.  

When you look at other cases like those on mailo land, you find that people were given interest in land and given mailo land when there were already people settled on those pieces of land. So, it is my wish that as we even try to harmonise, we look at the unfairness and questionable methods of how people acquired citizenship land.  

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of landlessness, and the committee in its wisdom says that part of the cause of landlessness is population increase, historical imbalances and public projects. This one is true. Like in my constituency, you find we have got a game reserve, we have got two refugee settlement schemes covering 10 square miles, we have got a forest reserve. So, it is my wish that certain public projects that are not of direct benefit to our citizens or Ugandans should be reviewed. 

Like in my place, they created these refugee camps when the population of Uganda was about nine million; now we are about 25 million. Because of the population increase, my people encroached on a refugee settlement scheme that had sort of been abandoned by the Government for about eight years. They were threatened with eviction last year. I am happy the eviction has been stayed. Let me hope Government will review this public project so that our people can find land where to get sustenance. 

The other matter is the way these projects are distributed. If 63 percent of Kasese can be under public projects, then where do our people go? So, my prayer is that Government reviews the matter of public projects, and as we harmonise the land law with the Constitution, we should take into account the manner in which the landlords acquired land. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee for the good report. I want to confine myself to one fundamental issue, and that is the amendment in regards to the family land. 

Let me start by quoting from the Constitution, Article 31(2). It reads: “Parliament shall make appropriate laws for the protection of the rights of widows and widowers to inherit the property of their deceased spouses, and to enjoy parental rights over their children.” 
(3) “Marriage shall be entered into with the free consent of the man and woman intending to marry.”
(4) “It is the right and duty of parents to care for and bring up their children.” 

If I am to go to (1), it reads, “Men and women of the age of 18 years and above, have the right to marry and to found a family and are entitled to equal rights in marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.” I want to stress the question of “entitled to equal rights in marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.”  This is where I come to thank the committee for proposing the amendment to bring the aspect of co-ownership of land by both men and women and children.

Mr Speaker, and honourable members of Parliament, for the sake of my male colleagues, some of you have daughters, you all have mothers and dear wives. By the time you marry, you love that woman, I am very sure - (Laughter). Now, if this is the case, I want you to reflect on the way these beautiful mothers and wives of yours are treated according to tradition. When a woman is married, she leaves the home of her parents and goes to live with her husband. When she leaves their home, she no longer has a share of the land at their home. I am sure it is the case in many cultures. 

When she marries and stays with her husband, it is formally recognised that she participates in the running of the family. But she does not have a share of the land she is staying on with her husband, and, therefore, in case of dissolution of marriage or in case the man dies, in many circumstances the women are chased away, the properties grabbed and they have nowhere to go. This is the reality.  

Now, my appeal is that this law tries to rectify this in only circumstances where the issue of land title comes in. I know there are so many systems of land ownership in this country. Of course, under circumstances where land ownership is customary, I am very sure this provision might not apply. But in circumstances where land ownership comes to be into registration and all this, I think this is the circumstance where it should apply. 

In this circumstance, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to support the position of the committee that in the registration of land, there must be the component of bringing in the women and the children. Because in circumstance where the man dies, the women have always had problems. They are chased away from this land and they have no where to go.  

To come to the minister's submission that these should go to the Domestic Relations Bill, this bill has been there since 1964. Every time we ask for the Domestic Relations Bill, it does not come. This time we want it to go to the substantial Land Act Amendment so that when the Domestic Relations Bill comes, we handle issues to do with family matters so that this issue of land is within the land law.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I have been listening very attentively to my honourable sister Betty trying to justify that all that is in the Domestic Relations Bill could only be addressed by that simple amendment. I am now seeking clarification, in the case -(Interruption)- May I finish, Sir? Protect me from hon. Kagonyera -(Laughter). The clarification I seek is, if we are to address the issue of land ownership or property ownership by a family in the law we are going to pass now, what are we going to put in the Domestic Relations Bill?

MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable Member for giving way. I want to be clarified. Does the institution of marriage stop women from acquiring property in their own right? If it does, it is an abuse of human rights! Can you stop getting married?  (Laughter)  Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the two Members for the clarification. One, the Domestic Relations Bill has not come to Parliament. We have held discussions and as far as we know, it is still a principle; it is not a bill. So, we do not know what is in the Domestic Relations principle.  Therefore, we cannot rely on that to make a decision. When an amendment comes we shall make the amendment, which is cognisant of the Constitution.  

I have just read for you the Constitution, and to clarify the second issue the honourable Member raised that don’t women have a right to own individual property? That is the right of everyone. But this particular provision of the Constitution is protecting those who come under the law to marry. If you come under the law to marry, you become two people who are equal in that marriage. That is why 31(1) says, “Men and women of the age of 18 years and above, have the right to marry and to found a family, and are entitled to equal rights in marriage….” That is my stress; that in this particular issue -(Interruption)

MAJ RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, hon. Betty for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like the Member on the Floor to clarify whether she means that both men and women are equal? In that sense, would the husbands also share the property of their wives?

MS AMONGI: Yes! For purposes of this, when you get married as a couple, whatever belongs to the woman will be yours as a man; whatever belongs to the man will be yours as a woman. In this circumstance, it will be ours.

Therefore, to conclude, I would like to urge –(Interruption)- I am very glad, Mr Speaker, the honourable Member here is already saying I am the right woman to marry - (Laughter).  In view of my contribution, I will wait for an application.  

To conclude, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like you to think critically about your daughters; think about your mothers; think about your wives whom you love so much. As we pass this family law, you should give us equal opportunity in marriage. You would only be doing your constitutional duty to make a law cognizant with Article 31 of the Constitution. I thank you.

MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report, especially for highlighting some issues on land. I am going to confine myself to some issues that relate to Kibaale.

The committee is recommending that the land fund should be extended to other parts of the country. Extended from where? To the best of my knowledge, in Kibaale it has not taken off! So, being extended from where? It has not taken off, and you are saying that it is going to continue. I really do not understand. Possibly I will get an answer from either the Committee Chairperson or the Chairman. 

Mr Speaker, people talk about the land fund; the people in the village ask themselves, “what if these landlords refuse to give in the land, what happens?” They might refuse the existing market prices or the market prices being offered by the Government. What happens? I hope I will get an explanation there.

I would also like to find out from the Chairperson and the Minister possibly, that when you have paid off these landlords, who now owns the land? Is it the Government, is it the people who were there or is it the people who are there in all these capacities? Because it is a bit complex because there are people who lost it. There are people who lost the land in the first place, when it was given away to the absentee landlords and there are those who came and grabbed it and they are there. Now, who gets the land when Government pays for it? 

In the Ten-Point Program, which have now become 15, the Movement was talking of correcting or redressing the errors. One of the biggest errors that have been committed to the Banyoro of Kibaale was grabbing their land by the government of that time. Now, the Banyoro are thinking of taking this Government to court. Is Government willing to compensate us for over 100 years? We have been on land, which we have not been using, land that has been used by other people, because we have only been squatters? Is Government ready to compensate us for all those 100 years because, how else do you redress the errors that were made by those past Governments? I think we should take Government to court if it refuses to compensate us.  

Most of the speakers have been asking about the land settlement policy of this country. I do not know whether it is in place, I stand to be corrected. But to the best of my knowledge, it seems there is no land settlement policy in this country and people continue to occupy land at will. When is Government going to come up with a law or a policy to help in the settlement? People move from wherever, especially in Kibaale, and come in, because after all, there are even no owners of the land. So, people come in and go out, but when is Government going to put one in place?

Finally, Mr Speaker, there are re-settlement schemes in Kibaale. In these resettlement schemes are people who have lived there for the last 40 years, but these people also do not have registerable interests. They are there also as squatters. When is Government going to make the people occupying the land re-settlers, especially those who were brought from the southern part of Uganda? These are my brothers and sisters; they have been on the land for the last 20 to 30 years, but they do not own it. They are still squatters like the Munyoro who is on the other piece of land. So, my question is, when is land going to be de-gazetted - these are the resettlement schemes - so that it becomes public land so that these people can now register and own them? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe South, Kampala): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like also to thank the committee, the Minister and hon. Lukyamuzi for his minority report. 

Mr Speaker, I refer you to page 5, the second last paragraph where the committee says, “These evictions are sometimes done without due regard to the law, using the armed forces.” I do not know what means the committee is going to put in place to punish the wrong doers of such an act. Why am I bringing out this? You remember when we passed the other motion I brought before the Floor of Parliament, a lot has happened because we requested Government to act very fast to protect the wretched of this earth. 

Recently, on 3 April this year, another act was done in the constituency I represent here in Parliament, and they have written and given a copy to me.  This is what they have said:

“Attached also is a copy of the letter dated 29 August 2000, written by Col. Elly Kayanja in which he was wrongfully evicting us. We have since been mistreated and harassed by army men claiming to be coming from Internal Security Organ (ISO) and in that respect, we do not rule out their involvement. They even took away their unipots. Our fear is that they may continue throwing us out one by one as if we do not have a right to fair and legal treatment, even if it is an eviction”. This one has come to me recently. So, what action is the committee really recommending to punish such people?

I remember, Mr Speaker, when I came here, one honourable Member of Parliament was pointed out and he is a powerful Member of the Cabinet. He is a Minister. He phoned me. He got my phone number from my colleague hon. Kakooza. I gave him my phone number because I thought we were going to talk about these matters and we amicably come out to this. But look, he is till evicting people forcefully! So, what laws are we putting in place to deter Cabinet ministers and other powerful people from evicting forcefully the wretched of this earth? I will lay this one on Table and you will see. There are so many documents. These people are protected. But now we are recommending good things but the big shots are affecting our people.

On Page 6, I sympathise with the people of Kasese District, because it is terrible that ever since we got independence, 63 percent of the total land area is occupied by projects. I wish that a study is recommended in this one and a fair distribution of land is done. But I appeal to the leaders of Kasese not to come out with a situation like we have in Zimbabwe, where the leaders can say they are fighting for these people, but when it comes to redistribution of the 63 percent, the leaders end up getting more than the people they are fighting for! 

On this one, I thank the committee, and in case the Government comes out with the leaders of this area to redistribute this land, please de-gazette it fairly for the people.

Now on Page 9, jurisdiction of LC courts. Jurisdiction of LCs has been made clear in the law. They will be handling customary land cases and issues concerning untitled land. Here I would like to request the honourable Minister together with the committee, to come out with guidelines to help the LCs because they are the centre stage of these manipulations. All the rules and regulations should be spelt out clearly such that they know their role in this one. Because of the poverty and unemployment, if a rich man comes and gives them a million, that will be the end of the game unless the law is put in black and white of the rules and regulations to curtail their vices. 

Coming to the recommendations, hon. Lukyamuzi brought it out clearly that the issues about that relationship - and they are a thousand. It says here that the study should be given urgent attention to mitigate the ever-souring relationship, in any case not later than two years. Is this one not too far? Isn’t it long a period really? I am asking myself loudly because at the rate at which people were being evicted from the land, the rate at which the relationship is souring, unless there is justification in this, I feel the two-year period is too long.

Commenting on ownership, which is a bit controversial, honourable members, I think when you are floating this one, there are some men also who are being subdued by the female counterparts. You protect them; they may even be here! They can be vocal here on the Floor but when they go home, their rights are also being violated.  Therefore, to get their support, try to balance it up.

Secondly, I will put it before the committee and the honourable minister. The culture, the custom - I know the Constitution says that whichever law is not commensurate with whatever is provided in the Constitution should be null and void. But there are certain issues, which are very, very sensitive.  

For instance, I am of the kobe clan; my wife comes from engeye clan. My wife inherits land from the Engeye clan and also I inherit from the kobe clan. How are you going to reconcile those two - Because the ekobe clan does not want to feel that it is going to be cheated by the engeye clan? These are some of the issues, which should be looked into deeply. Otherwise, I have no quarrel. But if you settle them, they look as if we are going to gloss over them but they are a bit sensitive. Therefore, with that, I have no quarrel with any other part. I thank you very much.

MS JENNIFER NAMUYANGU (Woman Representative, Pallisa): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report, and my colleague, hon. Lukyamuzi, for coming up with a minority report. In my language we say, even if you are alone you can harvest the millet.

Mr Speaker, honourable members, I will begin with the issue of a policy on land use. I really want to agree with the committee that Government needs to come up with a policy on land use because in some parts of this country, the way land is being handled is not the best. I will give an example of my own district, where land is divided according to the number of children you have. Then these ones also continue dividing it according to the number of boys they have. Apparently, as we speak, if you get somebody with two acres of land on average, you are lucky. So, I believe if we come up with a policy on land use, it will help this country to manage the land properly.

I have also heard cases where some people are denied access to land, yet we have landlords who have big chunks of land but they are not willing to develop it and they are not willing to allow other people to utilise it. So, I would have also wished the committee to come up with some arrangement on how Government is going to handle such people? Somebody has 100 hectares, it is there redundant, he is not developing it, but other people are not allowed to use it!

I also want to concur with the committee on the issue of operationalising the land tribunals. In my district we have had many deaths as a result of land disputes. Basically, when these cases are taken to court, it takes ages for them to be resolved. In the end people take the law into their hands; they can gun down somebody who has been rivaling on the land. I believe that if these land tribunals are in place and they are operationalised, they will help in alleviating this problem.

In the same regard, I also want to agree that these land tribunals should be under the Ministry of Justice because these are legal matters; they require people who are knowledgeable in the law. So, we should not just put anybody to go and determine an issue of this great importance. 

On the issue of family land rights, I want first and foremost to thank the committee for coming up with the proposals. I also want to appeal to colleagues here to support this proposal because many times, the women, the men and the children sometimes suffer equally but especially, I will emphasise the widows and the children.  Once the head of the family, most especially the man, dies, his relatives in no time sell all the land leaving the widow and the children landless. This has become a real issue, and I really feel that it is high time we put this into law so that land can belong to the entire family. 

But I also have the same problem like the Minister in cases where we have polygamous families, where a man has four wives; will this piece of land belong to everybody? So, I think we should state clearly the modalities of how this land is going to be owned.  

On the issue of LCs and the area of jurisdiction, in many cases the LCs go beyond what they are supposed to handle. And I entirely agree that it is better to come up with guidelines to help them handle. For example, now they have proposed here customary land and maybe untitled land, so that at least they know where their jurisdiction ends other than taking the whole issue. Then in urban areas, I am normally perturbed if you are purchasing land or you are selling land the LCs put up a certain percentage like 10 percent, 5 percent that this money must go to the LC I. So, I do not know the legality of this fund.

I want to comment on the issue of land fund. Many times you have heard that Government is providing some money to buy land and settle people somewhere. I want to agree with the committee that this fund should be given to every part of this country, because I believe we have similar problems. We have people who are landless. You have heard of people settling in wetlands and I believe if we can really take measures to settle all these people, it will be okay.

Lastly, as I sit down, I had forgotten one more important issue on how we are allocating land use. It becomes hard to look at land in Namanve that was allocated for industrial development from a forest reserve, de-gazetting a forest reserve, and up to this time you only see Coca-Cola Company. So, we should not just wake up one day and say now this particular land should be for this. We should plan. I thank you.

MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I would like to appreciate the committee and the minority report from hon. Lukyamuzi plus the comments as brought forward in the minister’s overview.  

Much as I appreciate the report from the committee, what we said about the land boards and land offices makes me feel uncomfortable about it, because the issue articulated here is that these are recommended to be scrapped or reduced in number because of the expense. But, Mr Speaker, as you know, the decentralisation was aiming at taking services down to the people, and the land issues are mainly concerning people on the ground in those small units. So, I highly recommend that we should maintain these small units, especially the parish committees. 

Since land issues are not as crucial in some areas as they are in some others, I suggest that those regions where land issues are critical should maintain these parish committees, so that people are comfortably handled and the issues are well received and addressed within the shortest time. In this way, we can maintain peace in our areas. For the areas where land is handled customarily, those areas could have journal offices so that they could address those issues as they come, much as they are not frequent as in areas where we have individual landowners. 

So, this element of saying that this exercise will be very expensive, I think it is only that the Ministry has not come in to actually implement. We are getting this complaint that it is very expensive but it has never been put into practice. So, it is just anticipated. I would like to see that at least in some areas this gets started off to see how visible it could be. 

Mr Speaker, Clause 40 of the Land Act talks of the minority age. But as you are aware, Government has embarked on sensitising parents and the girls in particular, so that they are maintained at school for quite a long time to complete their education. That is why UPE is there and USE is on its way. This means that most children will be above the minority age while they are still at school. 

When we consider only those of minority age to be beneficiaries in case their parents pass away, and we disregard children who are of majority age, then I think we are being unfair, especially to the girls who are these days taking longer to get married. They might be the only children in a family. If a child above the age of 18 should not inherit a piece of this land, I feel we are being sort of unreasonable to the children who we are asking to take longer at school, so that they could at least find away of fending for themselves at a later age. This applies to the question of clan inheritance or clan land. 

In some areas, we find that husband and wife can own land. If one of the two passes away, assuming that a woman bought the land and it was registered in the woman’s clan and at a later date the husband also passes away, this land is to be inherited by the children born of the woman. In some customs, it would be wrong. For example, in Buganda if we are living on land which I inherited from my parents and I happen to pass away, my children will not inherit this land because they are not of engabi clan, but of the lugave clan. So, I would wish to see how this can be addressed in such areas where – (Interjection) – yes it has to be national because we are putting in place laws, which will be guiding those who are to implement these laws. So, I think this issue should be looked into.

THE SPEAKER: You have a right to belong to a certain culture and to preserve it. I think what you are saying is that according to your culture, land that you inherited from Ngabi clan should not go to the Lugave clan. The question is, do you think we should overlook this? I think this is a position that we have to take.

MRS BALEMEEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance. I am looking at Government as to how it is considering the future generation. I wonder whether Government is putting in place measures as to how the country will have some land spared for the future generation!  Because as we talk now, it seems we are embarking on an exercise of seeing that the current generation is buying land, Government is selling off properties, which would be for public utilisation. In the future, maybe 30 or 40 years, there might be no land for the future generation to buy; assuming most of those do not inherit the land. 

So, I would like to see at least how Government is planning to have some public land, which will be in place for future development. As we know that we are now already in the “dot com” generation, and you never know what the world will be in the next 50 years. But can we assume that there will be land for the generations to come? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and hon. Ken Lukyamuzi for the good reports. I will base my discussion on the recommendation of the committee. When we analyse the recommendation of the committee and what hon. Ken Lukyamuzi also came up with, there is no difference, apart from the fact that hon. Ken Lukyamuzi was over emphasising the recommendation.  

I would also like to thank the minister for his contribution. I would like to caution the minister because when you look at the recommendation of the committee, it actually shows that there is a lot of lacuna within the land law, which means that the minister would have come up with a full amendment rather than bringing it piecemeal to this House, we debate, then at another time they bring another amendment. Because when we look at recommendation one, the two years proposed by the committee in order to analyse the law are actually too long. I think one year would have been enough such that the ministry can examine the land law and actually come up with the new amendment such that Parliament can amend the whole Act at once.  

Secondly, when I analyse the report, it is as if the minister wanted to operationalise the land tribunals, which is actually very good. But they cannot operate fully when the landlords are going to be paid Shs 1,000. So, you can see that even if the land tribunal will be in operation, when the ground rate is Shs 1,000 there will be very little to be achieved really.

My appeal, Mr Speaker, is that maybe in future when the minister realises that there is a weakness within the law, their technical committee and technical staff should study it such that when they come to the House, we actually discuss the law once and for all. Because when you consider on page three what hon. Ken Lukyamuzi actually came up with, you realise that – I was not in the 6th Parliament but I actually know how Parliament works regarding our Rules of Procedure. But if hon. Ken Lukyamuzi went ahead to allege that everything within the land bill, which is the Land Act now was decided by hon. Ben Mutyaba, I think it was not correct, it cannot be correct. Let me read it verbatim: “Hon. Ben Mutyaba, who chaired the Committee that passed the Land Act, lost popularity in Makindye East during the 6th Parliament.”

Mr Speaker, hon. Ben Mutyaba originates from my constituency. He is actually very popular, he encouraged me to contest the Parliament seat and I actually won. Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi actually knows that it is somebody’s wish to contest. We all know that hon. Benedict Mutyaba is a commissioner. He cannot hold two posts according to our Constitution. Yesterday it was hon. Ben Mutyaba, so tomorrow since hon. Ken Lukyamuzi has made the minority report, he will say Engineer Ndaula has lost popularity. If he does not stand he will allege such. What does that depict in our country? It actually shows that if you are a leader, you are supposed to cling to power. What if the President said, “I am not standing for a 3rd term”; will you say that the President has lost popularity? – (Interruption)

MR BAMWANGA: Thank you very much, for giving way my colleague. Mr Speaker, I want to concur with the speaker on the Floor that hon. Mutyaba was a principled lawyer. A good representative of the people and he did not look at being a populist in order to remain in Parliament. So, whatever he did while he was a Member of Parliament, most of us who were in the 6th Parliament really supported him. I was on that committee which he chaired. Therefore, there was nothing like opportunism. He was a principled man, a man who loved his country so much, beyond one individual personality and individual interest. I thank you.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague holding the Floor that I was the minister who propelled this bill in Parliament, and I have not lost popularity from my constituency - (Laughter and Applause).

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, why I brought that really, we are leaders today and I would like to encourage my colleague that we should set precedent for the future leaders because hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, I know him very well. He is one of the people who never wanted to lift that section within the Constitution. But if your thinking is like this, then the President should also cling on power because he is still popular. People love him! So, we should give credit where it is deserved and we should actually try to be principled – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have only set two days for this bill, and I think we should try to wind up. I have been following the debate and I think we are repeating the same points. Therefore, you should wind up. I have given opportunity to honourable Member for Iganga District and then we will see how we proceed. We have to complete this bill tomorrow. Therefore, unless you really have new ideas, you need not stand. But please complete your submission and then the honourable Member for Iganga District will contribute.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Otherwise, I want to end by thanking the committee and urge Parliament to team up and remind the Executive to bring the full amendment of the land law within a period of one year. I think that one can be put in the recommendation when you are passing the law such that even the study on the ground rent can also be revisited. Otherwise, if the ground rent is still Shs 1,000, the landless will remain landless; people will be selling them indirectly or mortgaging the titles in the bank. And when the bank comes to evict people - most speakers have been saying that they do it illegally, they do not do it illegally. 

I have seen a lot of eviction with court orders, which means that even the Executive is aware that people are being evicted. Individuals, companies, soldiers, everybody and even MPs evict people!  So, it is actually our wish that the Executive brings the law as soon as possible. I thank you very much.

MRS MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE (Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those people who have already thanked the committee for this report, and hon. Ken Lukyamuzi for the emphasis he put on some points, and the Minister of Lands for clarifications where may be some of us did not understand very well.

I want to start by commending the committee for their recommendations, mainly the two that I have picked on. One is recommendation 5, where they said that the land use policy should be streamlined. It is important that this policy is dealt with and is put in place very vividly so that it can ease people’s use of land where they have found themselves not really received very well, whether on occupancy or otherwise.

Mr Speaker, whatever has been in place has been very weak, due to greed of the people who have been executing that Act and those who want to buy or take land. So, we have found ourselves in a complicated situation where you cannot tell who owns the land and who does not own it when it comes to who should take it at a particular time.  

I want to talk about recommendation 6, which came in after eviction of people. I have read in the newspapers very disturbing news where you find that Ugandans have been cruelly treated as if they do not belong to Uganda by whoever wants to evict them -(Applause). I read in the newspaper last year – I do not remember the month - that some 900 people had been removed from an island, or wherever they came from, and they were dumped in Mukono. 

As you may imagine, when people are living in a camp, they are really displaced. There is no clean water for them, there is no shelter, and there is no food. There is nothing for them to turn to. You find that after a very short time, children start falling sick, and those children who fall sick are Ugandans. You wonder where those children are supposed to be placed after having been evicted! 

I was thinking, and will continue to think, that the eviction has been the worst type of mistreatment to Ugandans, and maybe elsewhere, because I have found that eviction is done abruptly. If one wants the land today or tomorrow, people will be evicted. You wonder whether there is no consideration for people to be given at least some time, that they will be evicted after a week or so or a month! That psychological bit that is put to these people is too much.  

You can imagine that when one is told to leave, he will leave without putting his things together. So, he will either leave his property behind or he will go with a few that he can carry. More especially, the women when they are moving, they carry the children on their backs, some are held by the hand and with luggage on the head and so on. 

I want to suggest that whoever is given that authority to evict people should treat them as human beings. They must be given information in advance; they must be given compensation for whatever, whether the land or property, but whatever is due to them. Another issue is that the people who are evicting must find alternative pieces of land for those people to be settled before they are evicted. There is another -(Interruption)

MRS LUKIA ISANGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member holding the Floor that even in Mayuge, people were evicted; their crops were destroyed and their property was stolen. But then they said that these people are encroachers. They are not supposed to be compensated!  Even now there is a proposal to resettle people who are staying on landing sites. They want to put them in one camp like those ones in Gulu. I do not know how they are going to do this. I think the Government should consider those people as Ugandans or human beings because they need also to have good life. Thank you.

MRS MAGOOLA: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, I want to give another example of an elderly man around Makerere who was evicted in a matter of hours. He was made to pack up whatever he had but the poor man did not have anywhere to go. So, he sat around his things, which had been thrown around. His dead had been exhumed after the man had stayed in that land for about 50 years. 

We really need to make the law that we are going to put in place very, very clear to whoever is going to evict and the one who is going to be evicted. Otherwise, sometimes we ask ourselves, is it me to be evicted next day? Is it my people who are going to be evicted?

Mr Speaker, talking about eviction reminds us of very many things because we have forgotten our culture. In Uganda, how do you go and exhume people who died 50 years back? I know we want money, but money should have a limit! We must respect our culture and other things.

I want to support the committee for the recommendation over the eviction of people so that whoever is evicted should be treated humanely, should be treated with respect. This displacement of people does not pay anybody, but we only lose lives. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to join those who have thanked the Chairman of the Committee and the minister responsible for this subject, and of course hon. Ken Lukyamuzi for a job well done. I believe that it is not too late for hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to consider harmonizing his position with that of the committee, since there is no big divergence in my opinion.

I have about four points to highlight. The first one, I would like to agree with the findings of the committee that the powers of the landlord over his or her land, for that matter, are being overtaken by those of the tenants on the same land. I think this is creating a lot of problems. We may have to think seriously, even in this bill, because you will find a tenant who will tell you, “All this is my interest on this land.”  This is where my megorora passes and sometimes much of that land is unutilised. If it is unutilised and the landlord with a title would like to develop it, why should the landlord be stopped from utilizing the unutilised land, if only he can provide some nominal compensation? That needs to be looked at. 

The previous laws were providing that the customary tenant or such kind of tenant would be entitled to developments on the land. But the current law, as it stands, it is the whole interest. If he can prove that this is where his boundaries pass, that is his or her land.

Secondly, I have a problem with locating the tribunals in the Ministry of Water and Lands, as opposed to the judiciary. We need to think carefully about this. I agree with observations that have been made on the Floor of the House, and of course the observation of the minister in the sense that when you look at the concept of separation of powers, you may want to locate these tribunals in the Judiciary. But let us bear in mind that the concept of separation of powers is not an absolute concept. More often than not, you need to look at what you exactly need to achieve at the end of the day.

In Britain, where we copy most of these concepts, the House of Lords is both a court and a legislature. Here in Uganda, Members of Parliament are in the Executive. Sometimes it depends on what you want to achieve. Now, what am I trying to drive at?  I want to propose and I am constrained. 

I have heard the arguments and more or less agree with them. They are not precluded, with all due respect, with the argument that the minister responsible made because a judicial officer is a judicial officer of a court. And when you read Article 151 of the Constitution in tandem with Article 129 of the Constitution, you will see a court can be this kind of tribunal.  

But that is not the argument. The argument is what are we looking at? We are looking at simplicity. We are looking at institutions, which are non-technical. We are looking at institutions, which are non-intimidating. An ordinary court of law, more often than not, is an intimidating tribunal. You find a judge seated with a wig, with all due respect - (Interruption) - I am winding up, Mr Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: No, honourable Member, I think there is this matter, which I think has generated some debate. You have to look at Article 243 of the Constitution and look at the functions of the land tribunals. They are two. It says: (2) “The jurisdiction of a land tribunal shall include – (a) the determination of disputes… and (b) the determination of any disputes relating to the amount of compensation….” Then “(3) The Chairperson of a land tribunal established under this Article shall be appointed on the advice of the judicial service commission.”
  
Then you have to look at the general provision depending on the interpretation of judicial powers to dispense powers among persons. You really find that the function of this tribunal is judicial if you use this general interpretation under Article 257. Parliament is given powers to enact a law and establish these organs. 

Parliament in its wisdom can definitely decide, even if this particular tribunal is found in the chapter dealing with the land, to confine it to the role of a judicial tribunal and, therefore, take it in the right place.  I think these are some of the points that should be taken into account when dealing with this matter.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Speaker, the whole of Article 243(8) makes a distinction between a tribunal and a court of law.  It says this: “A law made under this Article may prescribe the practice and procedure for Land tribunals and shall provide for a right of appeal from a decision of a land tribunal to a court of law.” 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but it does not prevent, in the wisdom of Parliament, to make that law and say we place it this way.  What I am saying is that, simply because it is in a chapter on land, and land being administered by Ministry of Lands does not mean it must own the tribunals created under that chapter.  

MR RUHINDI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. With that clarification, I believe that with clear regulations guaranteeing the more or less autonomous status of the tribunals, they can be located in the Ministry of Water and Lands.  That is my submission because, we have got the Industrial Court, it is located in the Ministry of Labour and Immigration.  We have got the Tax Tribunal; it is located in the Ministry of Finance.  We have got NPART, chaired by Justice Tabaro; it is in the Ministry of Finance, and so forth.  What do you intend to achieve at the end of the day to reduce the necessary bureaucracy as we know it, particularly we who go to court and we know what we go through?  

We expect the lady who is being talked about by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi of 102 years, sometimes without any legal representation, to go to that ordinary court. It would be better for that person to go to simpler institution.  That is my submission.

I would like also to see a clear distinction on a submission relating to joint tenancy of members of the family: Are we talking about joint tenancy or are we talking about tenancy in common, or there is a distinction?  In joint tenancy, there is a right for those who survive. If one of them dies, the property revolves to the surviving ones.  In case of tenancy in common, it is the reverse.  Finally, Mr Speaker, I am not quite happy –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: But I think here it can only be – because if you say tenancy in common, it means even when a person dies, his interest remains to the estate. But then what will happen if the man or woman gets married?  What will happen to the new spouse who will come if it is a tenancy in common?  This will cause a problem.  I think it must be intended for the survivorship to continue and then change the status of the property as the circumstances may arise.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  It was for the avoidance of doubt.  Finally, I was actually submitting that I am not quite happy.  Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi talked about two resolutions, which were made by this House about unnecessary evictions.  We people who are affected know what we go through every day.  

I would have expected, after these resolutions, the responsible minister, through a circular instruction, to write to the people concerned to help in making sure that there are no unauthorised evictions, evictions in which case would only take place when there is a court order.  Otherwise, such evictions should be stopped, and we should actually see a move by those responsible to stop these evictions because in some places they are arising in debts; people are being arrested even on charges of "Wembley".    

I have got one from Kireka, who was arrested because of such problems.  So, I would like to see those concerned taking a very pro-active role in stopping these evictions.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, members, don’t you really think we have exhaustively debated this matter? You will have an opportunity when we are dealing with the committee Stage to deal with amendments.  Don’t you really think we should end here?  So, I think let this general debate end here.  What we will do is that maybe tomorrow – do you have a few points to respond to- because you are the owner of the motion.  We start with the Chairperson if he has anything to say because he is the owner of the motion for the Second Reading.

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I wish to thank members who have contributed.  The issue I want to clarify is on the family land rights: I have heard members contributing, giving an impression that it would mean all the property and land that the family holds will be owned by the entire family.  What we are interested in is this particular law, is the land where the family ordinarily resides and derives sustenance.  That is the land, which we want the family to own: If you look through the amendments, Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the matter being raised is very crucial because sometimes you may own land in town but also have land in the village, and every weekend you go to the village and cultivate matooke to sustain you in town.  Now, which land are you talking about: Are you talking about the land you have in town where you have a house, that it should be jointly owned with your spouse?  That needs to be clarified.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, because the problem, honourable Chairperson, is this: maybe you have a house where you reside with your family, but then there are houses, which are being occupied by tenants and you get rent from those houses - ten of them. And because it is an income you receive from those ten houses, you use it to sustain your family, what will happen?

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  There are also cases where the man and woman have got paid employment: They have got jobs in town and they stay in some house somewhere in Kireka.  Occasionally they go home to see the parents; they have got some piece of land, and actually derive their sustenance from their jobs and not even the piece of land they have in the village.  Now, which land are you referring to?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will give you opportunity at the committee stage to bring up the same points, which I think you have made.

MR KAWEESI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are looking at a family ordinarily residing on the land and deriving sustenance. These are the vulnerable families where, when the family head dies they become destitute. You have got to be a resident on that land and deriving sustenance. 

For the clarification which hon. Kasirivu was seeking, these people who have got paid employment ordinarily do not have problems, even when one of the spouses or the family head dies. In fact, in many cases those ones have got their property already determined. One has got a house in a suburb, and it is either in the wife’s name or in a child’s name. Those are already catered for. 

We are looking at those families upcountry, which derive sustenance from the land where they are residing, so that they can have stability on that land. Page 6 in our report, on the amendments, brings this out very clearly, where we indicate that actually, it is for the stability of the family. Even if the family head leaves the family, there is a surviving family. That surviving family becomes the owner of the land. We have indicated it. 

I heard someone saying that the names of every family member should be written on the title. No!  Every family will have a corporate name, taken from the head of the family. The other members of the family, that is the spouse and the children, will be written on a schedule, and the Commissioner or Registrar of titles will endorse on that schedule, “no survivorship”.

THE SPEAKER: But my question was about these ten houses where I get rent and I use that money to sustain the family. What happens to that?

MR KAWEESI: Mr Speaker, since you will not be ordinarily residing in those houses, though you are deriving sustenance, the family is not ordinarily residing there. Therefore, this particular clause will not apply.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I think to be democratic, give me one second. I would like to thank all those who have supported my views in their minority form. 

Mr Minister, what I meant on page 4, by saying that the amendments you have floated are not good enough, is that the Land Act has not worked because of the reasons, which many of us know.  You ignored those reasons. They should have been included in the amendment framework you floated here.  

In regard to what hon. Ruhindi has said, what I referred to as the resolutions of Parliament being passed unanimously here, was a very important point and a big challenge to Government. You cannot ignore that discord spotted and supported by Members of Parliament, and you float amendments that do not address the discord on the ground.  

Finally, in regard to hon. Mutyaba, I was his campaign manager when he was campaigning to become a member of the East African Legislative Assembly.  So, I know the inside and I am certain of what he talked about. Thank you very much.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Three issues, the first one is in regard to the translation of the Land Act into our vernaculars.  More than any other law, it is the Land Act, which is translated in Luganda, the 4 Rs - Runyoro/Rutoro/Runyakole/Rukiga, Kupsabiny, Ateso, Lugbara and Luo. 

More than any other law, it is this one which has been given the widest publicity in the papers, in the print media, and on the electronic media - television and radio discussions. Sir, this sensitization still goes on, especially in the central region where we have got interests overlapping.  That is one.  

The second clarification I want to give to the House is in regard to the present status of land tribunals. Every district - 56 of them - has got a land tribunal, properly and fully constituted and appointed by the Chief Justice, including Masindi, Hoima and Kibaale. All these district tribunals have got office space, they have now got staff, they have got vehicles, equipment and funds to enable them function. 

Because now they are in place, my senior minister has already communicated to the Chief Justice to give due notice to the magistrates courts that any new land cases, which have been going to the traditional magistrates courts, should be handled by the tribunals.  

The third one is about land policy and land use policy. The other policy the members were requesting to have is the resettlement policy. Sir, my ministry is carrying out two studies, and one is on land policy. For example, we had fragmentation in Pallisa. What is the critical minimum size of land that should not be sub-divided, bequeathed to the grandchildren and so on? This is the policy that very soon will be considered by Cabinet, and will be also made available to the whole country and to this House.  

The other one is land use - the best use any piece of land can be put to according to its productivity. This includes zoning the district to produce either one crop or another, or to be a pastoral area or otherwise. 

Finally, Sir, the occupant of registered land: During the five years I have spent in the Ministry of Lands, I have found out that these people were actually the original owners of this land, before those agreements of 1900 reversed the order. That is why now there is a tag of war.  So, the study, which is being conducted, will bear out the facts. And given the findings, I think we shall make a sustainable decision on the matter. As I told the chairperson in the Committee, this is a matter that cannot be amended here without looking at the study. The first owners were the occupants. Thank you, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

THE SPEAKER: We have now reached Committee Stage, which we shall start with tomorrow. Therefore you should prepare the respective amendments which you want to effect in the law.

I have just received the sad news of the death of the father of the honourable Minister, Bakoko Bakoru, which occurred in Arua. Burial arrangements are being worked out. I think we have to observe a moment of silence in respect of the deceased.

(Members stood and observed a moment of  silence.)

THE SPEAKER: With this, honourable members, we come to the end of today's business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 10 April 2003 at 2 p.m.)
 








