
Tuesday, 2 April 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

(The Council  was called to order.)

QUESTIONS 

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, question No. 16 of 1996

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi):  Mr Chairman, Sir, let me first of all give this House a brief background to the security situation along the Uganda-Sudan border in the West Nile sector which the question is about.  Most of the insecurity along the Uganda-Sudan border is attributable to the West Nile Bank Front and the Sudanese Government.  The West Nile Bank Front was formed in late 1994 in the Sudan.  It originally consisted of former soldiers of defunct armies living in the Sudan and Zaire and initially it recruited its members from former refugees in camps in Zaire.  As Members may recollect, when the National Resistance Movement took power, all those that had taken refugee outside Uganda had been invited to return, a general amnesty had been offered except to those that had committed what we called personal crimes and they were many and about 500,000 refugees returned from Sudan and Zaire.  But a few thousands remained especially in eastern Zaire and southern Sudan who as far as we are concerned were fugitives from the law.  They feared prosecution for the crimes they committed against our people.  And these are the people from which the West Nile Bank Front recruited its members in refugee camps in eastern Zaire.  

Eventually, the West Nile Bank Front started clandestine recruitments inside Uganda which intensified around May/June last year.  During these months, there was massive disappearance of youths especially from Koboko and Aringa counties of Arua District.   The recruits were taken to Morobo in Sudan via Zaire for training.  On completion of basic military training, the West Nile Bank Front embarked on drawing military operations with the Sudanese defence forces.  The Sudanese Defence Forces are the official army of the Republic of Sudan and West Nile Bank Front started military operations with them based at Morobo inside Sudan.  The first such operation was conducted on 2nd June, 1995 when a combined force of West Nile Bank Front and the Sudan Defence Forces attacked the Sudan People’s Liberation Army, a rebel army positioned at Kimba in Sudan; Kimba is about four miles from Kaya town; Kaya is a town at our border. 

Later on 12th August 1995, a combined force of West Nile Bank Front and Sudan Defence Forces attacked and captured Kaya from the SPLA.  After the fall of Kaya, Kaya is right at the border of Uganda and Sudan.  On the Uganda side, we have a town called Oraba.  In fact Kaya and Oraba are separated by a river and they are connected by a bridge.  That is the only separation between the two places; and after the fall of Kaya to the Sudan Defence Forces, the West Nile Bank Front established its bases in and around Kaya on the Sudan side.  From these bases, the West Nile Bank Front began carrying out patrols in areas along the Uganda-Sudan border and in the process of doing so, they terrorised the civilian population in Ayupe, Oluba, pamodo, Ilongira, Oraba and great parishes of Ludara division in Koboko county.  

Because of such terrorism, a lot of civilians in these parishes vacated their homes.  In fact I do believe that all of them did vacate their homes.  Some of these displaced people are in Koboko Town, they are more than 10,000 people who are displaced and are in camps in Koboko town.  Others have sought and found refugee in Aringa and Terego counties.  But even after these parishes were vacated, the West Nile Bank Front continued to roam these areas in search of food and other merchandise.  Because of this, it became necessary for the UPDF to deploy its forces in Koboko county especially at Keri.  

The concept of this deployment was of an expensive nature.  UPDF carried out aggressive patrols in those affected parishes of Ludara division and by the beginning of February, 1996, UPDF had regained control of the entire Ludara division.  The West Nile Bank Front who had initially patrolled these parishes lost their initiative following these aggressive UPDF patrols in the areas and they withdrew back into the Sudan. This, to some extent restored some limited confidence i n the population that had been displaced and although they have not gone back to their homes, they started going back to collect tools and other essential requirements.  The success of the UPDF, however, forced the Sudan Defence Forces and their collaborators, the West Nile Bank Front to change tactics.  They changed from sending West Nile Bank Front on patrols into Uganda to regular artillery bombardment of Ugandan territory.  The bombardment is by the Sudan Defence Forces.  The most affected area is Oraba parish.

Allow me, Mr Chairman, to give this House and the country a few examples of the Sudan Defence Forces aggression to illustrate this point.  On 8th February this year, the Sudan Defence Forces shelled Oraba parish with over 250 shells wounding one UPDF officer.  The following day on 9th in Kaya, using a different type of weapon, they shelled Oraba bridge presumably to indicate targets for the Antonov plane which was overflying Oraba.  That plane consequently dropped two bombs one of which landed in Oraba and the second one on the Sudan side of the border.  

On 12th February, the Sudan Defence Forces Artillery pounded UPDF for two and a half hours.  Some of the shells landed close to Keri UPDF defence which is six miles inside Uganda.  A few shells aimed at Koboko UPDF defence landed some meters away from their targets.  The Sudan Defence Forces with their collaborators, the West Nile Bank Front, based in Kaya and its surroundings do not want to see UPDF on the Uganda side of the border.  In fact they shoot at anything that moves inside Uganda.  If it were not for the cool headedness of the UPDF and the leadership at large, an all out war would have broken out at this border point by now.  

So, Mr Chairman, it is not true to say that UPDF has failed to contain the situation.  As I had mentioned earlier, UPDF is now in control of all the Ugandan territory up to our border.  Our last deployment is only 20 meters if I may give you that detail. Therefore, the UPDF defences are right at the border and there is no more entrance into our territory from Sudan.  

On what course of action we intend to take to - I think the question was: “what further action does the Minister intend to take to stop further incursion?”  I think the actions UPDF has already taken are adequate.  These measures I have described we think are necessary measures to defend our territory from further incursions from the Sudan.  That is in the form of deployment of troops and appropriate equipment.  The only thing in terms of capacity to defend ourselves, which remains, is for us to find a solution to the problem of the Antonov.  

I have told this country through other media and I think I have stated this in this august House before that the Sudanese Government uses high altitude flying Antonov planes which ordinarily are cargo planes but which the Sudanese government uses to drop bombs on us.  What they do, they load bombs on the planes, and when they get over Ugandan territory, there is someone who shows it out.  It is not a very accurate way fighting because obviously they never find the target if any but as I told the people of Arua about three weeks ago, the Antonov does not cause so much damage but it instils fear in the population and therefore, we are determined to find a solution to that and I would like to state to this august House and the country at large that we are absolutely determined to get rid of that menace and once we do, once we have the means to answer the Antonov or any other high altitude plane used by the Sudan to cause fear in our population here, then we have taken all the necessary measures required to stop any incursion by the Sudanese Defence Forces in that part of our country.  

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I wish to end by saying that although there has been continued and constant provocative shelling from the Sudan Defence Forces in collaboration with the West Nile Bank Front in Kaya, Uganda and in particular the UPDF will maintain its defensive posture and will only wait to deal with those Sudan defence forces and West Nile Bank Front that will venture into our territory.  I once again reiterate that we have the capacity to defend our borders as we have shown over the last few weeks in that particular sector of our border.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, I now call upon hon. Members to give few elucidatory remarks.

DR ADONIA TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman Sir, in view of the fact that insecurity has persisted in the northern part of Uganda for a long time despite the government’s assurance that the situation is under control, is the Minister right to tell this House and therefore to tell the nation whether government is prepared to listen to some voice of reason that has been persistently been echoed by many Ugandans and organisations on the possibility of peace talks between the government and the two main rebel forces in northern Uganda; that is the West Nile Bank Front and the Kony forces and possibly even to include peace overtures with the government of Sudan.  That is one area in which I would like the Minister to make some comment.  

The second point I want to raise is the concerns that as insecurity persists in northern Uganda, elections are also around the corner.  I would like the Minister to tell this House and therefore tell the nation that we shall be able to hold elections peacefully in northern Uganda.  And if the government fails to contain the security situation there whether we shall have to hold elections in one part of the country which is not affected by insecurity.  These are the only two areas Mr Chairman, which I wanted the Minister to make some comments.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I will call upon the Minister last and he will summarise by answering all the question.

MR DRATRUTRU ROMANO:  

Thank you Mr Chairman.  I do agree with the full statement made to this House by the Minister of State for Defence.  What disturbed me most is the fact that the leader of West Nile Bank Front ran into his exile together with most of us and we were able to return with no disturbances.  He too was requested to return.  He opted to be in exile and started rebel activities against us.  I would like to know from the Minister what had been the problem of this very person who has decided to be outside?  My second comment is, he said youths from West Nile particularly in the counties of Aringa, Koboko crossed Kaya from Uganda and joined these rebel activities.  This is true, I just want to inform the Minister that these youths did not go with clear heads.  But what forced them into exile activity is mercenary activity in order to get money.  Their problem was lack of money in Uganda and they were promised money in form of activity against Uganda.  So I think Uganda Government should be planning to do something to reabsorb this group of youths.  

Thirdly, my appeal to the government through the Minister is one, the people of West Nile Bank Front are encouraged because of the existence and survival of Kony activities and I do agree if Kony’s activities were dismissed, the West Nile Bank Front would not have any strength or encouragement to operate; because they cannot come to West Nile.  The people of West Nile rejected them and we can resist.  My appeal is and I hope the government told us this month the Kony activities would be stopped.  We were assured that by April, the Kony issue will no longer be in existence.  

I want the Minister to assure us that this statement is true and for this month to end, we are 28 days and after 28 days, we are going one week thereafter to elections.  Can we be assured that all effort should be used to make sure that Kony is eliminated from the soil of Uganda with no malice at all.  Thank you very much.

MR PETER OKWERA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  First of all, I would like to thank the UPDF very much for all the effort they have put in to contain the rebel activities in the north.  Recently Mr Chairman, there was a rebel ambush on a convoy to West Nile.  I was very pleased when the government came out with a statement that they will compensate the people who have lost their vehicles in that ambush and that they would also give in some money to the deceased relatives or those  who lost their people in that convoy.  Mr Chairman, we are all aware that to protect property and lives of people in Uganda is the responsibility of government.  I will therefore like the Minister to tell me if the people in the north who have lost their lives through Kony rebel activities and who have lost their vehicles on other roads are going to be compensated also by the army.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR TIVU:  Mr Chairman, I thank you.  Mr Chairman, we have ever been talking in this House about insecurity in the north.  I remember putting exactly in this House why the insecurity in the north exists and I want now the Minister to tell me precisely because by then I was contributing to a general debate; that since we have been fighting liberation wars, we have been putting our technical trained army for several times and leaving them in the country side.  They are unemployed and they are not exhibiting their professions which they have learnt and these are now the people who have proved to be the leaders of these rebels. What is the government trying to do to make sure that these professionals who have used government money to train and yet they are capable of fighting in the bush?  What is government trying to do to make sure that they are within the Ugandan system not to lead rebel life.  Thank you.

MR ONGOM:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  The Minister explained to us the problems on the Uganda-Sudan border particular in Arua and one of the problems facing UPDF there according to the Minister is this high altitude flying plane that drops bombs on to Uganda and he said that they are trying to get some way of defending Uganda with this kind of thing.  But Mr Chairman, there are other problems that are facing UPDF.  Of late Mr Chairman, there have been persistent attacks by Kony’s rebels around Gulu town and they walk on foot.  They are not high flying and Mr Chairman, we have time and again been told that government is preparing to get rid of this.  But everyday, this is persisting.  As we talk now, there are a lot of people who are destabilised, a lot of people with homes in Gulu Town itself have been burnt down by Kony and yet we have troops around there.  

Of course the Minister sometimes does not get the correct statement.  The other day he told us that this place where the rebels operated and burnt houses was two kilometres away from the town.  In fact it is in town, not two kilometres away.  Even Kanyogoga where he said is two kilometres away where they dropped a bomb, he said two kilometres away from the army barracks.  But the army barracks is in Kanyogoga itself.  So it can really be one kilometre away.  So some of the information he is getting is not quite correct.  I would like clarification Mr Chairman.  What is the Minister really doing to protect us?  Because people are really feeling that they are not being protected.

MR KERIMORI:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I appreciate the statement of the Minister that the Sudan-Uganda border is well taken care of by the UPDF and at the same time, the Minister stated that some young people from West Nile sometime last May entered Sudan through Zaire to join the West Nile Bank Front.  But the border of Nebbi District which is also quite long with Zaire was used by these people to enter.  I would like the Minister to tell me what measure he is taking to make sure also the border between Zaire and Nebbi District particularly is considered security wise by the UPDF.  

As one of the people who was in the ambush of the 8th March, I think the suffering of the people of West Nile got on that day is still lingering in the minds of the people and the people expressed their great concern to the government to take measure that is appropriate to see that no such repetition of such a thing happens again.  So I would like the Minister to make a statement on this.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  First of all, I want to thank the Minister of State for Defence for his very frank and very informative statement about the situation in West Nile.  I wondered whether the Minister would agree with me that since this problem started, both in the North and in West Nile, that the Government has done its level best to bring the parties concerned to the table for discussions and has not left any stone unturned looking for peace and stability in this region.  Why is it that it has taken so long?  We have had from one hon. Member that he was one of the rebels, but he came back home and he has found peace, why have these people continued in the bush?

Mr Chairman, he was a refugee, I correct myself that -(Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I need to inform the House properly.  I said, I went into exile with Oris.  After l986 we were called to come back, most of the refuges in Sudan and Zaire returned, including me of course, I said, I was. Unfortunately, Oris did not come, I said, we were refugees not rebels.  But he remained behind and he formed rebel activity.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I fully appreciate the correction by my hon. Friend who has corrected that he was a refuge not rebel, I regret the slip of the tongue, that I put him among the rebels.  Nevertheless, the point is very well made, that he came back from a sanctuary outside the country and he has enjoyed peace like most of us and his people remained behind.

Mr Chairman, the point I want to bring is that, under our new Constitution, power has been put into the hands of the people, political power and military power.  What I do not hear in the statement of the Minister is what are the local leaders; the RCs and Members of Parliament doing?  One Member did mention that there is lack of logistics on the foot.  If there are to be logistics on the foot, this has to be provided by local leaders, particularly leaders like Members of this august House, RCs and so forth.  I am told by my Friends in Busoga, that the reason that Lakwena failed to pass through Jinja is because, the local leaders, the RCs and Members of this august House, were determined that she would not do so.  So, I would want the Minister to elaborate further what role, what effective role if any, has been played by the local leaders, by the Members of this august House, by the RCs, in order to deny these people with their allies from the Sudan sanctuary and also putting in our beloved country. Could the Minister elaborate on that?

MR MORO  (Koboko County, Arua):  Thank you for finally giving me this opportunity to ask my supplementary questions. I would like to thank the Minister for giving that information to the House.  Why I said, our forces might have failed was because, the war or the fighting or the problems started some time last year, possibly in august and they were only two parishes which were affected.  But now, there are more than seven parishes which are affected and more than 14 Primary schools closed and I think very soon, the number may increase.  That is why I said, it had failed, because, it started as a small thing, but it is now expanding. 

Mr Chairman, the questions I would like to ask, therefore, are three supplementary issues.  

One of them is, the people in those seven parishes have been displaced and I would like to inform you the issue of saying, people go back to collect food stuffs is out, in fact, people do not go beyond Keri now, that area is out of bounds.  Therefore, these displaced people do not go back to collect food stuffs.

Secondly, I would like to inform that as the shelling continued, when a bomb drops near you, you have no time to collect whatever possession you have.  These people have lost all their property and I am happy to hear that in some areas, where such things happened, people have been at least assisted.  I would like to know whether the Minister has planned to assist these displaced people, because they lost most of their belongings.

True; I was there for a week touring the areas where the displaced people were, they really are suffering, they are miserable. If I say it myself, Mr Chairman, the Minister may not be in position to see the picture clearly. I would like to know from him, if he is prepared to go with me, either tomorrow or next Tuesday, so that both of us could go and see the situation on the ground and Mr Chairman, as a Representative of the people, I think I will be wrong if I do not tell you exactly the picture of what is happening.  Although West Nile Front came, the root cause of these problems started because of not informing people properly.  Some of us think that we can be liked because we feed the Government with lies and if we continue to feed Government with lies, Government will think that the information is correct and at the end, it will be the Government to be blamed.  But if we tell you the truth, perhaps, you will be prepared to use the right methods.

Mr Chairman, my people have been complaining to me, that some of these causes of the problems were mainly Kony and Garang and they say, some of these refugees who have come to Uganda, particularly the tall ones, they come and they are refugees, but sometimes to go back to Sudan carrying -(Interruption)

MR ABU BAKER MAYANJA:  Point of order. Mr Chairman, there is a limit to which this House can tolerate the flouting of its rules and orders.  Is it in order for hon. Moro to use the pretext of raising a supplementary question, to make a long statement to this House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You see, hon. Members, I have been in this House since 1989 and I know some of my Colleagues here.  Some of them are definitely difficult and that is why earlier I had thought that we could give chance to others and some Members thought I was not being fair to my brother here, hon. Moro.
Hon. Moro, do not turn this into a debate, just put you elucidatory question and stop there.

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, in that case, I think I will keep that one, I will come and discuss with the Minister himself in his office; so the few questions I think I can ask.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and I would like to thank Members who have spoken for their appreciation of the situation at our border - their positive appreciation of that situation.  I will answer all the questions where a question is not repeated. 

The first question was from hon. Adonia Tiberondwa, representing Igara West County.  The question was, I am rephrasing it, would Government consider holding peace talks with the bandits in the North and the Government of the Sudan?  And the simple answer is that, we have held - we have made every effort to discuss our political situation in this country will all the parties that were involved in the past.  You know, we have used all sorts of methods to persuade people that Uganda is now peaceful, Uganda is big enough to accommodate everybody and those, as hon. Asiku, later on, says that they did not come back, must have had a reason other fear of political persecution for not coming back.

In the past, Mr Chairman, political power was taken or lost through all sorts of methods including use of arms. This era which took this country 25 destructive years, fortunately has come to an end.  We are now in the era of constitutionalism, power is taken according to rules that the people have determined themselves.  Therefore, it would be a grave error, it would be the greatest act of undermining this new political order if each time a bandit took up arms, Government was to get out of the way to go and negotiate with them to bring them into the political main stream.

Mr Chairman, I have explained to this House and to many other people that what we are facing now, are actions of bandits, they are acts of banditry.  I have heard some of the Members refer to these people as rebels.  They are certainly not rebels.  A rebel is someone who fights for a cause; he is someone who fights for a good political cause.  A bandit is someone who acts contrary to the law, for criminal intentions.  It does not matter the labelling bit, I am talking about the substance.  If you look at the Kony group, any one who cares to study that group, the few years they have been around, the actions they have been involved in, surely, no one can qualify their actions as a legitimate and a positive political cause, they are fighting for.  I do not want to repeat them, because, all of us know, they do not have a political programme, their actions are anti-people, so obviously, they cannot be qualified.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, and I thank the Minister for yielding the way.  Mr Chairman, when Obote II was in power, he used to call us NRM as bandits; we are also calling these people bandits, and the cause which we fought for that we want good democracy and elected Government.  But are we sure that those people, have we examined them and when did we sit at table with them to know that they are not bandits who would be flashed out of the bush?  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I of course do not follow the point raised by my hon. Friend, William Wanendeya; but the fact that someone labelled us bandits did not make us bandits.

Mr Chairman, the description one gives to any group arises out of the acts or the actions of that group.  When we wedged a people’s protracted struggle for restoration of democracy and sanity to this country, which I am glad we have been able to do, we, of the NRM, we never engaged in anti-people acts, we never cut anybody’s lips, we never cut any woman’s breasts, we never burnt ordinary people/civilians homes.  So, I hope hon. Wanendeya was not insinuating in any way that, our actions were comparable to the actions of these bandits of Kony; certainly, they were not!   

But Mr Chairman, what I was saying that, if as hon. Tiberondwa is suggesting, if we were to hold peace talks with these people, surely, we would have to have terms - grounds on which we each would represent our positions and that would mean that presumably, there would be some middle ground at which the two sides would compromise. What possibly could we comprise with a group like Kony?   The group that is engaged in anti-people activities, what do we say, that we allow a bit of their actions, we allow them in Government to cut off peoples lips, what possibly can we talk with them?  

So, in order not to undermine the constitutional which has now fortunately been re-established, we think it is not possible for us to have a negotiated settlement with any of these bandit groups.  But of course, the question of talking to the Sudan Government, I have told the Committee - I have appeared before the Sectoral Committee of this House, Chaired by hon. Adonia Tiberonda, I have forgotten its title, I think it is Office of the President and Foreign Affairs and I told them in very clear terms, that we have been willing and indeed we have engaged in talks with the Sudan Government and we are still willing and ready to talk to them in order to find a solution to the aggression they have subjected this country to.

Now, the second question was, can elections be held in this part of Uganda?  And my answer is yes.  If one is to be specific, the area which is in question, West Nile area, as I have told you is an area which is completely under the control of the UPDF.  It is true that the population in Rudara division has moved and they are not there and that is what I said and I named seven parishes as hon. Moro is saying, but there are inside Uganda, they are in Koboko, even if they do not go back to Rudara in this period, they will be able to vote.

In the case of the Kony bandits in Gulu district, it is true that if I may answer these questions, because, it was persistent in the questions that were raised by other people; it is true that the bandits of Kony still have a presence and they have engaged in acts of terrorism, sneaking into Gulu town and burning grass thatched houses, that is true.  But I would like to assure this House, as I have done many times before that this menace is a menace that is containable.  The problem raised by hon. Ongom that these people are on foot and that we should not give the excuse of high altitude for failing to get them, I think really is not a good point.  

We have stated many times before, that it is easy - you know here, in Kampala, I do not remember the figure of our police force; we have a huge police force in Kampala, but everyday, crime occurs on the streets and what do you say - I mean police was set up precisely because, it was anticipated that such crime would be committed and I cannot see a situation where such crimes will not be committed in future and indeed, there is no society, where such crimes have not been committed.  

So, the mere fact that 20 people can sneak into Gulu under concealment of darkness and ask cowardly by setting ablaze grass thatched houses cannot really be a conclusion, cannot lead to a conclusion that the UPDF has failed in its responsibility to pass by that group.  This group entered Uganda when they were about 800, I would like to inform this House, that the few times they have encountered the UPDF have been disastrous to them and in summary, as I speak today, more than 100 of them have been killed, corpses counted, 16 have been captured really, 72 have surrendered and in our opinion, close to 200 have been wounded.  Now, when you add up these figures, you find that more than 50 per cent of the team that came in, within a period of five to six weeks, has been reduced or disabled by 50 per cent.  Most of the weapons they came in with, have been captured.  So, it means that at this rate, 

Mr Chairman, given another few weeks, they will be finished; obviously, simple arithmetic and Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House, that because of that pressure, the leader of the bandit groups, Kony managed to sneak back into the Sudan.  Obviously, it was because of these serious losses that he went back, first of all, to save his life and hopefully to try to re-organise his supports from the Sudan and that is evidence enough that our UPDF has been inflicting heavy casualty on this group.  So, I have no doubt, Mr Chairman, that we will become May 9, we will be able to hold elections even in Gulu district where these people have been. The problem has been mobility, if I may repeat it.

MR ABU-BAKER MAYANJA:  Thank you very much.  I am grateful for the hon. Minister for giving way.  Is it not clear from what the Minister has said up to now, that really the answer lies with out improving the relation with the Sudan, because, we can finish Kony, then he goes and re-organises in Sudan; well, I mean these fighters - he sneaks back, re-organises until we really, we get the problem with Sudan, whatever it is, and it is a textbook, Elementary Knowledge in Diplomacy that whereas you can choose your friends, you cannot choose your neighbours.  These are our neighbours, they will always be there and it is our duty, and it is our responsibility and it is in our interest to establish good relations with them. Of course, it takes both sides, it takes two to dance a tangle, they must come and we must come. So, can he really tell us, for instance, whether they have talked with the Sudan Government since the breaking off of the diplomatic relations here, because, this is, as I said, Mr Chairman, the answer lies with the Sudan; so long as the Sudan remains hostile, we shall not solve this problem. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Mr Chairman, I could not agree with hon. Abu Baker Mayanja more.  I think the answer lies in persuading the Sudanese Government not to cause us these problems, because, we obviously have demonstrated that we have a capacity to deal with these problems inside Uganda and the problems recur because, these people run to the Sudan and they are retrained and re-armed by the Sudanese Government and every effort has been made to hold talks with the Sudan to discuss this matter, we have, as the country knows, held talks with them under the sponsorship of the Libyan Government, Colonel Gadaffi, we have held talks with the Sudanese Government under the sponsorship of the Chairman of the PTA, President Muluzi of Malawi, and as a matter of fact, since the break up of diplomatic relations, we have had contacts through the Malawi and the Minister for Foreign relations, with the Sudanese Government to see whether we could meet around a round table to resolve these problems peacefully and I agree with the point implied in what hon. Abu Mayanja is saying, that if peace talks fail, then obviously, we are not going to fold our hands, there has to be a way out and I would like to assure you, as I have said many times before, that Kony and his bandit group cannot always inflict this heavy toll on our people and run to the safety of the Sudan and live comfortably thereafter. I have said that the long arm of justice will find Kony wherever he is.

Mr Chairman, I would like to finish these points you asked me to - I think I have answered hon. Tiberondwa, I would like now to  -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, as a point of clarification in addition to what hon. Mayanja has said, will the Minister like to tell this House as to whether there is any foundation at all in the allegation that the Uganda Government is aiding Garang who is an enemy of the Government of Sudan, that - that might be the cause of the rift between the two Governments.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you for allowing me to give information to this House, through you.  Mr Chairman, it is not correct for anybody to imagine that the problem is between Uganda and the Sudan, it is not, it was wider than that.  The Sudan has problems with Uganda, the Sudan has problems with Eritrea, the Sudan has problems with Egypt.  So, Mr Chairman, for anybody stand here and over simplify the problem, by saying that if Uganda has an atonement with Sudan, the problems in the region will have been solved is totally mistaken, Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank hon. Mondo Kagonyera for effectively answering the point raised by hon. Tiberondwa.  

Mr Chairman, on the question raised by hon. Asiku, whether we could give money or we could make available money to the youths that run for mercenary reasons to join West Nile Bank Front, well obviously, I do not think - we cannot buy them back, certainly.  We have made it plain to them both through actions and through messages we have sent across that it will not be profitable for them to stay in the hands of West Nile Bank Front, of Kony and Sudanese Government and the 200 who crossed to Uganda on time, and were confronted by UPDF inside Uganda, those that survived, took the message that it will not be profitable for them to stay with UPDF fighting against the established Government of Uganda.

Hon. Okwera talked about compensation for victims of the Kony bandits.  It is true, Mr Chairman, that Government decided to pay what the Baganda call ‘Mabugo’.  It decided to contribute towards the funeral expenses of those that were killed in this convoy and to subsidise the medical treatment of those who are injured.  I am not aware that Government has taken a decision to compensate people for what they lost; all I know and what I stated in this House,  was that we had presented to Cabinet the possibility of helping those who had lost property in this attack on the convoy and that Government at that time, and even now, had not taken a position on it.  So, all I can say on this matter, is that, this convoy was a convoy that had been put in place by Government, by UPDF; it was the UPDF which gave the signal to the convoy to move, it was the UPDF that was supposed to give sufficient protection to these people against any attack.  Therefore, when the attack took place and people got injured and lost property, clearly, the Government, through the actions of the UPDF is liable for its actions and this should not be compared with criminals attacking some lawful persons on streets in Kampala and loosing property even life, because, although generally speaking, the Government is supposed to protect them, the acts of these bandits are acts which are unlawful and which I believe, Government tries its best to ameliorate where they have caused some injury, but I think the two situations are different.  

Mr Chairman, on the question of bandits who walk on foot, -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman. I am a bit confused by the Minister’s statement which seems to imply that criminal on a high way is different from a criminal  who operates in the villages and as I understand it, it is the business of Government, the responsibility of the Government to protect everybody, whether they are on a high way or at home.  So, what is the difference now, Mr Chairman?  The Minister has just made a statement here, that the Government takes responsibility because, they failed to protect the high way on which people were moving, but they will not be responsible compensating those or helping those whose homes are burnt, by the same criminals.  Mr Chairman, I am a bit confused, can the Minister sort of clarify, put me at ease on this?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Mr Chairman, I really do not think I have to make any more clarification on that matter, because, I think it is obvious to me, that the reason why we have the criminal court is to punish those that act criminally and I have not heard that Governments have been made to compensate for the actions of criminals, because Government was unable to present it.  I was saying, this was a specific case where Government clearly put people in a convoy, promised to protect them, asked them to move on the understanding that the road was safe, when it was not and they were attacked and there has been to be a clear distinction on that point. 

Mr Chairman, hon. Alphonse Kermu of Okoro County, says that his county, which borders Zaire was also used by some of these people who went to join West Nile Bank Front and he is asking me what measures we have taken to seal it off.  We have not taken any measure to seal it off, we do believe that political leadership of the area was taken unawares and by surprise and that is why these youths were able to filter through Nebbi, especially Okoro County to go to join the West Nile Bank Front, but now, with the awareness, I have not heard of reports of the recent past that there has been repeat action of youths going through and I attribute this to the awareness of the local leaders and the measures they have taken to prevent it.  

Hon. Kanyeihamba raised the question, what have the local leaders in these areas done about banditry and I would like to inform this House, that the local leadership has played a very active role in fighting banditry, especially in the West Nile Front, the people there are organised and they have totally rejected the West Nile Bank Front.  These people who are displaced from Ludara Division, actually had been lured to go to Zaire as refugees, but they have all refused, they have stayed in Uganda, although there were better facilities clearly ready for them by the UNHCR in Zaire, they refused and stayed in Uganda where they have less facilities and I think this, really is a sign of patriotism on the part of these people and clear leadership on the part of the local leaders.  

In case of Acholi, we have the Acholi Pacification Committee, Mr Chairman and they have held a number of meetings and a lot of leaders in this area, have obviously gone out of their way to mobilise people against the Kony bandits.  Of course, Mr Chairman and, therefore, as I have stated here before, the majority of people in Gulu district in Acholi generally do not support the banditry activities of Kony, they do not and that is why Kony abducts them, that is why he forces them to join him against their will, that is why he cuts the women, that is why he kills civilians, that is why Kony has been atrocious against his people.  So, the leadership there, generally speaking and the people almost universally, have rejected the activities of Kony.  I am using the word generally advisedly, because, of course, there are some leaders who do condone the activities of Kony and who do collaborate with the activities.

Mr Chairman, it amazes me, I said this here last time that it was important for the national leaders to make their positions clear on the activities of Kony and his bandits.  How can you aspire to be a President of this country, a situation arises where people are killed, houses are burnt, convoys are attacked and you do not show your position?  I asked hon. Adonia Tiberondwa to show his position, he stated it clearly.  I would like to ask people who aspire to higher positions than Tiberondwa to state their position on this matter.  Why are they quiet?  Why has hon. Ssemogerere not said anything about the activities of Kony?  Mr Chairman, I do not know the position of hon. Ssemogerere; as I said, I would not be surprised if he was against it, because, I have known him in the past to be - (Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister holding the Floor that, the office of hon. Ssemogerere, because we no longer use the IPC - the office of hon. Ssemogerere in Lubaga issued a statement signed by Mr Sekweyama condemning the Kony activities in the North and that was done not only on behalf of the cooperating political parties but also on behalf of hon. Ssemogerere who is at the helm of this cooperating groups.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  I know that the ex- hon. Sekweyama did issue a statement about this situation which was an ambiguous statement by the way. Mr Chairman, I know that there was  a line condemning the activities of Kony in that statement, but the greatest part of that statement heaped blame on NRM and the blame heaped on NRM clearly drowned the condemnation of Kony but that is not my point.  Hon. Ssemogerere as an aspiring President cannot afford to go through Sekweyama, a Deputy Assistant Organising Secretary in some office somewhere, to make a point for him.  I think hon. Ssemogerere ought to come out on this position and not give confusing signals.
Mr Chairman, these are people who have said, that because of the existence of Article 69, other methods will be used to bring about change.  Now, it is very, very confusing, Mr Chairman, -(Interruption) 

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of Order.  Could the Minister state exactly where hon. Ssemogerere’s supporters said that they would use other available methods to get the political situation put right?  Mr Chairman, the point over here is that, the Ministry over here - I have finished that order, I am adding to that order - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Cries of order.  Hon. Wanendeya, you ended up by spoiling the whole thing and therefore, you are just out of order.  Hon. Minister, please wind up.  We are taking too long on this matter.  Try to wind up.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  I have made my point on that one and I am really serious, I am very very serious on this matter. I would like to invite all Ugandans, especially those who are in leading positions, those aspiring to be leaders, to come out and equivocally, on this point, to state their stand.

MR OKWERA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I think it is very, very important for the IPC to come out with a clear statement on their position regarding the rebel activities - whatever they have changed their name to, Mr Chairman.

Mr Chairman, we have incidences.  In 1994, when we were going for CA Elections, the Kony group came out the way they have come now, and they were chanting DP oye, UPC oye, multiparty oye and at that time, none of these people came out to condemn that look, we are different multiparty groups, we are not associated with Kony and now, again, Mr Chairman, when we are heading for another election, the Kony people have come out the same way.  So, I am saying the Minister is right, unless these people who are advocating different system of Government from the Movement come out openly to condemn Kony, we in Acholi, have a right to associate with Kony.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I do remember during the Constituent Assembly, some delegates declined to condemn the rebel activity of Major Itongwa in Luwero area and other parts; they argued that they had not condemned Government activities, so they would not condemn Itongwa either. The hon. Minister has challenged all those aspiring to high positions of leadership to come out with a clearly stated position on the rebel activities in the North.  

This House, the last few weeks, has shown non-partisanship in condemning such activity.  We have no doubt that our other Colleague, hon. Ssemogerere will want to show his national colours and we know of course, he has been resting the last few days, to day or tomorrow, I believe, he is launching out his campaign.  Perhaps a word of thanks to the hon. Minister for reminding him that here is a way to catch more votes, let us wait and see and hear what he says, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, please wind up.  Order, we have taken too much time on this.  Hon. Minister, kindly wind up. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Thank you very much.  So, Mr Chairman, I think I have made that point about the role played by local leaders and expanded it by talking about the role of the national leaders or those who aspire to be.  

Finally, Mr Chairman, hon. Moro raised the question of relief for the more than 10,000 people that have been displaced from Rudara division and I would like to inform this House, that Government has taken a position on the matter to provide the basic items of relief and consequently cabinet has instructed the Ministry responsible for relief to act expeditiously to help these people, I hope this help is on the way.  

As to whether I can visit the people there, of course, I can, Mr Chairman.  As you know, as this House knows, the last time and I think it was last October or something like that, when these forces attacked Oraba, they crossed the border and occupied Oraba, I did visit the area, I did address a public rally at Koboko town and of course, unfortunately, hon. Moro was not there, because, then, we would have shared a platform to reassure our people about Government’s ability to protect them, but I am ready to go and if he is ready this time, I will take him along.  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA NURSES AND MID WIVES BILL, 1995


THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH  (Mr J. Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Nurses and Mid Wives Statute 1996 be read for the Second Time.  Mr Chairman, I wish to draw the attention of the House that with the new copy of the Bill, I do intend to draw the attention of the House, that the word Uganda will be dropped from the title among the Amendments, for the simple reason that this will be in line with the rest of the Bills which have been presented to the House. 

The Nurses and Midwives and Nursing Act, which a new Statute seeks to repeal and replace, first came into being in 1922.

Mr Chairman, the Nurses and Midwives and Nursing Assistants Act, which the new Statute seeks to repeal and replace, first came into being in 1922 as the Midwives Ordinance which provided for the practice of midwifery based on the Midwives Act of United Kingdom. The Ordinance underwent Amendments in 1926, 1927, 1933, 1941, 1950, 1951 and 1955.  In 1958, it became the Nurses and Midwives and Nursing Assistant Ordinance and acquired its present title in 1964 Revision of the laws of Uganda.  Since then, the Act has not undergone any Amendments nor has any subsidiary legislation been made under it.  Meanwhile, several changes have taken place in training of nurses and midwives in Uganda and internationally.  The training of Nursing Assistants was stopped and new categories of nurses, like Assistant Health Visitors, Public Health Nurses, Nurse Administrators, Tutors and comprehensive nurses were introduced.  

In 1993, the Ministry of Health in collaboration with the Kess Western Reserve University of United States of America and the Rock Feller Foundation started the Bachelor of Science in Degree a Nursing Course at Makerere University.  The pioneers of this course, who were senior nursing and midwifery practitioners spent two instead of three on the course, where amongst this year’s graduands. The object of the Nurses and Midwives Statute Bill before you, is to repeal and replace the existing Nurses and Midwives and Nursing Assistants Act with a view to streamlining the practicing, disciplining, supervision and control of nurses and midwives in Uganda.  The Bill will also provide for other matters related to the above.

The Statute intends to repeal and replace the Nurses Midwives and Nursing Assistants Act and provide for the training, registration and enrolment and discipline of nurses and midwives of all categories and other matters connected to the above.  The Statute is divided into eight parts with one schedule.  Among its salient features are:

1.  Establishment of the Nurses and Midwives Council as a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal and which may sue or be sued in its corporate name and subject to the statute, may do or suffer all other things and Acts, as Bodies Corporate do all suffer.

The functions of the Council shall be; to regulate the standards of nursing and midwifery in the country, to regulate the conduct of nurses and midwives and to exercise disciplinary control over them, to approve courses of study for the nurses and mid-wives, to supervise and regulate the training of nurses and mid-wives, to grant diplomas or certificates to persons who have completed the respective courses of study in nursing or midwifery, to supervise the registration and enrolment of nurses and midwives and publication of the names of registered and enrolled nurses and midwives in the gazette, to supervise and make recommendations to Government on matters related to the nursing and midwifery professions, to exercise general supervision and control over the two professions and to perform any other function relating to those profession or incidental to their practice.

Creation of a Secretariat to assist the Council in the carrying out its functions under the Statute headed, by a registrar as its Chief Executive Officer, providing for finances of the Council, providing for the regulation of private practice, licensing of private practitioners, and registration of health units, disciplinary provisions, providing for making of regulations by the Council with the approval of the Minister for the better carrying out of the provisions of the Statute and in particular, prescribing fees, prescribing applications forms, prescribing any other forms to be issued under the Statute, providing for the procedure of electing members of the Council, prescribing for the form of the register or roll to be kept under the Statute, prescribing for the form of application and other requirements for the registration or enrolment of a person under the Statute, prescribing of the examination that may be taken under the Statute, providing the curricula for courses of study and standards and grade of examinations, for the issue of a certificate or diploma under the Statute, prescribing any other thing that may be prescribed under the Statute, providing for the appointment of a supervisory authority, whose duty shall be to exercise general supervision over nurses and midwives in accordance with the rules made under this Statute, to investigate charges of malpractice, negligence of misconduct against the nurse or midwife and make a full report to the Disciplinary Committee of the facts and circumstances of the charge, to suspend from practice for a period not exceeding - there, we will be moving an Amendment to be in line with the other period of suspension which has been put in line with the other Statute, and to report to the Committee the name of any nurse or midwife convicted of an offence and the nature of the offense committed as soon as possible after the conviction comes to the knowledge of the supervisory authority.  Providing for offenses and penalties, the schedule provides for the seal of a Council, election of a Vice Chairman and meetings of the Council.

Title:

Since the training of Nursing Assistants was dropped, the title of the Statute has been amended to address itself specifically to nurses and midwives of all categories.

The Council:

The Council and categories of Nurses and midwives have been increased over the last 30 years.  It is necessary that the composition of the new Council reflects the situation.  However, the Council must be composed in such a way that it can function efficiently and effectively.  The Statute therefore, provides a Council of 16 members including a Chairperson, three of whom are to be ex-officio members.

Membership of the Council:

In the 1964 Act, the Minister for Health was empowered to appoint 12 persons to the Council of whom five should be registered midwives.  The new Statute proposes that the Minister only appoints the Chairman of the Council and that apart from the three ex-officio members, the 12 other members of the Council shall be elected representatives of the various interested groups of the Nursing and Midwifery professions.

The Council will also have one representative each of the medical and dental practitioners of Council and the Allied Professionals Council.  This is important to ensure a harmonious co-existence of key players in the delivery of health care and coordination of the control and regulation of their professional practice and conduct.

Private Practice:

During the period 1971 to 1986, Uganda experienced deterioration of the national economy, break down of the socio economic fabric, including health services, indiscipline, insecurity and violation of human rights.  This situation led to many health professionals including nurses and midwives to either leave the country or set up private practice in order to make ends meet.  This trend became worse in the early 1980 when the need to engage in extra duty activities in order to survive economic hardships coupled with a low morale, poor terms and conditions of service, general economic mal-practices and break down of law and order, led to an increase in operating clinics, drug shops and laboratory services throughout the country.

Nurses of all categories have hitherto not been allowed to engage in private practices, whereas midwives including those of enrolled level were permitted to operate maternity homes.  The Statute proposes to permit both nurses and midwives of all categories to engage in private practice within the limits of their professional training and under proper supervision.  In view of this, it is necessary that the Council takes all possible measures to control and effectively regulate private practice.

The Council will be responsible for approval and or rejection of application for private practice; for issuing licence with or without conditions; approval and registration of health units for private practice; their periodic inspection to ensure conformity with laid down standards and generally for our protection of patients and society from professional misconduct and elicit activities.  

To strengthen this supervisory roll, the Council will appoint a supervisory committee authorities in respect of any region District or a smaller area.  


Finances of the Council:

In 1964 Act, the Council was regarded as a section of the Ministry of Health, and these Budget and Finances were part of that Ministry.  Because of a new Council, it is easy to corporate to good body with its own independent systems. The Statute proposes the following sources of funds for the Council:

Money appropriated from Council by Legislature;

Grants and gifts and donations to the Council;

Fees and other monies paid for services rendered by the Council; 

Monies that may, in any manner become payable to or vested in the Council in pursuance of the Provisions of the Statute or in relation or incidental to the carrying out of its functions;

The Statute requires the Council to keep proper books of accounts and prepare annual financial statements of accounts; and

The annual accounts shall be audited by the Auditor General or an Auditor appointed by him or her;

The Council will be required within three months after the end of each financial year, to submit to the Minister an Annual Report containing:

One - Financial Statement;

Two - The Report of the operations of the Council; and

Three - Any other information that the Minister may direct in writing.

The Council is also required to submit to the Auditor General:

One; the Accounts of the Council for the Financial Year; and  Two - The Annual Report.

The Minister will in turn, lay before the Legislature, the copies of the Annual Report together with a copy of the audited accounts.  

The proposed amendments which have already been incorporated in the new copy are made to strengthen and streamline registration, training, professional conduct, ethics and private practice of nurses and mid-wives in Uganda.

Consultations about these proposed amendments have been made and continue to be made among members of the existing Council and nurses and mid-wives association, the private mid-wives associations, the Non-Government Organisation and International Agencies, Senior Members of my Ministry as well as Ministries of Local Government and that of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.  

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, I am pleased to present the Nurses and Mid-Wives Statute, 1996, to you and to request you to debate it carefully and expeditiously with the interests of the efficient and effective delivery of nursing and mid-wifely services and the protection of the patients and the society at large in general.  

Mr Chairman, at the appropriate stage, I will move an amendments of section 55 of this Bill so as to confirm to the Medical and Dental Practitioner’s Bill, 1996 which has been asked by this august House.  I would amend for this section to read as follows: ‘A person who commits an offence under this statute is liable on conviction to a fine of not less than Shs.300,000/= and not more than Shs.3m/=, or to a term of imprisonment not below three months and not more than three years or both’.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.  

MR BWANIKA BBAALE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, on behalf of the Sectoral Committee on Social Services, I would like to support this Bill.  Mr Chairman, the Committee went through the original draft of the Bill which had been presented before this House and made several amendments out of which caused the printing of a fresh Bill.  The old Bill has about 35 Pages and the new Bill has 34 Pages.  I think the Members should take note of this because we may have some confusion.

Mr Chairman, after discussing the two other Bills of the Ministry namely, the Bill on Medical and Dental Practitioner’s Bill, and the Allied Health Professionals Bill, this Bill will not be very, very difficult for Members to understand because the objectives are almost the same because it is giving the registration of nurses and providing for clear discipline and the training.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, this Bill is very straightforward and it is giving a little basis for the bulk of the health staff who are the nurses and mid-wives legal provision to operate.  

Mr Chairman, importantly in this Bill, this Bill provides for private practice as catered for under section 31 whereby a nurse who has served for not less than five years may apply to the Council for a licence to engage in private practice which has not been the case before and in order not to leave these people to operate alone, they need somebody to supervise them.  Under Clause 33, sub-Clause 3, the Bill says, ‘the Registrar shall not register in nurse or health unit or maternity home in the name of a registered nurse unless the Registrar is satisfied that there is a registered medical practitioner in the locality, which is very important.’  

So, for a nurse to get this licence to practice privately, there must be a medical practitioner in the locality who will supervise this health unit.  The nurses will be allowed to undertake, in the interest of a good practice and welfare of patients - ‘a nurse shall not carry out the procedures beyond common conditions and health problems which shall include malaria, cough, diarrhoea, common skin diseases, intestinal worms, immunisation and the rest.  These are the areas where they have been limited to do some private practice.  Anything beyond that one, I think the Law does not provide this.

Mr Chairman, the Minister has also said that he is going to make an amendment on Section 55 which deals with punishment.

Lastly, Mr Chairman, under section 5, sub-Clause 4, it should read, ‘no person shall be appointed a Member of the Council ...’  So, that word, ‘elected’ is not covered.  We just left it there because the Minister is going to appoint these people.  So, the provision of electing members of the Council does not apply.  

Mr Chairman, on behalf of the Sectoral Committee, I would like to recommend this Bill to be passed and as I said earlier on, this is the follow up of the other two Bills and I do not think the Members of this House will find it very very difficult because the idea is the same except that this one is now addressing the nurses and mid-wives.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

DR YYEKO: Mr Chairman, I do support the Bill.  As I said earlier when contributing the Allied Health Professional Bill some two weeks ago.  This kind category of staff still suffer from delay in payment of salaries, delay in confirmation in service and so on.  

Before I go to the Bill, Mr Chairman, let me make some few observations.
  
One; there are three categories of nurses and mid-wives; we have the enrolled nurses or mid-wives who wear pink; we have the registered nurses or mid-wives who wear white; then we have double trained who have gone for further training as mid-wives and then they go for extension as registered nurses or vice vasa.  The problem I have observed with this type of double trained people is that there is not corresponding increase in salary when you go for further training.  They almost earn the same, which is quite frustrating and demoralising.  The other observation which I want the Minister to convince me is that I do not know why male students are not trained as mid-wives, yet Doctors who are specialists in gynaecology and obstetrician the majority of them are males rather than being only females.

On the Bill, Mr Chairman, Clause 5 (a), ‘the chairperson of the Council shall be a registered nurse or mid-wife appointed by the Minister’. Well my query there is that we have registered nurses and midwives, then we also have double trained who are both trained as mid-wives or nurses.  So, I would want to add after the word, ‘mid-wife’ the word, ‘or both’ to include those who are double trained so that it should read, ‘a chairperson who shall be a senior registered nurse or mid-wife or both appointed by the Minister’.  This goes on similarly for Clauses like 11(i), 13(i).  Then Clause 5, 2 - it says, ‘the Members of the Council refer to in sub-section 1, shall be appointed by the Minister in consultation with association schools of nurses and so on.’ I think the Minister that should be Clause 1(c), because the ones of Clause 1(b) are X-Officials.  

The Minister need not consult them because they are by virtue of office.  Still in Clause 5, (c) (vi), it says, ‘The Council shall consist of one representative of the Uganda Private Mid-Wife Association’. In this Bill it proposes also to have nurses to join Private Practice.  So, I am proposing as in 31 (2) that nurses can also apply to become Private Practitioners.  So, I am proposing that we add another sub-Clause 10.

In Clause 20(a), it says, ‘A person holding any of the following qualification shall be eligible for registration or enrolment in the appropriate category to which the qualification relates.  (a) a Degree of Bachelor of Science in Nursing granted by a University established in Uganda by Law’.  While the objection I have there is that I think it is not the institution which is granted by Law which is important.  It should be the qualification which is important.  So, I am proposing that we delete, ‘granted by University established in Uganda by Law’ and replace it by ‘a Degree of Bachelor of Science in Nursing recognised by the Council’.  Because we can have Makerere University which is now training nurses and giving Degrees.  But the Degrees maybe of low standard and which the Council may not accept, for example, Ndejje, Nkozi Universities.  These Universities are not established by Law. 

Then seen in Clause -(Interruption)

MR NTIMBA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that although Ndejje and Nkozi Universities have not been established by an Act of Parliament or this hon. House, there are arrangements in place to ensure that all Universities are established in this Country other than those already established by Parliament, like Mbarara, Makerere and so on, to be recognized; they will have to be a National Council for High Education which will put in place arrangements to legalise new Universities and give them a charter.  So, we expected that in due course, Nkozi and any other subsequent Universities to be established.  With regard to this Statute, it is important and necessary that -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, is the Member implying that Universities which have been created other than by this House are illegal?  I am aware that some Universities have been created under the Company’s Act.  In which case they have powers to exist under that Act.  Are they also illegal?

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, they are not illegal, but I am talking about the future.  The future we streamline, and put in place, we bring into the Ministry of Education will bring into this House a Statute or a Bill for an Act of Parliament setting up a University’s Bill.  In the past, each University had its own Statute like ITEK and so forth before it could be illegalised.  But in future there will be one single Act which will cover all the Universities which have not hitherto been legalised by an Act of Parliament or Statute of NRC.  

DR YYEKO:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for the information given.  So, in other words, we pass this Bill and it becomes a Law until that Provision comes in. 

In Clause 31, 2, where it says, ‘a registered nurse needs to work for ten years in order to qualify to go for private practice.’ Clause 31, 1, accepts that, ‘a private mid-wife need only work for five years in order to join private practice.’ I do not know why there is that discrimination.  Whereas the two categories go for same year of practice.  The nurse has to go for ten years while the mid-wife only five years.  Even including an enrolled mid-wife.  

In Clause 33, 3 - It says, ‘the Registrar shall not register a Nurse Health Unit or Maternity Home in the name of a registered Nurse unless the Registrar is satisfied that there is a registered Medical Practitioner in the Locality who will supervise it.’  I have a complaint in the second line where it says, ‘shall register a Nurse Health Unit or Maternity Home in the name of a Registered Nurse’.  In this case, they have missed out the mid-wife because a Maternity Home is run by a mid-wife.  But here we only registering a nurse.  So, I am proposing that it should read, ‘a register shall not register a Nurse Health Unit or a Maternity Home in the name of a Registered Nurse/Mid-wife.’

Two; It says, ‘there must be a registered Medical Officer in the Locality to supervise the Unit.’ The questions I about this one is that I do not know what constitutes a satisfaction in that the Medical Officer shall supervise the Unit.  Is it mere presence of the Medical Officer in the District, in the area where unit is present?  Or has there to be an agreement between the Medical Officer and whether the other agreement is going to be oral or written?  How wide is the locality?

Three; How many units can a Medical Officer supervise?  I may be the only doctor in the whole District.

Four; Who ensures compliance by the Medical Officer?  He sees that I really go to supervise those units?  Is it the owner of the Health Unit?

Lastly, who pays the Medical Officer for the fees?

In Clause 35, 2 - It says, ‘in the interest of good practice and welfare of patients, a nurse shall not carry out procedures beyond the common conditions and so on and so forth.’  Still in the second line, after the word, ‘nurse’, they have missed out the word, ‘mid-wife’, yet the Bill talks about midwives.  I propose that after the word, ‘nurse’ they put ‘midwives’.  

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would request Dr Yeko to advise this House what would be the roll of a mid-wife under this; why he wants the mid-wife to be included under Clause 35, sub-section 2, where we are dealing with malaria, cough, diarrhoea.  What would be the roll of a mid-wife?

DR YYEKO: Thank you very much.  First, is that all these conditions also occur in pregnant women.  All these cases listed here also happen in any pregnant woman.

Secondly, I want to propose to delete all of those conditions which are listed.  They are irrelevant in this section.  

After adding the word, ‘mid-wife’, I propose that we delete all these conditions which were listed here and we just handle it the way we had handled the Allied Health Professionals Bill.  I remember very well, hon. Abu Mayanja, who has gone, had wanted to have some limits of the extent of the Allied Health Professional workers, but we said, no.  It is up to the wisdom of the Health worker to judge what condition and up to what level he can handle.  So, I am proposing to delete all those conditions which are listed because, for example, the word, ‘malaria’ in the presence, it is a nurse handling.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, I am getting a bit concerned about the procedure of the hon. Member because in one area, he is asking for detailed information to be put in this Statute and in another area, he is asking for details to be deleted.  I feel that if we are going to be economic on time in this House, hon. Members like my Colleague should have participated actively when this Bill was circulated to come out with these typographic errors and leave Members who have substantive points to be made in other areas to come out and mention them.  I feel that if we are going to go through some of these routine details which hon. Abu Mayanja was referring to, we are going to spend a very long time here.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR YYEKO: Mr Chairman, I do not actually agree with the Minister.  Okay, in any case under this List, the Bill has kept silent about the limits of a mid-wife.  It has not told us whether the mid-wives can handle bridges, and others.  It is only talking about nurses.  If we are going to say that nurses shall limit themselves only to cough, cough can be anything.  It can be T.B., and so on and so forth.  

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I think he should not be persuaded by the Minister to stop the line he has taken, of wanting to delete those items, because I can see that he is beginning to lose ground on his original argument because of the Minister’s intervention.  It seems to me although I am not a Doctor, that when you use the words as described in Clause 35 (2), ‘in the interests of good practice, and welfare of patients, a nurse shall not carry out procedures beyond common conditions and health problems which shall include.’ That means that by saying that ‘which shall include’, it means that there are others which are not included but these ones are being mentioned.  So, in fact by listing them you are not limiting anything because you are automatically saying that there are others they can do but they shall also include diarrhoea, cough, malaria and the rest.  So, I think we should stop at ‘beyond common health conditions.’  Maybe the Minister could clarify better before our Friend loses ground.  Thank you.

DR YYEKO: I thank the hon. Member very much.  So, I was proposing that we delete this as I have seen that by specifying this, it needs a lot of other conditions which the nurses or mid-wives will handle.  So, after including the word, ‘in any case of the good practice and welfare of patients, a nurse/mid-wife shall not carry out procedures beyond common conditions and health problems.’  Then we delete all that is listed and add, ‘... and continue and shall refer all cases beyond his or her ability to Medical Practitioner’.  So, it is up to the wisdom of the health worker, be it a nurse or mid-wife, to judge what is beyond his or her ability and refer all other cases to registered Medical Practitioner.  With those remarks, Mr Chairman, I do support the Bill.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: With this we come to the end of today’s Session.

(The Council rose at 4.35 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3rd April 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)

