Thursday 5th April, 2001

Parliament met at 2.21 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

MR MUSUMBA: I want to seek the guidance of the Speaker on a certain procedural matter.

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedural matter?  Let us hear it.

MR. MUSUMBA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. The day before yesterday I did chair a Committee session in keeping with the mandate, my Committee had to consider a loan request from the Ministry of Finance for units of accounts seven million which is equivalent to about ten million dollars for Ministry of Works. A number of particulars were given. We discussed these in the Committee and the Committee made some recommendations in which, it was sought the Minister should go and bring clarification to the Committee.

Mr. Speaker, I was very surprised, even shocked that the next day which was Wednesday, an article appeared in the newspaper of The Monitor on page six saying, “MPs have rejected a 7.5 billion road loan”, and that the loan which was being sought was supposed to include “107.2 kilometres of Karuma-Pakwach-Nebbi-Arua highway and the 162 kilometre of Katunguru-Kasese-Fort-Portal-Kilembe and Kilembe and equator roads.”   At no point in the course of the Committee did we discuss Karuma-Pakwach-Arua highway.  At no point did we discuss a loan to finance this particular road sector nor the Katunguru one, nor the Kilembe one.  

Therefore, I am perturbed and I seek guidance from you ,Mr. Speaker. When we sit in the Committee and we have deliberations and these deliberations go out in the Press or in the public in a manner that is distorted and is not accurate, they are bound to cause confusion. Because recently, Government did conclude a contract to make the Karuma road and the financing has been a subject of the meeting of the Committee the day before yesterday.  This may cause confusion. 

Therefore, I was seeking guidance from this House, in a situation like that, how am I supposed to proceed?  How am I supposed to relate the Committee activity to the main House and what goes out in the public for the avoidance of distortion?  I seek a procedural guidance Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well hon. Member, I do not think we can really do much. But what I know is that I believe the proceedings of your Committee are open to both Members of the public as well as the Press. Is that not so?  If that is the case, my advice would be that when you read in the Press a statement attributed to your Committee, you should be in a position to correct it using the same mechanism in the hope that they will oblige.

Otherwise, that was really about the proceedings of the Committee, which of course later on will affect whatever you will send here.  It is either that or the Minister responsible can call the Press and say what the Committee is reported to have stated or the position which is reported to have been taken by the Committee is not the correct one. I think that is the only way you can go about it. Maybe you can call a Press conference.  The very same people will report and say look, you misquoted us or you misreported us.

MR. RUZINDANA: What about our Public Relations Department? If the Chairman of the Committee gives information to this department, can they not issue a statement that the Committee was misquoted?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is another way.  But I think with this, you need to come promptly in order to catch the ears or the eyes of those people who were initially fed with the information that you are now disputing.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr.Andruale Awuzu): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I am glad the Chairman of this Committee has brought this point up because I saw this article in the paper and it made me worried very much. Because you remember that during the last campaigns for the Presidential elections, the question of construction of this road was a major issue in the West Nile region.  Then immediately after the elections, the people are misinformed that –(Interruption).

MR. MUSUMBA: I rise on a point of order Mr. Speaker. I have sought clarification from you, Mr. Speaker.  Is it in order for the Minister to bring in issues of last campaigns and so on, which are not a subject of my initial submission?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I was about to intervene. The Chairman sought advice as to how they could proceed in the light of the fact that their proceedings are being misreported. And my advice is, either the chairperson of the Committee counteracts the misreporting or the Minister on reading that article would then call a Press conference and counteract it. As it is now being suggested and quite rightly by our colleague the hon. Member Ruhama, Ntungamo District that, our PRO also could take it up from there, I think it is possible to give more accurate information.  

So hon. Minister, I think let us confine to that and I know you have stood in good spirit to thank your colleague for raising the issue. But why do we not stop there?

MR. AWUZU: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I do not think I am supposed to stand up here and say one plus one is equal to two, because before I say what I want to say I thought I am supposed to give a background of why I am saying such a thing.  Anyway, since you have ruled that, I wanted to actually give the main reasons why I think it is very good that he has raised this point. Because it is a very important issue, but since I am not been allowed to substantiate my information, I thank him very much for noticing this very important matter and hope that he will follow its logical conclusion. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: I also thank the hon. Member for raising the issue. 

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker –(Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: Are you on the same point?

MR. NYAI: Yes, just on a different angle to it, Mr. Speaker –(Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: I thought we have disposed it off. The Minister has sought from a Chair a clarification, which is given, is there anything left on this particular issue?

MR. NYAI: Yes Mr. Speaker, I was just putting it slightly differently that, the people who yearn, wish and pray for that road have a heart which other Ugandans should think about –(Interruption).

MR. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  I have categorically made it clear in the manner in which I sought your intervention, that this is not political roads or political pledges. The roads that were being referred to are roads that include Katunguru, Kasese, Fortportal roads; Kirembe and Equator road; Karuma-Pakwach-Nebbi road – it is a host of roads, which were reported in a newspaper, not a particular road.  Mr. Speaker is it in order for a Member to isolate one road and seek to intervene on that matter which is sectarian in the angle. Is it in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, this is not a matter really for discussion! I have given a clarification, and that is it, hon. Dick Nyai let us leave it at that.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister to whom this question is directed. Is there any other Minister who will answer for the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development?

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr. Speaker, this matter that I rise on is on the manner the Executive is handling business of this House. This question was put on the Order Paper, definitely in consultation with the Leader of Government Business. I do not see as to why the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is not here with a prepared text to answer a question that has been raised by an hon. Member of Parliament, within our Rules of Procedure and notice was given to the hon. Minister. 

 On a matter of procedure, Mr. Speaker, I would like this House to take this matter very seriously and to see to it that, we give a communication of the disgust of the hon. Members who are Backbenchers – to and through the Leader of Government Business to ensure that Ministers take matters of this nature with serious concern. 

MR. MUSUMBA:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I want to add to what my hon. Friend, Capt. Mike Mukula, has just said. Among the people who come late most in this House – first of all, among the people who come in time are you, Mr. Speaker, and the Leader of Government Business hon. Prof. Nsibambi and myself. And among the people who come late are the people on the Front Bench!!  

Mr. Speaker, how shall we continue in this House debating matters relating to this Government if Members of the Front Bench for whom these messages are intended come late, long after their leader has arrived?

MR. NYAI. Mr. Speaker, I find it very, very hard to agree with what hon. Mike Mukula has said and what my good Friend is just saying, because we are passing judgement without hearing the other side. I think, Mr. Speaker, would it not be the correct procedure that you get from the Ministers, who are supposed to answer questions why they are not here and then this House can proceed.  Instead of us jumping the gun and start blaming people. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Dick Nyai, the fact is that questions have been put on the Order Paper; the Minister or Ministers concerned are not here!  I think the hon. Members are entitled to wonder why and then other detailed things can be discussed!  

MR. NYAI: No, Mr. Speaker, what I was saying was whereas it is true the question was asked and the Ministers knew they were asked, and the ministers are not here, I believe procedurally the Speaker, should get a clarification from the Ministers where they were, before we condemn them.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I appreciate hon. Dick Nyai is trying to be an advocate for the Executive, I think –(Interjections.)- Yes, I said I appreciate and I would like to convey my appreciation through you to hon. Dick Nyai for his advocacy for the Executive, when they have not endeavoured at all to show cause; but we shall take that in its own stride.  What I am trying to reach at the way of information, this particular question was presented even when we were in recess; to caution the Minister to avail us the earliest opportunity to ask these vital question, and if we had asked them, you would see how vital they are.

Now I want, following what hon. Musumba was saying to you, to ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether, if a question like this has been put on the Order Paper and the authorities have been appropriately informed, we are not right to think that there is contempt of the House not to present themselves to answer these questions.  Would this be a deliberate attempt on their part to ignore the procedures of Parliament to come and answer? 

All we are doing is calling the Executive to account and this is our constitutional right, our constitutional duty and our historical mission. Why should we be denied that right and that prerogative to exercise our right?  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister, as Leader of Government Business, shares that responsibility and he is the leader to take this responsibility squarely, Mr. Speaker.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to appreciate hon. Dick Nyai’s new position but I am seeking two clarifications.  First, we used to have in the Order Paper printed matters to follow. It serves some useful purpose to keep us prepared on what is coming. I do not know whether the Business Committee or your office found that it was serving no purpose, but I would appreciate if we could continue to do that so that we really know what is coming.  

Then my second clarification, Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to raise it over the microphone, I have a motion pending for a very long time now on graduated personal tax, which does not seem to be coming. When do Members know whether their motions will come or will not come and so on, because you know silence like that keeps us really in great suspense and we do not know what to do with those who want to support that motion. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is true there is a motion, which was received from the hon. Okulo-Epak quite some time back, related to the question of generating consensus or a policy on whether to continue levying the graduated tax.  That is the one you are talking about. Well, I do not know exactly why it has not come but it is possible that maybe my office lost touch with you. There are motions, which are more recent, and we have been in touch with the proponents and we intend to put some of them on the Order Paper next week. But now that you have raised the issue, I am sure the matter is well taken and we will attend to it.  Is that okay?  

MR. KYEMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who have expressed their concern about the inability or unavailability of Ministers to answer questions on the Floor of this House. The questions that Members bring here are normally matters of very grave concern to the people we represent and the questions on the Order Paper today of which we can get no answer are no exception. 

 You remember, Mr. Speaker, indeed that for quite some time back, this House was at pains when considering the question of electric power generation in this country. We had almost to sit over weekends. When it comes to a position now where we cannot even get answers, it is certainly a matter of very grave concern to us. The question of electricity co-generation is also affecting a number of farmers in the district I represent, which depends on growing sugarcane for economic development.  

When I note, that the Minister who is in charge of this sector is not available to answer these very vital questions on which the economy of this country depends, I am actually very much concerned. And since there is collective responsibility in these matters, I find it rather strange that we can go on when actually the position can be clarified, since it is only the Backbenchers who are speaking and nobody on the Front bench has offered any explanation and I find it rather strange, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWUZU: Thank you Mr. Speaker. When I stood up to speak I did not say I was going to speak on behalf of Government and, therefore, Members should not try to stop me from saying what I want to say. I am not arguing about the question now that there is no Minister here to answer these questions. 

What I am saying is that I disagree with hon. Musumba in his sweeping statement when he comes here and says always Ministers are not here, he is always on time, Backbenchers are always on time and yet on this particular occasion when he was speaking there were more that ten Ministers on the Front bench here, which is one sixth of the number of Ministers. And at that time there were less than 30 Backbenchers here, which is less that one eighth of the House. So, can hon. Musumba let us know one sixth and one eighth which is bigger?  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I do not want us to degenerate into a debate, which is not going to help us. I can see that the House seems to be desirous to hear from the Leader of Government Business. So I will give him an opportunity to do that but before he does, I would like to confirm the position as far as my office is concerned that the decision to defer answering or giving answers to the questions, which are now before the House, it was at the request of the Ministry responsible for this sector and that is why the questions came in today.  

I also wish to confirm that the Ministry was aware that these questions could come today and I would like also to confirm that the Minister of State in that Ministry came to my office and it was confirmed to him that these questions were on the Order Paper. But even apart from today’s conversation, it was at the request at the other time that these questions should come up today.  That is the position as far as the office of the Clerk and my office are concerned.

THE PRIME MINISTER  (Prof. Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, it was deliberate on my part to keep quiet for some time because the way I was brought up, people have to perform –(Applause)- people have to perform and if they do not perform they must face the consequences.  And therefore, I get greatly disheartened when that very important principle is not adhered to, but there are laws of justice namely, that before we judge others we must listen to their cause as to why they are not here. 

It is only proper that I must find out the calamity and it must be a calamity –(Laughter)- which has befallen of this Ministry because there is a senior Minister and a Minister of State who if they are unable to come they should have communicated not only to the Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs, but also to the Minister for General Duties. We have the Speaker, and of course, I should have started with the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker so that we know how to handle the problem.  That is why I am greatly stressed and perplexed by the Minister’s failure to be here.

 Under the circumstances, I can only apologise on behalf of my colleagues and say that I shall find out why this matter has taken the course it has taken and needless to say, I shall take appropriate curative actions.  I thank you.

MR.MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities):  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I wish to ask the following question to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Would the Minister inform this House as to how many people with disabilities have benefited from the ‘Entadikwa Credit Scheme and the Youth Employment Scheme from the time of commencement of those schemes to-date, district by district.  What measures if any is the Minister taking or intends to take to increase the participation of people with disabilities in these schemes, if the participation is not adequate?

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take it that I will ask one question at a time because I have got three questions.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, maybe that will be convenient because there are quite a number, let us deal with (1).

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS)  (Mrs. Nayiga.Sekabira): Mr. Speaker, as you have heard hon. Mwandha, MP for people with disabilities Eastern Region, seeks an answer on the question as presented by himself. I wish to submit as follows; by June 30th 1997 a sum total of Shs.92 billion had been released and disbursed to 214 counties or constituencies throughout the old 45 districts to implement Entandikwa Credit Scheme.  The Ministry of Finance stopped the release of funds to the Entandikwa Scheme Program in June 1997. 

It is important for this august House to note that the total loan portfolio as by September 1998, was Shs.9,300,840,000. The administrative costs of the scheme constitute Shs.615,600,000. Mr. Speaker, the beneficiaries of the Entandikwa Credit Scheme total up to 39,200 of which 587 were people with disabilities. Unfortunately, dis-aggregated data per district is not available, however, is must be appreciated that as some beneficiaries retire their loans other new clients join the scheme.

Mr. Speaker, gender distribution of Entandikwa Credit Scheme beneficiaries as by September 1998 is as follows; gender categories men 14,056 benefited and that is a percentage of 34.6, women were 13,244 that is 33.7 percent. Youth were 11,313 that is 30.5 percent, people with disabilities were 587 that is 1.2 percent; the total number is 39,200 beneficiaries for that year. 

The Entandikwa Secretariat is planning a national wide survey to establish the actual number of beneficiaries of the Entandikwa Credit Scheme; this survey is expected to generate adequate and up to date data for the scheme particularly as regards the men, women and people with disabilities who have access to the funds.  

Regarding the YES Scheme or the Youth Entrepreneurs Scheme which targets graduates of universities and other tertiary institutions, the Ministry has taken deliberate steps to avail training opportunities to people with disabilities. In September 2000, the YES programme contributed, Shs. 5,630,000=, towards the training of 28 youths with disabilities in business skills development.  A similar amount has been earmarked to support the training of youths with disabilities in Eastern Uganda which hon. James Mwandha represents.  

The National Union of disabled persons of Uganda together with other district authorities are currently mobilising and identifying people with disabilities, for this business scheme training.  Similar training will be held for the remaining regions.  

Information of the YES programme has been provided to all youth councils and district authorities particularly the office of the RDCs, Chief Administrative Officers, Chairpersons LC.V and Chairpersons District Youth Councils for all persons in the districts to access.  

As indicated in a table which I will have to circulate later on, 1,255 youths have benefited from the loans from the YES Programme, totalling up to Shs.566,050,000=.  I wish to inform the hon. Members that every youth has access to Shs. 450,000= as seed capital at the interest rate of 16 per cent.  Of the total youth recipients, 28 are youth with disabilities who have accessed the loan portfolio up to Shs. 12,600,000=

Mr. Speaker, I have a table that shows youth with disabilities beneficiaries who have already accessed to the YES Fund at districts.  The Government is currently in consultations on the modalities of establishing a co-ordinated mechanism, for efficient and effective delivery of micro-finance services to all persons in the communities at the sub-county and parish levels, by all players in the micro-finance sector.   Emphasis will be put on specifics targeting of micro-finance services to people with disabilities, women, youth, the elderly and other interested groups. 

The list I have of people with disabilities, the 28 who benefited came from different districts of Uganda, we have people from Pallisa, Tororo, Mpigi, Busia, Kamuli, Mpigi, Arua, Jinja/Iganga, Bushenyi, Kamuli/Gulu, Kitgum, Mbale, Rukungiri, Kamuli/Mukono/Jinja, Ntungamo/Kampala and Kabale. 

This is what I can submit Mr. Speaker, at the moment and the Ministry is ready to give a copy of this list to hon. Mwandha, so that he can easily follow up those members from his constituency to ensure that they properly utilise the loan and that they are able to pay back at the right time. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha just for my own knowledge, the hon. Minister in her response to your question makes reference to YES Programme, YES Fund. Now, do I understand that to mean what appears in the question, as Youth Employment Scheme is the same thing as YES Programme, is it the same thing as the YES Fund or is it something else?  Some people call it - is it the same thing as Youth Entrepreneurship Scheme?  What are we talking about?  Is it Youth Employment Scheme or is it Youth Entrepreneurship Scheme?  I am reading your question here.

MR. MWANDHA: The word YES, represents I think the official title, may not necessity the title and the question, which is Youth Entrepreneur Scheme.  But am I allowed to answer a supplementary question?

THE SPEAKER:  Oh yeah, that was for me. You see I have heard these things elsewhere about YES Scheme, and then people talk of Youth Entrepreneur Scheme, I thought it was that one, but in your question it is Youth Employment Scheme.  

MR. MWANDHA: Your observation, Mr. Speaker is correct, it should be Youth Entrepreneur Scheme.  So -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: So can you amend that bit accordingly, because many of you might wish to ask supplementary questions?

MR. MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Right Mr. Speaker, can the Minister explain why so few disabled persons as compared to the rest of the beneficiaries of Entandiikwa, have benefited; and therefore, can she inform the House as to what measures she or her Ministry are taking to ensure more participation of persons with disabilities?  With regard to the Youth Entrepreneur Scheme, she mentioned the number of districts, some districts were not mentioned, could she inform the House why some districts are not covered by this Scheme?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

DR.OKULO EPAK:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Could the hon. Minister now or later tell us what is the comparative rate of recovering these loans from people with disabilities compared to the others? I think it is important to know their ability and capacity to repay the loan. 

My second question is, in the opinion of the hon. Minister, could we not really give priority to persons with disabilities in these schemes, so that they are given priority and the number which is worrying my colleague hon. Mwandha does not become an issue. Because in the actual population even the people with disability may be a very small proportion; but I think they should be given priority in that when people are queuing for these loans, the priority should be given to persons with disability because they are the least disposed to getting such facilities elsewhere.  I thank you.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have two supplementary questions. Whereas the Ministry responsible for Gender Labour and Social Development, is handling the issue of youth Entrepreneur Credit Scheme, Entandikwa Credit Scheme was originally the preserve of the Ministry of Finance; so with Poverty Alleviation Programme and so was with Rural Farmers Scheme.  Could the Minister tell us as to whether or not people with Disabilities have also been integrated to benefit from this other four poverty alleviation related programmes?

Is the hon. Minister aware that the implementing authorities of these schemes at district level, do not take interest to ensure that women, youth and people with disabilities do benefit from these schemes proportionately. Is she aware?  I thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: To be followed by hon. Margaret Baba Diri.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, to strengthen the point moved by hon. Okulo Epak noting that there is scarcity of funding in Uganda – Uganda is one of the poorest countries in the world. Why does Government not concentrate, why does Government not focus on the disabled people, so that we find the alternatives for those who are able to work?   That is question number one.

Two, the answer given by the hon. Minister in reply to the question raised by hon. Mwandha focused specifically on the year 1997. I would like to know why recent years are not referred to, because in my constituency which is part of Lubaga Division, I have never heard Entandikwa scheme given to the young people.  They are always coming to my office and I have never heard anybody telling me he has received Entandikwa.

Three, assuming that the Entandikwa Scheme for the youth is operational, is it interest free and how sustainable is it?  It is one thing to give us figures in regard to 1997. Could you assure this House that the Scheme is operational and is sustainable? Thank you very much, indeed.

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask the hon. Minister two questions. One I am aware that this poverty alleviation funds go to the district, what measures are in place to ensure that Local Government provide this money to persons with disability?

The second question, we have got various categories of disabilities. We have the blind, the deaf, mental retarded. Can the Minister explain how many of these different categories benefited from what she has said?   Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Now, let us give her the opportunity you see there are still two other major questions she has left.

CAPT. MUKULA (Soroti Municipality, Soroti):  Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to find out from the Minister the implementation of the Entandikwa scheme and the money which was allocated way back in 1997, when it stopped.  When did the Ministry carry out the last evaluation to see that the core concept of this project  - implementation of the project has achieved its focus.

What is the future of the YES Scheme in terms of the resources that have been allocated, because the YES Scheme initially was focused and had targeted the youth emerging from the University. What is the future in terms of the future resource allocation and its focus?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, as soon as you are ready, you have the Floor.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Mrs. Nayiga Sekabira):  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Members for the supplementary questions raised and I am going to endeavour to answer some of them and those that require papers to be presented, then those will be referred to the department directly responsible for Entandikwa Credit Scheme and the Minister will come with comprehensive answers to those questions.

To begin with, there is the question on why few people with disabilities benefited compared to the other youth that, is in the YES Scheme or Youth Entrepreneurs Scheme.  It is true that we people with disabilities we are 10 per cent of the population. However, I take note of the fact that even those who have received do not amount to 10 per cent of the youth who are supposed to benefit.

There are some issues that had earlier on not been attended to for example, the trainings were not supposed to be residential. The resources that had been earlier on provided could not cater for residential seminars or training courses. So, the youths were always commuting from home to come and attend these courses.  However, the Ministry had to find ways of ensuring that people with disabilities, especially the youth do not lose out completely and we had to work with our partners or stakeholders, that is NUDIPU to look for additional resources to ensure that we organise residential training for the youth, such that they could access the YES Entrepreneur Scheme.

It was not possible to get enough resources. Youth with disabilities had to have residential courses because it was difficult for them to commute from home and be in time to attend the course. So, right now, we are working at ensuring that we have enough resources to ensure that they all have residential courses. There are other costs that go along with such payment, we need to have sign language interpreters and they have to be paid.  This had not earlier on been planned for.  So, it is important for us to note that though the number that has been trained is not satisfactory compared to the percentage of the youth with disabilities, some work is being done and those unique concerns of people with disabilities are being attended to.  

So, the future plans I have already mentioned in my answer that, we are planning to organise other regional workshops. The first workshop was organised here in Kampala, we had to get those youths who had applied, who had come to my office and NUDIPU offices looking for the loans. We got them together and they got trained in Kampala. But we are now working on organising regional training workshops so that more youths with disabilities access to this entrepreneur scheme funds.  

Another question has been why some districts are not represented and others are represented. As I explained earlier on, the youths that came first and applied for the loan were attended to. But the future plan is to ensure that we organise at regional level such that all districts are represented and that youths from the different districts benefit from the Youth Entrepreneur Scheme Funds. 

Hon. Okulo Epak is concerned about the ability of people with disabilities to repay the loan. Hon. Okulo Epak, Uganda Government is committed to build and empower all members of its population. People with disabilities have the rights and they are entitled to benefit and utilise the remaining abilities they have to compete in the open market. What matters is the provision of the right resources and the building of their capacity to do so.  So, when people with disabilities access to the training that other people access to, if they receive information in a form that is acceptable to them; I want to assure you that they can always repay the loan.  

So I want to allay the fears of hon. Okulo Epak, that people with disabilities once given training will be able to pay back the loan. It is also true that many able bodied people who receive the loan I think some of them have not yet paid back.
 
DR. OKULO EPAK: Point of clarification. I am sorry to disturb the hon. Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Since it is about your question, I allow that.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I think I was slightly misunderstood.  All I wanted to know was the comparative rate of recoveries. That is all. I mean if they are doing better than the rest, then they could be more serious. For instance if you look at the Entandikwa recovery rates, women are doing better than men and that is encouraging.  And I thought I only needed that as an indicator of relative preference. And that is why the next question was why not accord them priority to access these facilities? But I think the hon. Minister may have understood my remarks to be a little bit on the negative side. No, it was on the positive side. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: And even if it were true hon. Okulo Epak and hon. Minister that there was some problem somewhere with person’s with disabilities, I think you would go as far as even saying that, let the Government give them more favourable terms than the rest. I thought that was the spirit?

MRS. NAYIGA SEKABIRA: Thank you very much hon. Okula Epak for clarifying that. And I take note of the fact that you are also concerned that peoples with disabilities should be given priority and Government is doing that through Affirmative Action. Because the department of Entandikwa is embarking on evaluating the repaying back sort of rate.  And it is true that when they are evaluating this programme, they also give us what has come out of people with disabilities and how they have benefited.

Through the Affirmative Action, people with disabilities are attended to. And I want to assure this House that people with disabilities shall always be given priority.  We need your support as Members of Parliament in your own constituencies because it is the one thing coming out with a policy and another having the policy by implementers. We go out to monitor as Ministers, but you as representatives of constituencies are also expected to follow up and give reports and also advise the implementers even at the sub-county level. Because at times even when they receive a policy, Entandikwa was supposed to meet the concerns of the businesses of the women, youth, people with disabilities and other people.  But you may find that the implementers at the lower local Government levels are not doing the same.  So it is important that we have concerted efforts with you Members of Parliament to ensure that people with disabilities benefit from the same.

Hon. Okumu Ringa is wondering whether people with disabilities have been integrated into other poverty alleviation programmes. Hon. Members, people with disabilities are targeted and are supposed to benefit from the PAP funds. When you talk about Universal Primary Education, the children of disabled parents are supposed to benefit. And the disabled child must be given priority.  When it comes to Modernisation of Agriculture, people with disabilities are supposed to benefit; those who are interested in investing in agricultural enterprises. People with disabilities are entitled to benefit from restocking programme. And the policy that the local Governments are supposed to implement always includes these interest groups. 

Hon. Lukyamuzi is wondering why Government does not focus on people with disabilities instead of those who are able to work. I mean people with disabilities need to be focused on but with a developmental sort of eye. That is to say, they need not be looked at as people who cannot work. They are people who are supposed to work and who work once provided with the right facilities and once they get the right training. It is also true that in the draft policy we have on employment provision will be there to articulate the concerns of workers with disabilities. Why are recent years not referred to? (Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker with due respect to the Minister, I thought I have a right to be understood. My point in proposing that instead of concentrating on the two group, namely; the common youth and the disabled, noting that Uganda is a poor country and noting that many able bodied young people are capable of working if Government made it possible for them to work possibly in industries, why does the Government not concentrate that Entandikwa Scheme limited as it is, on the disabled people, and make it possible for the able bodied to work in industries?  That causes employment. That was the synthesis of my problem.

MRS. S. NAYIGA:  Mr. Speaker, people with disabilities advocate for full social integration and inclusion in all fields of life. There are jobs once they are trained that the people with disabilities can manage in industries.  So what we are talking about is full social integration, the provisions of opportunities in all sectors of Government and even in the private sector. So what we have to do is to ensure that whatever programme comes people with disabilities are targeted and that they benefit in proportions, as according to their percentage in the communities or in the country.

So the Government is committed to ensure that people with disabilities benefit from all its programmes, and that is what the President articulated in his manifesto page 99.   People with disabilities will benefit from the Entandikwa Scheme.  They must also be employed by the private sector.  We are working hand in hand with the private sector, trying to lobby and trying to work on a policy to come up with standards that can enable the private sector to employ people with disabilities. 

You are concerned about your Constituency hon. Lukyamuzi.  It is important that you get in touch with all the youth in your Constituency, to find out if none of them has ever benefited from the Youth Entrepreneur Scheme.  However this scheme is supposed to serve all youth in this country. If they have not yet benefited, that means they have an opportunity to benefit soon or later. This Youth Entrepreneur Scheme provides for an interest fee of 16 per cent and this is to assure you that this scheme is sustainable.

Hon. Baba Diri is concerned about the PAF or the Poverty Alleviation Fund of programmes and what measures are being taken to ensure that people with disabilities benefit.  I think I have already responded to this the Government is aware that amongst the poor people in this country or in our population, the people with disabilities must be given the attention they deserve.

Categorisation of people with disabilities in relation to those who were trained; I did not come with the list of how many blind and how many deaf, how many with physical disabilities benefited from the same but this list will be brought so that are able to benefit from it. However, the department is aware that amongst people with disabilities we have the different categories and that is why programmes, like functional adult literacy, we are organising special training programmes for the blind, for the deaf and those with mental disabilities. Even in the regional workshops that are going to be carried out, the different categories of people with disabilities will be attended to.

It is also important for us to note that we still have some challenges especially in ensuring that people like the deaf get access to tertiary institutions and University. So if you find that we have fewer deaf people, it is because the Government is still trying to work on how best it can address the education of the deaf people in tertiary institutions and ensure that as many of them as possible who qualify benefit from that particular service.

Hon. Mukula is concerned about - or would like to know when the Ministry last carried out its evaluation exercise. Hon. Grace Akello has been doing her monitoring and supervisory roles in the districts following up this Entandikwa trying to get details.  However, even in my presentation, I mentioned that the Entandikwa Secretariat is planning a national wide survey to establish the actual number of the beneficiaries of the Entandikwa Credit Scheme. This survey will be an evaluation exercise and at its completion, this House will be briefed and will receive a report on the same.

Hon. Mukula would like to benefit from the information on the future resource allocation. This is information, which I do not have with me right now, and I will pass it over to you as soon as I get it.  Thank you very much.

MR. MWANDHA (Representative of persons with Disabilities): Mr. Speaker, I wish to ask the following questions for an oral answer from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. International and National Days in other sectors are supported and organised by Government. For example, the International Day for Poverty Eradication, International Labour Day, International Women’s Day, International AIDS Day, etc.  Why is it that the International Day of the Disabled which falls on the 3rd of December of each year, is not organised by Government like the other International Days and National Days and is always left to the people with disabilities to organise?  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ELDERLY AND DISABILITIES AFFAIRS) (Mrs. Nayiga Sekabira.): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I would like to begin by stating that the Government through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has never at any time shied away from supporting and organising the International Day of people with disabilities. As all Members know that there two types of National Days which are normally commemorated in Uganda. Namely, gazetted National Days, these are recognised days which Government has gazetted as National Public Holidays, e.g. the International Women’s Day, Labour Day, Hero’s Day and Independence Day.

They’re also the non-gazetted national days.  These are days, which are recognised and celebrated in Uganda, but they are not public holidays. These include; Youth Day, The Day of the African Child, The World Food Day and others. The International Day of People with Disabilities falls among the later category.

Mr. Speaker, for all those National Days gazetted or non-gazetted which fall under the mandate of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development they are organised and supported by my ministry. In case of International Day for People with Disabilities, NUDIPU and other Uni- Disability Organisations as key social partners, play a major role as regards the mobilisation of People with Disabilities.  This is to avail them an opportunity to conduct advocacy activities aimed at raising awareness on disability among the public on disability issues.  

Mr. Speaker, it is important for us to note that in 1994 the Disability Movement headed by an umbrella organisation called Disabled People International, to which people with disabilities in Uganda are affiliated communicated to the Disability Movement Internationally asking them to always spearhead the organisation of celebrations of 3rd December. This is a day when UN under resolution 37 (53) declared the implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning disabled persons.  

Mr. speaker, since then NUDIPU has always spearheaded the organisation of the day but with support from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The support that the Ministry offers is both financial and we also offer human resource plus sometimes technical support.  But we always work together and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development will always continue to support People with Disabilities in organising this day. 

In fact last year when we were in Masindi, I was the Mistress of Ceremony.  We expected the President, who delegated hon. Ruhakana Rugunda to represent him and many other Ministers participated. They joined us in the celebrations and hon. Minister of State for Local Government hosted us.  So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to assure the Members of Parliament especially MPs for People with Disabilities that the Ministry of Gender will always give all the support it can to ensure the success of these celebrations on 3rd December. Thank you.

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. The disabled people of this country are fully aware of the commitment His Excellency the President has towards their cause. And the disabled people of this country have been celebrating that International Day year after a year for a long time.  Would the Minister inform the House why the Minister has never invited the President, to attend and participate in these programmes like he has always done in a number of other programmes?  

Mr. Speaker, I am also aware that one of the reasons why activities of people with disabilities including the celebration of that day are not funded by Government, is the absence of the National Disability Council and the Minister promised that the Council Bill will come to this House. Would the Minister inform this House as to when this Bill will come?  Thank you.

MR. MUSUMBA: The hon. Member did give notice that he is going to give questions to the Minister and questions, which are of a substantive nature, have actually been raised. I am wondering why the hon. Member did not raise questions of when the Bill will come in time to enable the Minister to get proper briefing from her technical people?  Why is it that the very member who had opportunity to raise these questions in writing is the same member raising additional substantive questions without sufficient notice to the Minister? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister would you like to answer?

MRS. NAYIGA SEKABIRA: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, it is not true that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development has failed to invite His Excellency the President to officiate on the International Days for People with Disabilities. His Excellency has always been invited and because of some other state duties, he has always been represented –(Applause).  

Last year, His Excellency the President was represented by no other than hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, the Minister in-charge of Presidency and whatever pledges he made one of them was met. He pledged that through his communication to People with Disabilities, that he would soon meet the leadership of the Disability Movement. And in December, His Excellency the President met the executive Committee members of the Board of Directors of NUDIPU as well as the Members of Parliament for People with Disabilities at State House Nakasero – (Applause and laughter)- and hon. Mwandha was one of them.  

Mr. Speaker, in relation to the Bill on the National Council for People with Disabilities, Cabinet has already passed the paper, it is now being worked on by the Drafting Council. And I trust before our term of office as Members expires, this Bill shall be discussed. What I can ask from the hon. Members is to avail themselves so that we always have the Quorum. Thank you very much. (Applause and Laughter).

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR. MWANDHA (Representative if People with Disabilities): Well, hon. Members may feel jealous that I have so many questions to ask, but this is the way the Order Paper has been designed.  Mr. Speaker, I want to ask my last question to the same Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The question goes as follows:  
The plight of Ugandan children can be seen from the increased number of children who are forced to go to the streets to beg, rob or pickpocket for a living, yet the majority of them should be benefiting from UPE. If nothing is done to improve the situation these children become a big burden to society for a long time.  
Would the Minister inform the House: -
What policy Government has on street children?
What are the causes for the increase of children going on the streets?  
What measures Government is intending or intends to take to eliminate the causes, which force children to end up on the streets?
Does the Minister agree with the belief generally held that some NGOs, do encourage children to remain on the streets?  If she agrees, what measures is she taking to stop the practice? Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ELDERLY AND DISABILITIES AFFAIRS) (Mrs. Nayiga Sekabira.): Mr. Speaker, Government at present does not have a comprehensive policy on street children, but is working on the same. What we have in practice is practice-guide lines to work with street children.  Hon. Members, these guidelines were developed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, in consultation with over 300 stakeholders and key-players from civil society and public sector.

The guidelines explain how street children should be handled under the existing circumstances in Uganda; these guidelines operationalised the Statutory Provisions and the Children Statute, 1996, and the Local Government Act, 1997.

Hon. Members, the causes for the increase of street children on the streets. The increase in number of street children is due to a combination of numerous inter-related factors at micro and macro levels such as, poverty in households, HIV AIDS pandemic, armed conflict, urbanisation, break-down of families and the general decay of community and family moral values.

The measures Government is taking or intends to take to eliminate the causes, which force children to end up on the streets, are:
1. Government, through Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, has developed the policy guidelines to work with street children. 
2. To guide communities and districts in the process of service delivery to vulnerable members of society in general and street children in particular.
3. Government has also enacted the Children’s Statute, 1996 and Local Government Act, 1997, to provide legal a framework.  
4. To apportion the responsibilities of the various stakeholders at the national level.

Emphasis has also been laid on the following:
Prevention of children coming to streets, through sensitisation of communities on Children’s Rights and the children’s statute, this is supported by Government of Uganda, UNICEF Country Programme and NGOs especially, Save the Children Alliance. Through this effort, communities are now aware of the children’s rights.  

Resettlement of street children back to the community is another strategy; it is supported by NGOs and district authorities.  

Provision of Informal Vocational Skills Training for Street Children in the districts of Kampala, Mpigi and Jinja; this exercise is supported by World Food Programme and implemented by NGOs and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has established the street children Desk to co-ordinate the many NGOs working with the street children and to provide technical advice to them. It organises quarterly co-ordination meetings to monitor incidences of street children.

We as a Ministry agree to some extent that some NGOs were encouraging street children to remain on the streets by making life comfortable for them. A few years back, some humanitarian organisation used to run lunchtime feeding schemes for street children. If this had been allowed to continue, it would have acted as a pool factor. So, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, as a matter of urgency intervened and stopped the feeding scheme.  

Through regular monitoring, the likelihood of such practices is checked. Mr. Speaker, that is the response I have for hon. Mwandha’s question on street children. Thank you very much.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the response given by the hon. Minister. But in general terms, apart from the children who sit on the streets to beg, and as hon. Mwandha pointed it out as being a public nuisance and calamity for the future for this Country, we also have situations where there are people who are old and they are also begging on the streets. 

You have rightly pointed out that some NGOs, through the feeding schemes, have encouraged these children indirectly to be on the streets because that is where they find easy food.  But there are some practices, which are religious practices, for example, every Fridays, Moslems or Asians with shops, you find beggars walking nearby and they are either given money or they are given food. In other words, they are indirectly being encouraged to stay in town and beg. Does Government have measures also to stop this thing so that we discourage these kind of people from benefiting from this kind of practice?

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, is the Minister aware that these street children are a big security problem, to the extent that they are even threatening tourists?  Mr. Speaker, The Monitor of Sunday 1st April, reported a situation where tourists from Netherlands said,  “The street kids in Kampala are a big scare to foreigners”, and one was quoted as saying as follows:“We have been following Uganda’s history since the days of the famous Idi Amin, but we did not know of these dangerous street children who almost stole some of our property”.  The kids also threw stones at the tourists as they tried to take some photographs. Now, if the situation is not handled in time, Mr. Speaker, Kampala will be difficult to live in because of the increasing number of people who are dangerous and are security problem.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague is that the problem is big, no doubt, but what we must all remember is that the question of delinquent children is unique to Uganda. All cities of the world have suffered this problem of street children.

THE SPEAKER: Have you finished or you are still on the Floor?

MR. PINTO: Yes Mr. Speaker. The problem is big, no doubt but what we must all remember is that the question of delinquent children is not unique to Uganda.  All cities of the World have suffered this problem.  It is true that we should call the attention of Government and other responsible citizens to try to address it.  I think what we must look for are the causes and address the causes.  What we see on the streets are only some of the manifestations of a very big problem.

While we are talking about street children, we should be talking about the many village children. Indeed in the rural areas they are far too many, idle, unattended, the problem is big. We should all address ourselves to that problem and try to look for a solution for it. I agree in the city streets it is a menace, but it is a bigger menace if you look at it countrywide and also World wide.  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure and guidance from you. The House is conducting serious business but the noise in the lobby is literally interfering with our serious business. Could we be guided as to what should be done about that noise?

THE SPEAKER: Sergeant-at-Arms can you do the needful.

MR. MANDHA:  So Mr. Speaker in view of the gravity of this problem and considering the fact that in fact we are going to get a second generation of street people, is it not time that really Government came up with a policy and tried to implement in spite of the difficulties which have been mentioned? Thank you.

MR.ETIANG: Mr. Speaker thank you. I would like first of all to thank the hon. Mwandha for raising this question and the Minister for giving what I think was an adequate reply.  Mr. Speaker I have the Malaba experience as far as street children are concerned and I have spoken on the subject at various forums.  Listening to the Minister's reply I was particularly keen to hear from her about the unique situation that exist in Malaba and I believe in other boarder towns like Busia and maybe Mpudwe, Arua and others. 

What we saw in Malaba makes me raise a supplementary. p to very recently and here I am not even talking of teenagers, I am talking of children below the age of ten being abused by the very officials and greedy business community, using them to cross international boarders to go and ferry in goods for them; sugar, salt, extra.  Of late if you went to the boarder you would see a situation that is uniquely developing regarding the disabled. That is to say, the disabled have now joined these young children in ferrying goods from across the boarder. Not necessarily because of their own initiative and wish but because they have been used by unscrupulous businessmen.

It is a pity, only a few days ago Mr. Speaker if I had a camera I would have it recorded. It is a pity when I saw a disabled person on a wheel chair peddling across the boarder 100 litres of fuel on a specially constructed vehicle, which takes in more than the immediate requirements of a disabled person.  

I would like to invite the Minister to go and witness this situation. It is unfolding everyday even as I speak. Now, I would very much like therefore to request whether the Minister - and this is my supplementary - whether the Minister and the Ministry generally have become conscious of this unique situation existing on the boarder towns, of which Malaba is one and from where most of the situation such as the one I have described is existing. Unless, this is attended to we are going to get a more complicated situation than just the street children.

An international boarder has its unique problems not only confined to the abuse of children and the disabled as such but there are also security problems. The security spreads from direct assault on State machineries to the transmission of communicable diseases about which this House has expressed a lot of concern in the past.

Madam Minister, I really appreciate very much the points you have expressed but I would like you - (Interruption).

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have been following honourable’s discuss. It looked as if he was in favour of people with disabilities but as he proceeded he is claiming that the people who are smuggling at the boarders are people with disabilities. Is he in order to claim when everybody is smuggling?  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: If you can substantiate it. The point of order is that when you started your observations and I was still waiting for the supplementary question, you - okay if you did then thereafter you dealt into a matter which tended to portray that the persons with disabilities are the ones involved in smuggling across the boarder.  Now, if that is what you said then you substantiate it otherwise I will rule you out of order.

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Speaker far from it.  I did say very clearly and maybe you can play back the tape for the benefit of my Sister. I did say that the disabled persons in their innocence were being coerced and used by the businessmen who are using every opportunity at the boarder, previously starting with little children and have now enjoined in that abuse of society the disabled persons. If I gave that impression I want to apologise to the House, but I need not apologise to the House because I did not do so.  

The impression I want to convey is that the abuse of children is now extending to the abuse of disabled persons by the uncouth businessmen notably in Malaba across the boarder. And I think somewhere I have also recorded an invitation to the House here that for those who are interested in seeing what is happening they should go to Malaba and see this unfolding situation as it happens right now as I speak, I said that.  So if I gave you the impression that the disabled are contributing to that. I also quickly chipped in the explanation that they are circumstantially being pushed into it by the uncouth businessmen and women. Thank you.


THE MINISTER OF STATE (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Mrs. Nayiga.Sekabira): Thank you Mr. Speaker and hon. members. Hon. Member from Kaberamaido was concerned about the street children and beggars especially on Fridays who go to the Moslems and the Asians to receive some kind of handouts. This is an area that the Ministry can handle with the religious people, but we are also aware of the religious practices that we have to be careful with.  Like the Moslems have that humanitarian heart of trying to help but the way they are doing it may not be acceptable to you. We will need to discuss with them and see how best they can do it but you will appreciate that religious organisations have always come out to give a hand to the needy.  

Street children are a threat to the tourists as hon. Mwandha says and as per my response, the Ministry of gender is not relaxed, we are working hand in hand with relevant authorities the city council, district authorities and municipalities to ensure that we bring up those Ugandans to be responsible people in this country.

Hon. Etiang is concerned about what is happening in Malaba and Busia and even other sites on the borders of Uganda. I want to say that the Ministry will take it upon itself to go and discuss with relevant authorities in these towns or at these borders to ensure that we protect our children and people with disabilities from being abused. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US DOLLARS 47.5 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK TO FINANCE UGANDA HIV/AIDS CONTROL PROJECT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Sometime ago we laid on the Table several resolutions.  Mr. Speaker, this time I am now presenting one of the resolutions which reads as follows, “ Whereas a credit agreement for United States Dollars- (Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: One of the what?

MR. OPIO:  One of the resolutions which we, as the new procedure, laid on the table and I laid several of them.

THE SPEAKER: You are moving a motion?

MR. OPIO: I am now moving the motion.

THE SPEAKER: For a resolution of Parliament.

MR. OPIO: Mr. Speaker, I am moving a resolution - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: A motion.  You see-

MR. OPIO: I am reading- (Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: I know what you want- a resolution of Parliament in this, but when you are, actually you are moving the House to have this resolution. Proceed.

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Speaker, I move the following motion that; 
Whereas a credit agreement for United States dollars 47,500,000 is to be concluded between the International Development Association IDA of the World Bank and the Government of the Republic of Uganda, for purposes of financing the Uganda HIV/AIDS control project;

 And whereas under article 159 section 1 of the constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; and 

Whereas under article 159 section 2 of the said constitution, borrowing by the Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament; and 

Whereas in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament and the terms and condition of the state loan for the approval and authorisation;

Now therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is here by authorised to secure credit from the International Development Association IDA of the World Bank upon the terms and conditions therein stated.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded yes.

MR. OPIO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that this is a motion, which is very dear to many of our people in this country. Many of our people are in trouble because of AIDS scourge and when the Ministry of – this time the President’s office approached as for assistance for funds they wanted actually about 250 US million dollars. We have managed to identify IDA as a source for about 250 million dollars.  

The conditions are as follows; the credit is amounting to US dollars 47.5 million. The maturity for this loan is 40 years including 10 years of grace. The service charge on this loan is 0.75 per annum on this UN disbursed and outstanding amount. The committed charge is only 0.5 per cent per annum on un-disbursed portion of credit.

 The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered this lending to be concessional and in line with the Government financial strategy. I commend to this House that the House approves that we borrow this amount of money. For more details I will call upon through you, Mr. Speaker, the Committee Chairman and if necessary the line Ministry. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The Committee on National Economy in keeping with its mandate did consider this motion and we would wish to report as follows:

Mr. Speaker, all hon. Members are aware of the devastating nature of Aids in Uganda; and as stated in the Minister’s brief to Parliament which was circulated, the Aids epidemic has affected 2.4 million people directly, this is about 10 per cent of the population.  And almost every family has lost a dear one to Aids.

The Committee also wishes to commend Government for the bold steps taken in mobilising the country against Aids, which has yielded the level of awareness of 99 per cent now; and has seen a decline from 18 per cent of Aids prevalence to 8 per cent. The efforts of Government to control the spread of Aids has also been recognised internationally. It is for the effort of checking the prevalence of Aids, reducing its devastating effects, increasing awareness and cost testing services that Government wishes to mobilise additional resources in order to continue with these vital tasks.  

By way of introduction the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to this House the above proposal to borrow on March 28th, 2001 and we did consider it as a Committee. In our meeting, we discussed the way forward, the implementation of the project with the following personages: 

The Minister of Health, the Minister in charge of Presidency under whom this project is going to be co-ordinated, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and these we did jointly with the Committees of Economy and that of Social Services.  

The joint Committees had a two-day workshop on the project and the Uganda Aids Commission and other stakeholders, which was held in Entebbe. The findings are attached as the first annex to this report. There were a number of questions that were raised and responses were given and discussions were held. In summary Mr. Speaker, the Committee raised questions about previous projects, their evaluation and the benefits there under. 

We were assured that the methods that have been used have given impetus to the Uganda Aids Commission to know the application and allocation of the money that is to be borrowed and applied. And it will be applied to strengthen the efforts that have already been made and the gains that have already been achieved. 

We also addressed ourselves to women and youth out of school and people with disability who are even more vulnerable groups to Aids. We wanted to see how this project would address those extra vulnerable groups of our society. We also raised questions about how the project implementation will be result oriented in order for the impact to be realised in the shortest time possible. 

We also raised the capacity of districts to implement, to ensure that the last person on a village is sensitised about the effects of Aids. We also raised questions about procurement of goods and services. We also raised questions about the policy review, which is to be carried out in every sector and we thought whether it could not be consolidated and done centrally. 

We also raised questions about the trade unions’ involvement, the civil society organisations and the use of NGOs and the Faith based organisations; the churches, the balokole and so on. So in continuing to analyse and evaluate this request, we looked at why the project intends to import condoms and not manufacture them here because we were looking at huge amounts of money for importation of condoms

The clarification was given to the effect that in the short-term, it cannot be done now because you need the raw materials to manufacture the condoms and you need to persuade the investors to invest in that particular area.  But assurance was given in due course, this effort will be analysed with a view of having condoms processed or manufactured here.  

We raised questions about distribution of condoms, we raised questions about allocations to various Ministries, and all these were given answers to. We would want to report that, we were satisfied as Committees that the application of 47.5 million dollars over a period of five years in the bid to combat the deadly disease of Aids is justifiable and we would want to recommend it. 

By conclusion, I wish to state that the Committee wishes to thank the Government for this project and we would want to recommend to this House that approval be given to borrow 47.5 million dollars to be implemented along the guidelines set out in the report.  

I also want to take this advantage to lay on the Table this report, so that it becomes part of the records of this House for the purpose of ensuring that during implementation, what has been agreed to between the Parliament and the implementing agency is adhered to.  I thank you, and I lay the report on the Table.

MS KIRASO (Woman representative, Kabarole District): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion as moved by the Minister of Finance and to support the recommendation of the Committee. I also would like to add my voice to that of the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy, to thank the Government not only for having secured this loan which we are about to approve and which I believe will get overwhelming support from the Members, but I would like to thank the Government for the approach taken towards Aids. 

In many countries there is a lot of stigmatisation especially when people realise that they are HIV positive, they are discriminated against, they are called all sorts of things, as if it is shameful to get this disease which actually in non-discriminative.  So I would like to applaud the efforts of the Government and to say that the world over internationally, Uganda has really been recognised as one of the countries, which are too much ahead in the fight against Aids. 

I had the opportunity or the privilege of attending the ACP/EU joint Parliamentary assembly in Brussels in October, where the Minister of Health hon. Kiyonga had been specifically invited to come and address the joint Parliamentary Assembly on the Uganda’s experience on HIV/Aids.  I thought this was a great thing but unfortunately, for one reason or another, the Minister did not come. So I took it upon myself to share the Uganda experience with the rest of the international community- (Applause).  

Uganda has actually been applauded; Uganda everybody knows is an example of a good fight against Aids.  Not only that, I also had another privilege of travelling to Rome with hon. Pinto a former Chairman of the Uganda Aids Commission where he gave a very, very good paper on Uganda’s experience on Aids. So world over, Uganda is known for its fight against Aids and the problems that the Aids scourge has brought to our population do not need to be repeated. 

Actually I think that the ten percent figure being mentioned here of the population might even be on the modest side because, there are so many people especially in the rural areas, especially in our villages deep down who die without getting medical attention and nobody ever records them as having known the source of their death.  Most of those people are dying of AIDS but nobody has got the statistics.  So, I welcome this loan, a loan which I believe has got very favourable payment conditions, because a grace period of ten years; I think is a good thing. 

I have also looked at the question and the concerns of the Committee and the responses, which they got from the people who were soliciting for this loan. I again like to agree with the chairperson of the Committee on the Economy that these answers are very satisfactory.  I just pray, I just hope, I just urge the Ministry, which is concerned to monitor and make sure that this money is actually used for the purpose for which it has been solicited for. 

Mr. Speaker, if you see on page number one, they are saying that one of the allocations for this fund is procurement of drugs. There are anti-re-troviral drugs on the market, which even after the manufacturers have allowed reducing the cost they cost about two dollars per day!  An average Ugandan – actually, more than 75 per cent of Ugandans cannot afford these anti-retroviral drugs, even at two dollars per day.  So, I believe that the procurement of drugs will include drugs which address or cure opportunistic diseases.  

Accountability is very important and behaviour change is still lacking, because especially in the rural areas there is a lot of work still to be done.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to support the motion and the recommendation by the Committee. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Anybody who would like to just supplement what the hon. Member for Kabarole has said?

MR. PINTO (Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Indeed I stand here to support the motion as Moved by the hon. Minister and to thank the Committee for a thorough job, reading the attachments you can see, especially, in number one the concerns of the Committee mentioning that funding has not reached the community level. Funds have mainly remained at the central and district level. Under this project the community component should be allocated more funds than the district component, since the HIV problem is more at the community level. This is hitting the nail on the head, and I am glad, Mr. Speaker, this is what I see in the allocation.  

What I want to supplement is to call upon our colleagues, Members of Parliament, and to call upon anybody else in the position of leadership whether at the household level, whether at LC or at any point of leadership to ensure that this programme, this loan, the funds availed to the community, reach the community and are not misapplied. It must be our concern, hon. Members, and I think the Committee has done us good, they have put an attachment here indicating what has been allocated to which district.

Now, we want to make sure that the funds not remain at the district, because these funds are meant for use by the communities, and the communities should actually use them. The experience currently with decentralization is that we actually decentralised corruption from the centre to the district. What is this? In cases where 25 per cent is meant to move from the district to the communities, to lower groups, it does not reach. There are inherent problems –(Interruption).

DR. P. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, hon. Pinto for giving way and thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In relation to the hon. Member’s statement about decentralizing corruption, I wish to state to this august House that decentralization has been one of the most fundamental steps taken by the National Resistance Movement Government since 1986 and it has produced tremendous benefits to the communities, which he has referred to.  It is true there might be some malpractices in some districts, which we have been able to detect and are in a process to correcting. But I would like to allay Members’ fears about the wild statement that decentralization in effect decentralised corruption. Thank you very much, Mr.Speaker. 

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the sentiments of the hon. Minister and I did not expect any less from him because I think he is here to try to defend his position in the Ministry. But the facts are on the ground, you cannot deny that corruption does not exist at the district level. The fact is that as we speak today we do not have a system to audit the funds that go to the districts; not only to the districts further down to LC 3; substantial funds go to these levels!  All I am doing is calling upon the Minister –(Interruption). 

MR. OPIO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Pinto for giving way.  I would like to state that there is a system, but the system may not be up to date as hon. Pinto and the rest of us would like it to be; but we are working towards making sure that the system is efficient and effective. I would not like the House to go away thinking that we do not have a system. I thank you. 

MR. PINTO:  Again, Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Minister because the worst part of the point is denial, admission is positive as the Prime Minister brilliantly made apologies this morning on a point of failure, will mean that we are going to have corrective action, because this is our role, we want to bring Government to account. We are pointing out weaknesses, so that these functions can be strengthened. If we were here to give Government praises and not point out the weak areas, we would not be doing our constitutional duty. Therefore, we point out these weak areas because we want them to be strengthened and corrected.

We are concerned that there exists weakness in the implementation of certain programmes and in the accountability of certain funds and we point it out for good measure and in good faith, and hon. colleagues, the Minister, knows very well that there are good points in decentralisation and we applaud them. Where weaknesses are, we are going to point them out and do not deny us this constitutional duty and right.  

Let me just conclude by saying that the biggest chunk of the problem really lies in young people, and indeed today the hon. Minister of state for Gender mentioned when she was answering a question from my hon. colleague about street children. I think response does not only affect street children but also children in the village, young people, youth, mostly the adolescent and pre-adolescent – this is where the problem is.

So, I am calling upon my colleagues, Members at Parliament level and as leaders to really ensure that when these funds come the intention, is to put up activities that are going to prevent further spread of HIV/AIDS and to ameliorate those areas where there have been severe effects. Otherwise, I commend the Government for this initiative, for the motion from the Minister and my colleagues, the Committee for a thorough job. I support this motion. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. KINYATA (Kinkizi east, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since there is nobody opposing this motion and everybody is speaking in favour, I move a motion that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question for those in favour of the Minister’s motion in terms of what is presented.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

Clause 27.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Deo. Rwabita): Mr. Chairman, yesterday you requested me to meet the Attorney General and people who have got stake in this Amendment. This morning we met him and he told us that, what we are trying to amend as clause 27 and also recommital of the definition of ‘Urban authority’ was a piece of an iceberg in the whole law. Therefore, he advised us that we should make more consultations and as a matter of fact we need a Government policy on this allocation of tender boards and also the definition of ‘Urban Authority’. Because the Minister of Finance has to be consulted on whether he will be ready to finance these tender boards; and also the law covers a lot of lacuna in the whole Act, which will be affected by amending these two clauses.  

So, Mr. Chairman, we beg that we stay over this Amendment until we get proper consultations from the Attorney General and people who are interested in this Act. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. P. Byaruhanga): Mr. Chairman, I fully concur with what the Chairman has just said. I feel that we need to consult further as we are in the process of further consultations and that as soon as we are through with this consultation we shall bring back the Clause in question, namely, Clause 27 and the recommital of the definition of ‘Urban Authority.’

MRS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that there is need for consultations but at the same time I am also concerned that the local Governments are already in the process of formulating their budgets and further delay of this Bill may affect the operations of the local governments. 

So, I would request that those concerned especially the Chairperson and the Minister plus the Attorney General maybe give us a time frame when they will come up with a concrete position; because we have been told that it may even involve making some kind of Government policy and I know it takes a little bit of time to come up with such policies.  So, I do not know, I would request that really a time frame be given to enable our local Governments to operate smoothly, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, if I had been in your position I would have said exactly what you are saying. Do we just leave it as open, we have started legislation, and we are at the tail end of it. You are now being asked; you are going back somewhere. When are you coming back?  

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Precisely to supplement what the hon. Member has just said, I have received an invitation from my district of Ntungamo and they are saying that there is a budget conference to take place on 10th, which means they have actually gone through the process of budgeting and if we do not come up with this Amendment and pass it then we may disorganise them in their budgeting process.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I am also concerned about my timetable for this Parliament, so I need some indication as to when the hon. Minister and the Chairman are coming back so that we conclude this matter.

DR. P. BYARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, at our consultative meeting this morning between the Ministry of Local Government, the Committee and the Attorney General, it was quite obvious that we have to get a Cabinet position on Clause 27, because of the intricate relationship it has with some other Clauses in the Act and also the schedules of the Act. We are in the process of drafting a Cabinet memo, which we shall present to Cabinet very expeditiously probably by Monday and then by Wednesday hopefully we shall be able to bring this to the House, 
Mr. Chairman.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr.Bart Katureebe): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do appreciate the need to expeditiously pass this law because it is indeed causing some problems in the districts, but at the same time it is important that we do not pass the law that may contain a lacuna and when it comes to implementation, the districts find themselves in great difficulties. I did find that as we discussed, it was much more than a technical amendment of a definition and I found that it may be necessary to make cross amendments to other sections and the schedules.

And it also involved the considerable question of a policy matter, how far you may go down in granting tender board status to some of these local Governments. My view therefore, was that the Minister can liase with the Prime Minister and quickly present this to Cabinet and it could come back next week. We also got the Parliamentary Counsel who was not attending this morning to advise us on the drafting and cross references so that we have something that really is going to be workable. That is my major concern.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, next week the Bill will be here.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. P. Byaruhanga): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the whole House do resume and the Committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. P. Byaruhanga): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House did consider Clause 27 that had been deferred and agreed to the Minister’s request to stand over this until adequate consultation is complete.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. P. Byaruhanga): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: By the look of things this concludes today’s Business and the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 0’clock.

(The House rose at 4.51 p.m and adjourned until Tuesday, 10th April, 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)





