Tuesday, 9 April 2002

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms. Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to inform you that hon. Sempangi was involved in an accident on Friday. But we are happy that he survived it, except that his driver was in a bad condition. We are happy that he is back in the House in one piece. Welcome back, Dr Sempangi. (Applause)

Secondly, I am delighted to inform members that the emergency repairs that have been going on on the Independence Arch, which led to the closure of the main gate for more than one year, have now been completed. So, starting from tomorrow, you will be able to use the main gate as well as the one where we are now parking. So, there will now be ample space for members to park in comfort and conduct their business here. (Applause).  

The third communication concerns our rules of procedure.  I have noted that over the last several months, there has been a very severe assault on the rules of procedure, to the extent that the rules which we cherish and have utilized for many years are in danger of becoming extinct.  So, I thought it prudent to draw your attention to the key rules of debate in this House.  

There has been unnecessary use of the word “procedure” in our debate. I would like to remind members that this need only be utilized where there is a procedural defect. For instance, if insufficient notice has been given for a meeting; or an item which you expected on the agenda is not there; or the Clerk has made a mistake in reading out the order of proceedings, or the Speaker is invisible by virtue of being improperly dressed; or a bill coming for a first reading has not complied with the provisions of the Budget Act - those are examples of matters of procedure. It must relate to the form and not the substance.  

At the beginning of this session, you were informed that decisions of Parliament are made by resolution upon a motion. The various motions are contained in part nine of our rules, while part 10 deals with the rules of debate. 

I draw your attention to rule 42(1). This is a rule where you can move an adjournment of the House to discuss a matter of urgent public importance. If such a motion is made and five members rise in support, and the Speaker rules that it is a matter of urgent public importance, the time will be appointed on that day for the same motion to be moved.  

I have in mind, for instance, matters like landslides in Manjiya county causing death, volcanic eruption in the Semiliki plains and attack on our borders somewhere in Uganda, attacks by rustlers, for instance, in Kapelebyong. Those are the kinds of things which are so important that you can use rule 42.  This rule would permit proper debate and possible resolution rather than a dialogue between the Speaker and the member or an inconclusive response from the Executive.  

Rule 44 gives a litany of motions that can be moved without notice: motion for adjournment, suspension of rules, e.t.c, and motions that the Speaker has certified to be urgent.  

Rule 59 deals with interruption of debates.  I have noticed that members wait until the contribution has been completed and then they rise on a point of procedure.  Let me make it clear that once a member has made a contribution and completed it, you cannot rise on a point of elucidation, order or procedure because there is nobody holding the Floor. 

If you want to interrupt a debate, stand up when the person is still on Floor.  Once he or she has finished, you cannot be allowed to raise matters. Debates may be interrupted on a point of order, for instance if rules have been infringed, or for clarification arising from what the member has said.  

In situations where you feel that a member has used abusive or objectionable words, you can move under rule 61 that that member be no longer heard, especially if upon being called to order, she or he fails to retract, to explain the words or to apologize to the satisfaction of the Speaker.  

With regard to ministerial statements - rule 37 (1) and (2)- these do not attract debate but elucidatory questions arising directly from the statement. 

Under rule 38, a member may make a statement on a matter of public importance or personal explanation. Again, no debate arises from this, but some comments which are not of controversial nature may be made.  

The list is not exhaustive, but I thought I might restate them, so that you may stop misusing the word “procedure” in this House.  

Finally, according to rule 66, the Speaker is responsible for the observance of rules of order of the House.   Please, do not forget that.  Thank you very much.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker –(Laughter)- if I am seeking guidance from the Chair, which rule can I use? And also, if I am seeking clarification on a matter pertaining to communications from the Chair, how do I go about it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I have noted is that the matters on which you seek clarification do not arise from the communication. You usually have something completely different from the communication. If you are seeking guidance, do not say “procedure”; say “I am seeking guidance”.

MR AWORI: Exactly! That is what I have meant. I need guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, you are a very senior member of this House. You know the rules in and out. All the rules are available to you depending on the subject you want to raise. If someone has attacked you in Lumino, rule 42 is available. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS BILL,2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING(Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I move that a bill entitled “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Bill, 2002” be read a First Time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The bill stands referred to the appropriate committee.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Dr Okulo Epak): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report and opinion of the Auditor General to Parliament on the public accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the year ended 30 June 2001 in volumes 1 and 2.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The two volumes of that report are committed to the Public Accounts Committee for scrutiny.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a slight problem here. I had undertaken to hon. Eresu and hon. Kidega that their questions would be answered today, but I have been informed that the two ministers are not available.  So, I will reluctantly defer them to 16th, next Tuesday.  

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I have duly made consultation with the hon. Minister of State for Education and Sports, and we have agreed to defer the date because she told me she is going to go and do proper research.

MR KIDEGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am pleased by your revelation that the Minister is not around, but I am indeed hurt because the last time we sat here, the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs told us that the Minister was on the way running, coming and now the Minister is still running, coming up to now. (Laughter).   

I am indeed disturbed because sometime ago it was alluded to on this Floor that some members who were standing for local council elections had lost a lot of weight because of campaigning. Indeed, you know the youth are always thin, they do not have enough flesh on the body to lose, but they have been losing since then up to tomorrow. So, I would like you to help us and make sure that next time they do not again say, “next time”. Thank you very much.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I have interest in the question by hon. Kidega, because the people I represent in this House are equally affected. In spite of the fact that we have contacted all the relevant government bodies regarding this matter, nothing seems to be forthcoming, and yet the last set of elections, that is elections of LC V, are coming on the 18th. We do not know whether the Minister intends to permit these elections to take place, and even form executive committees without our people being elected. 

Surely, if the Minister of Constitutional Affairs was not dodging this matter, she should have at least given her reply to a colleague to read out to this House. So, we are extremely worried that the Minister of Constitutional Affairs is behaving the way she is. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for the record, let us express our displeasure at the delay on this matter, especially since it concerns the fundamental human rights of the disabled and the young people of this country. Let us hope that next Tuesday will be the last time, and we expect no further deferment of this matter. The Leader of Government Business is asked to take note of this.

MR OULANYAH JACOB (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is one such question that falls in the category of those which have been riddled with procedural problems. I submitted this question for the first time on the 19th of November last year; it is coming for asking today. So many things have happened since. There is an invalid part in the text; you will excuse me because I will be reflecting on the changes that have occurred so far.  

On July 18 1998 in Rome, the Rome Statute was adopted.  The International Criminal Court (ICC) will be created on the basis of the Rome Statute, which ICC will be a permanent court that will investigate and bring to justice individuals who commit the most serious violations of international humanitarian law, namely; war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide, and once defined, aggression. Unlike the International Court of Justice in the Hague, whose jurisdiction is restricted to States, the International Criminal Court will have the capacity to indict individuals.  

The International Criminal Court will be complementary to national jurisdictions, and will act only when national systems are unable or unwilling to genuinely carry out investigations for prosecutions of such crimes.  

The International Criminal Court will be established when 60 States have ratified the Rome Statute. By the deadline of 31 December 2000, 139 nations had signed the Statute, and to-date, 55 have deposited their ratification instruments with the United Nations, 10 of them are from Africa. 

The purpose of this is because everybody would prefer that we rather see our injustices addressed by appointed judges than by self appointed terrorists like Osama Bin Laden and so on.  

Could the hon. Minister inform this House what steps Uganda has taken to ratify the Treaty of Rome and to be among the first 60 nations that will bring the International Criminal Court into effect?  

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The way questions are being asked these days; people first make long statements and then they ask a question. That is very interesting! However, I congratulate the hon. Oulanyah for asking this question because it is very important.  

For more than half a century since the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials, states have actually failed to bring to justice people responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. The statute on the establishment of the international court, which was adopted rightly in Rome on 17 July 1998 by the international community should have helped, and will help to give answers or to solve the problem of providing for the establishment of a permanent international criminal court to fight against impunity and bring the perpetrators of those crimes to justice.  It is true that when eventually ratified, the court will be complimentary to national criminal jurisdiction.

The honourable member has correctly cited the crimes: genocide, crimes against humanity, crimes of war aggression, terrorism and others. Those will be the main four that this court will be centred on. The statute will enter into force when 60 states have ratified it. As of today, 139 states have signed the statute and 56 have ratified, leaving only four for the full realisation of its entry into force.  

Uganda signed the statute in 1999, and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has already prepared a Cabinet paper for Cabinet to consider the ratification of this statute.  This will be done soonest, and I hope that Uganda will be among the first 60 states to ratify this very important convention.

Ratification is critical and vital for bringing this court into effect.  Without realisation of 60 states ratifying it, the court will just remain on paper, and since Uganda is one of the countries leading in as far as fighting crimes against humanity is concerned, definitely the ratification will take place immediately.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Supplementary?

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you minister for the answer you have given.  I need further clarification on two issues. We are informed that the states that will constitute the first 60 states will have benefits accorded to them under the statute. There are four places left and the honourable Minister is just submitting the papers to Cabinet, which sits on Wednesday!  I hope it will sit tomorrow and consider this.  What guarantee do we have that these papers will come out quickly enough for us to sign our ratification instruments and deposit them in time to be among the first 60 states?

Secondly, when this statute was first brought in, America reacted negatively to it.  Senator Jesse Helms re-introduced a law in the US Senate seeking to punish states that would sign this treaty. Is Uganda acting cowardly so as not to be among the first 60 to be penalized by America?  Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME: The guarantee that I have is the Prime Minister here because he chairs Cabinet. He will give the guarantee because he has the discretion to bring forward any business in Cabinet.  When that paper is on the agenda, I am sure he will take the necessary measures.  About the United States, Uganda is a sovereign state and we cannot be intimidated. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister, are you aware of the consequences of this law? Once we sign the treaty, it means that eventually we will have to apply municipal law in this country.  Next week, 60 countries in the world could be signing the treaty, and I believe that within one month it will be an international law. I have no doubt that in the next six months, UPDF will still be in Congo and Sudan, among other places.  

My concern is, and a lot of people have raised concern over this, the conduct of some of our soldiers abroad. DRC is a signatory to this memorandum, and they have indicated that they will be among the first 60 countries to ratify this treaty. This means they will have a right to arrest any UPDF soldier there and take him to this court.  Are we ready to defend that soldier? Have you liased with the Ministry of Defence to see the legal implications of this treaty? 

My honourable colleague here has mentioned the American reluctance to sign this treaty for good and obvious reasons. Americans are reluctant to sign it because they have got their troops all over the world doing all kinds of things, especially those in Afghanistan. They could be arrested by the Taliban and brought before the ICC. Americans do not want to be embarrassed. Are we ready for the embarrassment? 

In Sudan, we are already there too.  I do not know how many have been arrested by Kony and handed over to a foreign government to prosecute, since we are not in Sudan by protocol but by a simple agreement, and I am sure my honourable colleague representing the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is aware that that agreement was determined and signed without the input of the ministry. The understanding we have with Sudan is that we walk in there and look for Kony; there was no input on the part of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. My question is, have you taken into consideration all these implications before you append your signature on this treaty?

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to be clarified by the Minister whether he is acting on this matter, because hon. Oulanyah asked the question, or you have actually been thinking about it. The more I listen to what is going on on the Floor, the more I get worried that maybe the Government did not have interest in this subject until hon. Oulanyah brought it up. Can he clarify to us briefly whether it is in our interest to sign this treaty at the moment?

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who have expressed concern that this was probably an unnecessary law, because we have an international court of justice which takes care of matters that are caused by other states. States are made up of individuals, and I would think that any state should take up a matter caused by the respective member. So, I am actually wondering why this law is coming up. 

First of all, it is going to have a double effect in terms of cost and even of action, because a national will not be affected and the respective Member State fails to support that member. A state is expected to protect its nationals!  So, is the state going to lie down and leave the international law to take its course without defending its nationals? 

I am also wondering why a developing country like Uganda would encourage a law which is going to cause a lot of administrative costs, when in fact an international court of justice exists, and could have taken care of whatever is being raised in the new law. Why are we interested in this type of law? What competence or competition does a person from Uganda have compared to a person from a developed country who may be a millionaire? How are the two individuals from the said different backgrounds going to have a level playing field under the same law without the protection of the respective nations? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime): Madam Speaker, yes, the statute is in our interest because Uganda respects human rights, and has a Uganda Human Rights commission. So, this ratification is definitely in the interest of the people of Uganda, in the first place.

Two, where a law fails – if Uganda, for example, fails to prosecute anybody who has violated human rights or has committed genocide, then the International Criminal Court can come in. In fact, we shall circulate this document so that the honourable members can understand it better. And I think this question which the hon. Member is asking will be taken care of. But it is a very, very important statute, and there is no doubt that Uganda is interested.  

It is not correct for hon. Aggrey Awori to say that Foreign Affairs did not have an input. The Third Deputy Prime Minister himself signed this Agreement. He signed it, and his signature is there. I was in Addis Ababa and I received this Agreement, and I clearly identified the signature of the Third Deputy Prime Minister, the Rt. hon. James Wapakabulo. How dare you say that Foreign Affairs was not involved in this document? It is not correct! 

He is a brilliant lawyer, he is the Third Deputy Prime Minister, and he is a Member of Parliament, former National Political Commissar and Foreign Affairs Minister. Really, I think Uganda cannot and – but anyway, he signed the document and I can vouch for him that he signed. Therefore, by the fact that the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs signed it, definitely Uganda participated in its preparation.

On our troops being in the Sudan, the Minister of Defence came here and explained about the limited access of UPDF in the Sudan. When the time expires, we shall come home. But as long as the objective is not yet achieved, that is a matter for the two states to decide. You know diplomacy is about how states communicate. So, we shall communicate and find out whether we should stay or come home. If we come home without the prize, it will not be very good news. But we hope that the objective of that matter can be achieved.

On ratification, the Uganda troops being in the Congo and in the Sudan, our troops are in Congo by the Lusaka Protocol, and hon. Aggrey Awori knows this very, very well since it is your subject of particular and special interest. Therefore, if the ratification was to find the troops there, then they would be immune and it is in this statute. They will be declared immune, and therefore, they will not be caught up with any of these phrases. You should not be scared about that.

Lastly about the Sudan, I have said there is an agreement of limited access, and the troops will come home as soon as the objective is achieved, or as soon as the troops have been given clear, precise instructions to return. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague on the Front Bench seems to have misunderstood the last part of my question, especially pertaining to Congo. I was specifically referring to a certain area where two tribes are fighting, the Lendu and Hima, and we are involved. In this law, once you commit an atrocity, no protocol can save you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not remember you talking about the Lendu and the Hima in your question. No, no!

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I assumed that my honourable colleague on the Front Bench is totally immersed in that whole exercise of being in Congo. So he knows when I talk about Congo, since it is the area he knows.  Lendu and Henu are around Beni.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No! Hon. Member, you wanted to know whether he has taken into account the implications of being party to this law.  That is what you wanted to know, and I think the Minister did.
  
DR NABWISO: Madam Speaker, I really beg you to let me seek clarification on these questions.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What questions?

DR NABWISO: My question is about the questions that Members of Parliament are presenting to Government, which are not being answered. 

Hon. Oulanyah’s question was presented in November last year. Since December, I have presented eight questions and hon. Byabagambi has also presented questions. If we move at this chameleon speed, when will these questions be answered?  Who is suppressing our questions?  Do we have to present something Kidogo to the committee?  (Laughter) Madam Speaker, that is what I am asking about these questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would the Prime Minister wish to comment on this matter?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My understanding is that if the questions are properly tabled to the Minister, they should be answered within two weeks. This is subject to filing the question to the right person. 

There are two areas of possible delay. One possible area of delay is where the question was wrongly filed, and therefore, the Clerk to Parliament has to cure that problem.

The second one arises when the Minister delays in answering the question. But as far as I am concerned, we have been very stringent in ensuring that these questions are answered, and that they are very well researched. If any honourable member has a question, I would request that the question be specifically put to the Minister concerned, copy to the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and the matter will be addressed forthwith.  I thank you.

DR NABWISO: Madam Speaker, my questions were well put. They were forwarded to the ministers concerned, and I have never been told that these questions were not clearly formulated. I was told that they will be answered in two weeks time, and that should have been by February this year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now let me just reiterate that –(Mr Mwandha rose_)- on the same questions, hon. Mwandha?

MR MWANDHA:  Madam Speaker, I just want to give testimony that I put a question for an oral answer to a minister of Government and the Clerk wrote to the minister, and gave me a copy, and the Clerk said that according to the Rules of Procedure, this question must be answered on 9 April. I came here prepared to receive the answer from the minister and even prepared to put further supplementary questions. I was surprised that the question was not put on the Order Paper, and that even the minister concerned does not appear to be around.  

But before the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister entered the Chamber, Members were concerned that hon. Janat Mukwaya - we were told that she was running to this House to answer the question prepared by hon. Kidega, and we waited and waited, and hon. Mukwaya did not arrive.  Now, today the question is on the Order Paper – (Mr Musumba rose_)

MR ISANGA MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I hesitate to rise on this point of order, but I have no choice.  You have ruled on the matter of the honourable Minister for Constitutional Affairs, and the question that was put before her. You have guided this House and ruled and even set a date by which it will be answered.  The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister took note and we have all taken note and we will comply. Madam, is it in order for the honourable member to re-open debate on a matter that you have already ruled on?  I seek your guidance, Madam.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, he is out of order! And Prime Minister, since you were not here when we started, I had said that the matters which have not been answered today, should be answered next Tuesday. I would really like to remind our colleagues on the Executive side that our rules state that questions must be answered within 14 days. Let us hope that we shall co-operate to have these matters handled expeditiously according to our rules.

Maybe before hon. Wacha begins - hon. Members, last week I had hoped that since the amendments were not very many, we would handle the matters really very fast and finish the rules as quickly as possible. But now this week we may not be able to sit on Thursday.  We have the Leadership Code, which has been waiting and many other bills. 

I was wondering whether there could not be a strategy for shortening the debate and the process for going through these rules.  I do not know what the chairperson of the committee thinks, but at this rate, we will be here this week and also next week on the rules.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES & DISCIPLINE (Mr Ben Wacha): Thank you, Madam.  Actually you have read my mind.  I was going to suggest that there are certain areas, which will definitely need some debate.  But a lot of areas which have been reproduced here in the green or blue book, are just lifted from what we called the Rules of Procedure of the 6th Parliament. There should really be no contest.  

So, I was suggesting that if it were possible, I bring out the areas which I think would need Parliament’s particular attention, we deal with those and the others we will actually just look at them and pass them.  

I do not know whether that procedure can be acceptable to the Attorney General.  I talked to him earlier on and I talked to the Speaker and I think we agreed on this procedure.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm that we pondered over this problem of how to expeditiously go about approving these draft rules, and we agreed that in order to be faster than we were last week, if the Chairperson of the Rules Committee can indicate, for example, that no amendment has been effected to a particular rule, then we should take no time in disposing of that rule. I wish to confirm that.

MR MWANDHA: I also agree that we should deal with these rules as expeditiously as possible. However, I think this being a new Parliament, we have to adopt rule by rule. I do not think that we can simply say, there is no amendment to that rule, therefore, we should proceed. In any case, there are some areas where the Committee has not reported at all, where we may wish to make some proposals, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the process of amending these rules has been going on for so long and the Committee was available for a very long time. I am not certain that there are new areas that are coming on vote which have not been considered. So, maybe if the Chairperson does not mind, he could indicate all the rules that have no amendments and we proceed with the others.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I think we must deal with these rules with speed. I agree with the Attorney General, and I also see the point set forth by the Chairperson. Everything must be done by all parties concerned to ensure that this matter is solved quickly. But even what is contained in this blue book is not in all cases the same as what is in the rules of the 6th Parliament. I will point out those areas as we go along. 

So, there is need for us to be satisfied that we are all comfortable with the rules that will guide us for five years. We should also use this opportunity to take other Members of Parliament who want to know what the full import of a particular rule is. So, the onus is on you, Madam Speaker, to find the balance between these two interests. I thank you.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Madam Speaker, I think what we have really agreed on is not at variance with what my colleague is stating. We said each rule will be called. We are not simply to skip a rule – each rule will be called and where necessary, the Chairperson will indicate whether there has been any amendment effected to it, or whether the current rule has been retained. It is not our intention that we simply jump a particular rule because there is no amendment proposed to it, no.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I think, hon. Members, let us do as proposed by the Attorney General and the Chairperson of the Committee. He will go rule by rule and indicate those where there are no amendments, and if there is something that the Committee did not consider you may bring it up.  But I will give only two people the opportunity to contribute so that we shorten the time for debate. So, Chairperson, when we adjourned we were handling proposed rule 8, specifically Clause 8(3).

MR WACHA: Madam, we were about to pronounce ourselves on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I asked you to sleep on this matter for the weekend and I think you have had opportunity to do so. I now put the question that the proposed rule 8(3) as amended by the Attorney General form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 9:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, there is no proposed amendment on this.

MRS BYAMUKAMA DORA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): Madam Speaker, I would like to move an amendment on this rule which talks about suspension of rules. I propose that under Clause 2, apart from this rule, not applying to rules 4, 5, 6 and 7, it should also not apply to rule 74.  

Rule 74 talks about secret vote, and when you look at it critically, it states that: “There shall be secret voting in respect of a Bill for an Act of Parliament to amend the provisions of the Constitution”. It also talks about the fact that there should be secret voting in respect of election or removal of a person holding office under the Constitution, and also in respect of election or removal of a Parliamentary Commissioner - (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you talking about rule 73 or rule 74?

MRS BYAMUKAMA : Rule 74 - Secret Vote  (Interruptions).

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I think there is confusion. I think we should stick to this document - the blue or green one.  Because what hon. Byamukama is talking about is 74 in the smaller document.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Byamukama, I have located it. It is Page 60. Chairperson, have you found it?

MR WACHA: Okay. But I pray that the Clerk follows this one, and follow it in the order, which it appears, not in the order which we are passing it, because it is confusing us. He called rule 9 when we were dealing with rule 8.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I will make reference to the short titles if that will help us. I am talking about suspension of rules, and in particular, sub-clause (2), which states that “This rule shall not apply in respect of Rules 4, 5, 6 and 7”. And I am proposing an amendment, which should also include rule 74 so that if we are suspending rules, we should not suspend rule 74. Rule 74(a) talks about the secret ballot and in this case it is provided that there shall be secret voting in respect of a bill of an Act of Parliament to amend any provision of the Constitution. 

Rule 74(b) “the election or removal of a person holding office under the Constitution or under a law made under the Constitution;”  

(c) “the election or removal of a Parliamentary Commissioner;” 

(d) “the censure of a Minister or Vice President;” 

My reasons are that by providing for a secret vote, these rules have singled out these particular instances as being very important. For example, if we are amending a Constitution, I think it is important that we do it by secret ballot, rather than go to the lobby or put up our hands.  

Also, when you look at (b) which talks about removal of a person holding office under the Constitution, for example a Minister or a Speaker, it means that we would show hands, but the rules have found it prudent to put this under secret vote. I therefore move that we should not derogate from this secret vote by using rule 8, and thus we should add this amendment to rule 8. This is my submission, Madam Speaker.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, what the hon. Dora Byamukama has raised extends beyond that particular rule. There are other rules that I think must be entrenched in it, many of them.  It will not be comprehensive at this point to deal with these rules as we jump here and there because they are rules relating to censure.  Some new rules have been proposed, which if passed, would have to be entrenched in it and therefore rules 4, 5, 6 and 7 are not comprehensive.  

We could proceed by standing over this exception and after we have gone through all the rules, we choose those that we want entrenched and put them as exceptions to the suspension of provisions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, is 74 (e) not enough to cover this kind of scenario?  It says, “any other matter if the House so decides upon a motion.” Are you sure that we shall be able to point out and identify all the 20 or 30 rules so that they are put under rule 9?  I do not know, but it is up to you.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I think we need to look at the language used carefully. There is no way sub-rule (2) of rule 8 can apply to suspend rule 74, because rule 74 is mandatory.  It says, “there shall be secret voting in the House.”  It is mandatory; you cannot opt out of it.  So you cannot actually invoke sub-rule (2) of 8. When it comes to any of those items, the word “shall” implies that you must actually abide by that particular provision.  Thank you.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to comment on that. I am however suggesting a way forward that will cater for what hon. Musumba has stated, and what we are going to do next.  I was proposing that we pronounce ourselves on hon. Byamukama’s amendment and then leave this particular rule open.  We may come back to it after we have finished.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why do we not stand over that rule now, in its entirety, and then come back to it at the end?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to know at what point we will come back to this rule, because even as hon. Ruhindi has stated, I think the word “shall” is subject to interpretation. So, I would like you to be specific. 

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not think that every rule which uses “shall” is not subject to suspension unless it is saved by rule 8.  The word “shall” per se does not say you cannot suspend a rule. I therefore agree with hon. Musumba that we stand over rule 74 because we cannot include it in rule 8 before we adopt it. At the moment, it is not yet a rule because it is not yet adopted. So let us adopt rule 74 and then consider if we can put it under rule 8.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byamukama, let me assure you that whatever is stood over, we shall come back to it before we finally conclude.  You have my assurance on that.

Rule 9:

MR WACHA: Rule 9 –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that page 11?

MR WACHA: That is page 11, part II. There is no proposed amendment to meetings, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 9 remains part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, there is no proposed amendment to this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 10 do remain part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, the Committee proposes that besides sittings on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays, there should be an added sitting of the House on Friday. That is the amendment.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had noticed that and wanted to move an amendment to it to say that we meet on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays.  For much as our principle role is to legislate for this country, we have an added duty of mobilising our constituencies for development and of course political participation and consultation. 

And there are Members who have constituencies which are far off from Kampala, like Arua.  If they are to go by road, they will for example take two days to get there. In the interest of time - for I had several reasons to justify this amendment - I would like to move that we meet on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays only.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Isn’t that the present position? There is no amendment. 

MS KABAKUMBA: It is different in the suggested rules - this green book.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I see! But the chairperson did not justify. He did not give a rationale for the amendment.  Perhaps you could do that before we debate.

MR WACHA: I am not abandoning it. I had just introduced it.  We have a problem with private members’ business. Most of the times when we sit here, we tend to conduct business which is brought by Government only. Private members’ business is given a very short time by this House. 

The Committee’s suggestion was that for two hours every Thursday, the House gives private members at least two hours to ask questions and to bring any issue of particular urgency which they think should be discussed.  

Then on Friday morning, it was the suggestion of the Committee that the whole period from 10 O’clock to 1 O’clock be devoted to private members’ business. That was the suggestion.   

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am just wondering if 10 does not cater for what we are talking about. It says, “In the case of an emergency, the Speaker may call a special meeting…” Doesn’t it cater for these debates on Fridays, Saturdays, and perhaps even Sundays, if the discretion is with  the Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have been complaining here that your questions were sent in November, and they have not been answered, and others are still in the pipeline; they are still being cooked. I think the Committee is trying to make it mandatory that this business be handled every week. They are making it easy for you.  

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to say that this Parliament of Uganda is probably one of the few Parliaments which meets minimum times. Other Parliaments meet in the mornings and afternoons and even on Mondays. But this Parliament meets only on Tuesday afternoon, Wednesday afternoon, Thursday afternoon.  Madam Speaker -(Interjection)- I am not accepting any information because I have not made my point.  

I want to advocate for increase in the time when Parliament meets. We do not necessarily have to meet on Friday. I would like to make a proposal that we meet in the mornings and afternoons of Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays –(Interjections)- Members are saying “what about the committees?”  I think time can be found.  

I want to advocate for more time if every morning for three days is too much. I was thinking that committees can meet on Mondays and Fridays so that we really concentrate on the business of this House and be seen to be using the time for which we were elected very effectively. I want to make that proposal. Thank you.

MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, I would like to associate myself with sentiments expressed by the hon. Kabakumba. According to the current rule, we meet on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, but there is a provision in the rules that in case of exigency of work, the Speaker may call us at any time. I think this particular provision takes care of any additional work that we may be required to attend to. I quite agree, and I subscribe to the sentiment that the House needs enough time in order to dispatch business.  

On the other hand, some Members of Parliament spend one whole day driving to their constituencies and one other day returning - that is Monday - to Kampala to transact business on Tuesday. Therefore, if we take away Friday, you have already lost one day, and you have only three days, Saturday, Sunday, and then Monday you are coming back. Members of Parliament should be given this opportunity to use Friday for other business other than Parliament business.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I now put the question that rule 9 be amended as proposed by the Committee.

(Question put and negatived)

MR WACHA: That means that we retain the status quo that the House meets on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays.  

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, then there is a consequential amendment on 11 (3) 

MR. WACHA: I am taking care of all that. Madam Speaker, there is no suggested amendment on 12.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 12 do stand part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)
Rule 13:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I now put the question that Rule 13 remain part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 14:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I now put the question that Rule 14 do remain part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 15:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, 15 (1) and (2) are a consequence of the amendment to the Constitution which was carried out in the Sixth Parliament making the requirement for quorum to arise only at the time of voting.  That is why (1) reads as follows: “The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote”

 And (2) says, “The quorum prescribed under sub rule (1) of this rule shall only be required at a time when Parliament is voting on any question.”  

Those are constitutional provisions.

THE  DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 15 stand part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 15, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 16:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, 16 remains the same except that there has been a re-arrangement of the order of business. Otherwise, every item there is the same as in the old rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 16 remain part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 17:

MR WACHA: Rule 17, there is no proposed amendment, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 17 do remain part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 18:

MR WACHA: There is introduction in Rule 18(2) that: - “Subject to Rule 19 the Clerk shall send to each Member every Friday a copy of the business arranged for the succeeding week.”  
That means that the order of business is to be sent in advance to Members.  Hon. Okumu seems to have a problem- (Mr Okumu Ringa rose_)

MR OKUMU RINGA:  Madam Speaker, I do not have a problem, I am seeking clarification.  Madam Speaker, Rule 18(1)(b) seems to be often abused and it reads: “in the case of any other sittings, at least one hour before the sitting.” How can this be cured?  And Rule 18(3) reads: - 
“The Clerk shall keep a book to be called Order Book in which he or she shall enter and number in succession all matters intended for discussion at each meeting.” 

This is a good proposal but how can we ensure that this is not abused, this is the clarification I am seeking?

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, our role here is to pass these rules.  As to the administrative part of it and how it is implemented by the Office of the Speaker, I think let us leave it to the Office of the Speaker.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, after the amendment that says we will end on Thursday, don’t we need to have a consequential amendment on Rule 18(2), which says that:“Subject to Rule 19 the Clerk shall send to every Member every Friday a copy of the business arranged for the succeeding week.” 

Should this not be sent on Thursday, because Friday we are technically travelling to Arua, so that we can travel back later?  Should the Clerk not give us this copy of the business arranged for the succeeding week on Thursday when we are here?  So, I want to propose that instead of Friday, we put Thursday in order to keep with the rule that we have just passed which retains the position.  If you read Rule 22 in the old rules, it says: “Every Thursday, the Chairperson of the Business and Welfare Committee shall make a statement in the House”. And it goes on to put emphasis on Thursday as the day when we shall have this information.  So, I thought that the Committee had put Friday here, arising from the earlier amendment where they had wanted Friday to be a day for us to be here.  This, therefore, follows that consequentially, this should be Thursday, so that the Clerk can give us this information on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am looking at the practicability of it.  Supposing we sit here until midnight on Thursday, what time will the Clerk have to issue that paper?  

MR WACHA: Not only that, Madam Speaker, I think hon. Musumba should have turned over the page and looked at Rule 19, because Rule 19 says exactly what he is reading from Rule 22.  Now the idea here, Madam Speaker, is that after a statement is made under Rule 19, on Thursdays it is possible that arguments will arise on that statement and then after it has been settled, the issue will be communicated by the presiding officer to the Clerk.  It gives the Clerk enough time to reorganize business for the following week and then come out with a proper business on Friday; it has nothing to do with what we have already passed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 18 be amended as proposed by the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that clause 18 as amended do stand part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19:

MR WACHA: Rule 19, there is no proposed amendment.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I would like to make a proposal and come up with a Rule 19(1).  The drafting people will put it correctly that,” At the beginning of each session, the Business Committee shall draw up a calendar for Parliament.” What I have in mind, Madam Speaker, is that they should draw up this calendar telling us how long each meeting is going to take, when we are going to have the recess and when we are going to return from recess, so that hon. Members can actually plan in advance to do certain things at certain times. But, Madam Speaker, today you do not know when you are going on recess, so you cannot plan to travel or to go to conferences or to do personal things; all of a sudden you are told, “the House is adjourned sine die.”  Madam Speaker, I think we need to do better than that because even schools know when the first term begins, when the holidays begin, when second term starts and so on and so forth, and I think Parliament should do better than what we are doing now.  

Therefore, I want to make a proposal that the Business Committee at the beginning of each session draws up a calendar for Parliament, so that Members know what to expect and when to expect it.  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this one is really something that is done by the Speaker’s Office and the Business Committee.  But I am sorry to say that many times when we have agreed that we do such a duty in such a week, reports are not ready.  We could have an indicative overall programme. Maybe Chairperson could address it.

MR WACHA: Well, this is a matter which really I cannot comment upon; maybe the hon. Prime Minister could say something.  Be as it may, if the House approves it, then it cannot come under part 3 which we are discussing, because part 3 deals with order of business of a particular day or a particular sitting; it will have to be put elsewhere.  But maybe the hon. Prime Minister can comment whether it is possible for Government and the Speaker to sit together and say, “we are going to start business and then we will end on such and such a day and come back on such and such a day”.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That kind of arrangement requires a lot of competence and also ensuring that even late coming does not arise. But when I examine what is on the ground, time management is a problem. 

The second point I would like to make is that flexibility is always essential especially when we have a number of contingencies which occur to us. The more flexible you are, the better. If the current situation was leading to abuse, then there would be cause to amend it. But we have always consulted.  

I was just looking at Article 95 (2), where again you can see: “A session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may, by proclamation, appoint.”  

And (3) says, “The Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation.”  

In other words, there is a process of consultation when you are handling legislative, political, or financial matters.  

Let me finally say that from time to time, you may have a financial limitation, and if you are rigid, it might become very difficult to cure. I would suggest that we retain the current flexibility. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: I quite agree that you need flexibility. In fact, when you have that kind of arrangement, there is nothing that stops flexibility to be exercised. If, for instance, money runs out and you cannot meet for a longer period, you can call the meeting to an end. 

What I am talking about is uncertainty and not lack of flexibility. I think it would be much better. Other Parliaments do it. I got embarrassed when I was asked, “when are you going to have your next recess?”  I had not idea! Therefore, I think this matter should be supported, but I want to be advised by the chairperson. At what stage should I appropriately bring this matter?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, bring it under part 28. I will remind you to bring it up. Clerk please take note of that. I now put the question that Rule 19 remains part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 20:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, we did not have any amendment on Rule 20.  But in view of the fact that we have removed Fridays from the days of our sittings, maybe members will reconsider the number of hours we are going to give private members on Thursdays.

MR AYUME: In view of the fact that in an earlier rule we only agreed to confirm the current days for the sittings of Parliament, and therefore, not increasing the time for transacting business of Parliament, I would like to propose that instead of what is being proposed here, we state that the last two hours of a sitting on every Thursday shall be allotted to the transaction of private members’ business, instead of one and half. 

I am proposing an amendment to 20(1) in those terms. Instead of one and half hours, we increase it to two hours and only on Thursday.

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, I support that amendment, but I am also moving an amendment. It will be a consequential amendment. Where “Friday” appears, it should be deleted. 

The last line on 20 (2) reads, “…members’ business and that business shall take precedence over Government business.” I move that we add another article to that so that it reads, “If there is no sitting of the House on Thursday or Friday, the Speaker may direct that two hours on any other day in the week may be allotted for private members’ business and that that business shall take precedence over Government business”-(Interjections)- but we need to tell them.  Why didn’t they do it if it is drafting? That is the amendment.  

On (3), after “Members” there should be an apostrophe because it is plural. Thank you.

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was just wondering why we put the two hours at the end of Thursday. Why does it have to be at the end of Thursday? Can’t it be at the beginning and then we discuss other business? I think that is a little marginalizing of the private members’ business.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, if you go back to Rule 16, you will see that the rule provides for the order of business, and we cannot vary this. There are certain ones which we cannot vary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 20(1) and (2) be amended as proposed by the chairperson and by hon. Okumu Ringa.

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 21:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, there is no proposed amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 21 remains part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 22:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 22 remains part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 23:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 23 remains part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 24:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, on the whole of part (5), which deals with questions, manner of asking questions, supplementary questions and answers to questions, there has not been any amendment. All we have done is to re-arrange the sequence of events.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, Rule 24(3) says, “A Minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question from a Member.”  

I want to amend this to say, “Except with the authority of the Speaker, a Minister shall not…” –(Interjections)- if I will be allowed to explain.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, give the rationale behind your view.

MR MUSUMBA: “Except with the authority of the Speaker, a Minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question from a Member.” I will give my explanation, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, you see, we have used two weeks which means 14 calendar days.  When we use 14 calendar days, we run into a problem because the alternative would have been to use sittings, but if we are using calendar days, we run into a problem where we have calendar days upon which a particular minister has been served with this question but the days are such that the 14th day or the 14 days a lapse when this minister is either not available for justifiable reasons, and we would want to leave an opening in which the Prime Minister can explain why this Minister is not around through the Speaker, and the Speaker can come here and clarify to Members that, “Yes, I have heard the reason why this minister is not here or why this minister cannot give a response within a period of 14 days, and therefore he will give it on the 16th of this month.”  

Madam Speaker, if we leave it like this, we tie the hands of everybody, and we will run into a situation where we may not have good answers simply because the law says 14 days.  

I will give an example. There are offices like the Attorney General’s office which is specific to the holder.  If a back bencher put a question to the Attorney General, and Attorney General was defending us in the Hague or wherever, and he is not here for 14 days and that question can only be answered by the Attorney General because he is the advisor to the Government by Constitution - nobody else - we will be tied and make a law that makes us look like we did not anticipate these kind of occurrences.  I am not saying we should have excuses for Ministers not to deliver within two weeks, but I am saying, Madam Speaker, that to pass a law that does not give the Chair or the Office of the Speaker possibility to explain a peculiar situation, is making a law that is unreasonable. 

 I am only seeking to make amendments, so that if the Speaker has been informed, and justifiably so, why the Attorney General is not here to supply an answer of a legal nature or a technical nature in 14 days, the House should be able to appreciate.  

MS KIRASO:  Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister or maybe the Front Bench, because there are some of these things which we are not conversant with.  When a Minister travels abroad or within or is sick and has informed the Prime Minister, I think his office is vacant at that time or they always leave somebody to act in their place, that is in the kind of situation he talked about? Otherwise in the other Ministries, there is no Ministry which has got only one Minister.

MR KAWANGA:  Madam Speaker, those are the very reasons I was going to give, because we do not have a Ministry which has only one Minister; there should be an acting Minister to be able to answer this question.  So, the period of 14 days should be kept for Government to be able to find a Minister to answer the question when the substantive Minister is not around.

MR MWONDHA:Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The office of the Speaker is already too busy to start supervising Ministers.(Applause). I think the supervision of Ministers should be left where it is, and please Ministers answer the questions as required. (Laughter)

MAJ KATIRIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I wish to move a motion to introduce sub-rule 4 on this rule, and it is my wish that this rule will help us cure the disease we have noticed among Ministers who do not want to come and answer questions -(Hear! Hear!)- and this motion I want to move is that we introduce Rule 4 saying that, “Parliament may express its displeasure on a Minister who does not answer questions.” (Laughter).  I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:Okay, hon. Members, I think let us first deal with sub-rule 3.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume):  Madam Speaker, I know why the hon. Member who has just been holding the floor is anxious to move this amendment, but I had actually requested that we dispose off sub-rule 3 before we get there.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Matembe, is there something different you want to say?  

MRS MATEMBE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Certainly as the Minister for Ethics and Integrity, I would not like hon. Ministers to neglect or to refuse to answer questions, but I just want to say that we should not be taken as if we are so irresponsible that we have got to be policed, because Madam Speaker, answering a question in this House is a serious matter. 

For example a question may be asked where this Minister has got to gather all the information within the country; because it might be dealing with districts,and when such questions are asked, I think the hon. Members need to know that we are political heads and we are facilitated by technocrats and we ask these technocrats to go and gather this information and find out the relevant information.  

The question may be so broad that this answer is not available within two weeks; but this rule here says, “A Minister shall within two weeks…” 
Now, if we do not put some kind of check to allow a little bit of relaxation to get the correct information to answer, if two weeks end without the negligence of the Minister and without his refusal, what happens to this question?  Does it mean that it cannot be answered anymore or what?  Therefore, my appeal, Madam Speaker, is really to let us look at each other as responsible colleagues.  We take you as responsible Members of Parliament, please also take us as responsible colleagues who would be interested to do the work, and therefore accept the hon. Musumba’s amendment which allows some bit of flexibility for a period beyond two weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, my understanding of the thinking of the hon. Members of this House is that they probably have no objection to someone answering in three weeks.  But they have an objection to an inordinate delay of one, two, three, four, five months; I think that is really what their problem is.

MRS MATEMBE:  It says ‘shall’ here; it means once two weeks are over, I do not know what happens.

CAPT BYARUHANGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I had wanted from the Minister of Ethics and Integrity, is as to whether Ministers will cut out slightly on their Ministries when Members ask questions here.  I think Ministers are supposed to be researching on their Ministries, so to allude that you will have to get statistics on your Ministries after a Member has asked is really misguided, because they have those statistics.

DR OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am in a bit of dilemma.  This provision is mandatory “shall answer within two weeks.”  And I think that provision has been there like that and no answers were being given within two weeks.  My dilemma is still on what hon. Matembe was saying that supposing within two weeks the Minister does not answer, does the question lapse; does the Minister come and explain and ask for more time?  I would like the Chairman who is an expert in this to clarify to me, what happens under those circumstances?

MS DORA BYAMUKAMA: I would like to point out two small issues.  One, I am seeking clarification on what is to respond?    Secondly, I think in this era of cyber space, email, fax, phone and all other research facilities, as well as personnel at the disposal of Ministers, it is imperative that we say two weeks subject to what to respond means.  Thank you.

MR WACHA:Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The purpose of this sub-rule really is to bring out the importance of question time in this House.  It is unfortunate that question time is not being given the due respect that it deserves.  In other legislatures, question time is perhaps the most important single hour that the House has and it is supposed to keep Ministers on their toes, so that the House knows what is happening in each Ministry.  Now, if a Minister is asked a question and he takes five years to answer it - really it has happened; it happened in the Sixth Parliament, I am not talking out of my head.  It is a very, very serious matter, it is indicating lack of respect for the Institution of Parliament; it is indicating that whoever asked that question does not matter and this is a matter that the House should not take lightly; we cannot take it lightly.  

What happens if the question is not answered?  What happens if somebody breaches this Rule?    It is a breach of the rule and the Office of the Speaker must take action; yes, you just cannot go away with it that way.  The Office of the Speaker must see that these rules are followed, otherwise they are just rules with pieces of ink left on paper.  Two weeks is good enough in this era where we have computers; where we have researchers; where we have everybody.  Because if you do not have two weeks, what are you going to have in one month; what happens if you do not answer after one month?  The issue of a minister not being there is taken care of in another sub-rule 31, and I hope we will come to that and discuss it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I now put the question that Rule 24(3) be amended as proposed by hon. Musumba.

(Question put and negatived)

LT COL KATIRIMA:  Madam Speaker, I move to introduce a new 4 on this Rule 24, and the rule should read as follows: “ Parliament shall express its displeasure on a Minister who does not answer questions put to him.”  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There is a proposal.

MR AYUME:  I did not get his proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There is a proposal that we add Rule 24(4), to the effect that Parliament shall express its displeasure upon a Minister who fails to respond to the questions, something along those lines, is it not?

MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, Parliament is already well armed under the Constitution to deal with a minister who does not perform, who is incompetent under Article 118 and I think that in my opinion it is a sufficient ammunition.  And therefore, when it comes to these particular rules, we should not really crowd them with matters which are already well taken care of in the Constitution or even elsewhere in this rule.  Thank you.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the opinion given by the Attorney General to the effect that this area is very well covered in the Constitution under Article 118, and I think under Rule 83 which we have not reached. I specifically moved to show the seriousness we the back benchers attach to the questions we put to the Ministers, and take into account the attitude the Ministers have had in answering these questions put to them, and the lack of seriousness they have particularly shown in answering these questions. The intention of this move is to show that refusing to answer a question from Members of the House could be a ground enough for Parliament to express displeasure in anyway it likes up to a point of censure.  I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Kiyingi Namusoke):Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have no problem about Parliament expressing its displeasure.  But I am just imagining that when Parliament wants to express its displeasure, there will be a motion that will be debated.  Now how much time are we going to put in just expressing displeasure?  And if we are talking about Parliament conducting its business and finishing it, surely, do we have to move a motion to express displeasure?  Do we need to specifically stand up and say we are expressing displeasure? That is the problem I have.  If we talked about a Minister who routinely fails to answer questions or refuses or whatever word we use, then does that make sense?  But if we want to express displeasure every time a Minister has not given the answer - because we have said, “shall give an answer” and who knows, maybe the answer that will be given at one point one will say, “No. That is no answer. We are going to express our displeasure.” I really think it is going to be costly in terms of time to the House.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  This afternoon, I think Parliament pronounced itself and recorded displeasure about the act of some Ministers; this in itself may be a simple matter.  I have heard arguments from Ministers that we should only consider people who routinely avoid answering questions.

Now Madam Speaker, by recording displeasure we shall be able to establish a trend because unless there is a record that minister so and so, in such and such a month, neglected or failed to answer questions; they will always have the benefit of doubt or think they have been treated unfairly.  In our chronicles there have been instances where ailing ministers, even when we know that in the absence of a minister, the portfolio can be assigned to another minister to answer questions.  I think before moving to Article 118 to censure a minister, the minister should be given an opportunity to reform and perform better, and I think that just like in civil service, the first time you give a warning, verbal or written, this time we record our displeasure.  Next time when it is becoming a habit, it must be handled firmly so that the inhibitors in Government are actually dealt with. 

We are actually assisting our friend the Rt hon. Prime Minister in ensuring that his work is not unduly burdened.  That is why I stood up to second this motion that it is appropriate for Parliament to exercise its duty and to be able to record that actually – it is another way of saying, we have warned Minister so and so to pull up his socks or her socks.  I thank you Madam Speaker.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want people who perform, because the way I was brought up, you either perform or you must be fired and there are no two ways about it.  I always get very disgusted when we appear to be weak, yet we are extremely strong.  I want to make it clear that in fact it is not proper to castigate all Ministers.  Many Ministers have done extremely well and since this Parliament started, I have been very proud of the Executive.  

What has happened - for example today, hon. Mukwaya has not been able to oblige, but we are yet to know; she may have faced, for example, an accident on her way.  (Interjection). Yes, you have always heard what I call the contingent element.  So, I think it is important, and already you have expressed your displeasure anyway. 

Whenever Ministers have not performed, they know what I write to them, including the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs. When I was not here, for example; I was not feeling well and he was busy noting, so I want to make it clear that we have been handling this matter through the executive arrangement, and I do not want any impression to be given that the Executive has not been performing; it is the other way round and I have been very proud of their answers.  

But now, if you squeeze the Ministers on the wall, then we say, “fine they can come and give you an average answer,” so what are you going to do about it?  Fine, if you censure a minister, is that the end of the world?  (Laughter). It is not, because many of these people can manage their lives outside this Parliament; so you need quality answers.  You too have shortcomings, you should be aware of it.  

What I would request is that you have already expressed your disgust to some Ministers, and not all of them. There was an occasion when I even made it clear to the Minister that he had misbehaved and he was ashamed of himself; he said, “Prime Minister, you did not even defend me, what is happening”?  I told him, “I am disgusted with you”.  So I would suggest that you leave the matter to the Executive.  You always show your disapproval and we shall continue to correct the matter.  But if the matter recurs, you can use Article 118; do you see what I mean?  I suggest that leave this matter without accepting that amendment. My ministers have done their best under very difficult circumstances. (Laughter).  I thank the ministers!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that a new Clause 24(4) be created as proposed by hon. Katirima.

(Question put and negatived.)

(Some Members stood in disagreement with the decision.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Are they forty? You did not form forty.  

Hon Mwandha, you want to create a new 24?

MR MWANDHA: Before I move my amendment, I want to give a bit of background. This afternoon, you guided the House because very often one of our colleagues, I do not know whether he is here, hon. Aggrey Awori, would start off with procedure and come up with all sorts of issues. Some of them very controversial, but others very topical. I am aware that in many Parliaments, apart from the usual questions with a notice, they normally would have a session of open questions to the ministers to raise current issues. Issues which the population expects the Parliament to raise. Issues of today, to be raised today, because after sometime, they become irrelevant and out-dated.

The Parliament of India, the House of Commons of England, the House of Commons of Canada, they have a practice of open questions at the beginning.  For instance, in Canada, they have 60 minutes of open questions to ministers.  I want to make a proposal, Madam Speaker, that we have a session for open questions at every beginning of the sitting for only 30 minutes, instead of the kind of time that I have been talking about.  This will help issues of a current nature, which are topical, to be brought to the attention of the House. In fact, some of the ministers may not be aware of some of the topical issues and I think Parliament will be seen as really handling issues of the day. 

Now, I believe that this kind of arrangement could be put at the beginning of Rule 24, but the drafting can be left to the people who are qualified to draft. I think that will formalise what hon. Aggrey Awori used to do, which I think in a way was very useful to the House to bring up topical issues so that we can do it in an orderly manner.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think we are moving back and forth. I think there is a constitutional provision, which the Chairperson might help me with relating to the order of business in this House under the Constitution.  It sets out what business, and how it should come.  So, in view of that section, we may be violating the Constitution by putting private members’ business first every single day of the week.  I think it is 90 – hon. Wacha, I think I had indicated that section to you in the Constitution. Now, if we are going to do that, we shall be violating the Constitution.

The Constitution provides for the order of business. 94(1) “Subject to provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure including the procedure of its Committees”.

94(4) says, “The Rules of Procedure of Parliament shall include the following provisions: “The Speaker shall determine the order of business in Parliament and shall give priority to government business.” 

Now, the Committee on Rules had tried to circumvent that by providing extra time, which this House rejected.  In the circumstances, I would advise that that procedure may not be appropriate, but maybe the Chairperson to the Committee has something to say about it.

MR WACHA:  Madam Speaker, we discussed the issue of question time at length.  I think what has come out is, what do you need time for?  Why do you need it?  Do you need any answer or do you need an answer which will satisfy you?  The reason why you give notice is that you give the minister time to dig out information, which will satisfy the House. Now, if you are going to ask a question without notice, are you going to get any answer from any minister?  Because if you are raising the question because of a matter which is happening currently, then you have another provision of the rule under which you can go by using proposed Rule 43.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The current 42(1).

MR WACHA: 43  “Adjournment motion on a definite matter of urgent public importance.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, honourable members, earlier this afternoon, I drew your attention to the rules you can use if you have a matter you feel is of urgent public importance, and I said you can move to adjourn the House under Rule 42(1) so that the Speaker creates time on that day to discuss that particular matter, and I gave you examples of a landslide killing people, volcanic eruption.  So, there is a provision in our rules even today for this.  Thank you.

MRS ZZIWA: I wanted to give a supplementary concern to the issue which hon. Mwandha has raised. Considering that in most cases when these issues are raised, they are always very topical and eventually they draw supplementary questions.  If it is an everyday affair, we may end up even not tackling the would-be business of the day, and in some cases, we may end up with a backlog of the issues which we may be supposed to deal with maybe in particular period.  So, with that maybe it would be good that we stay with Thursday as may be scheduled and that remains the day when we always deal with oral questions and maybe questions of notice.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, my hands are tied by Article 94 with respect to that particular proposal. Thank you!  So, I now put the question.  Is there anything else under part (iv) under Rule 25 or 26?  I now put the question that part (iv) of – (Mr Musumba rose_)

MR MUSUMBA:  Madam Speaker, I am getting confused with these parts and I thought we were going rule by rule because I had something on Rule 29; maybe you will inform me when I get there.  We have to go rule by rule; that was your previous ruling.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay! But I have been informed that other than the small matter in 24, there were no other amendments.  

MR MUSUMBA:  There were no other amendments from the Committee, but we are not members of the Committee.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rule 24.  I now put the question that Rule 24 remains part of our rules.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 25 agreed to.

Rule 26 agreed to.

Rule 27, agreed to.

Rule 28:

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the Chairperson of the Committee in 28(2). Rule 31(2) of the old rules, the notice should be at least three sittings.  The proposal now is that it should be at least three days.  Why has the Committee chosen three days and not three sittings? As you know, we are actually not here on some of the calendar days. But sittings are sittings. I seek clarification.

MR WACHA: Madam, if you read the whole of rule 28, you will notice that we have excluded Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday. In other words, any notice can be given any day of the week. We could give a notice of a question on the three days we start running from Monday, or we give a notice on Friday, then the period will run from Friday, Monday and Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Musumba, do you still have a problem with that?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I do not have very strong feelings either way; I was just wondering what would happen, because at times here, even before we go for recess, there is adjournment for a number of days which are more than the days of the week. At times we are in recess. I do not know whether this excepts recess time. I really do not know. I just thought that the earlier one was better, but I do not have strong feelings, though I would have stuck by the old provisions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 28 remain part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 29:

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, my understanding is that we are making these rules for the good of this House. In which case, there are no positions of Front Bench or Back Bench. If I were on the Back Bench, I would be arguing for rule 29 to be varied. I would rather have gone with rule 32(3), which says, instead of determining what question to come by lot – the provision now is that if 20 Members of Parliament gave in their questions, the order by which they would be asked in the House is determined by lot under the direction of the Speaker.

I was reading rule 32 which says that a record book will be kept and the order in which the questions for oral answer is recorded is on a first come, first served basis. Therefore, if we are 20 MPs who have put in questions for oral answer, instead of the Speaker determining the order by lot, the Speaker should determine the order on a first come first served basis as recorded in the book kept with the Clerk for that purpose. 

Therefore, the determination of what comes in what order by lot, in my view, should be removed. Instead, we take the provision in a subsequent rule that an order book be kept. It is rule 33(3) “There shall be a Questions Record Book to be kept by the Clerk…” and that we insist on questions coming on the basis of first come first served. That is the gist of my amendment.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification following hon. Musumba’s submission. If there are many questions registered for oral answer, but one of them is of an urgent nature -. For example, if there is a camp for internally displaced persons and cholera has broken out in that camp. Or if there has been a landslide and a Member from Mbale wants to know what immediate measures the ministry responsible is taking, but then that Member comes in when there are already 20 registered questions for oral answer. That means that these questions will be answered after 20 weeks if we stick to question time every Thursday. That is the clarification I am seeking. Why don’t we leave the matter to be looked at by the Speaker in terms of what is urgent?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Perhaps let me explain. In determining the lots, there are many variables the Speaker takes into account. For instance, if we are about to discuss the budget and a Members asks a matter related to the budget, and in two weeks time the Committees are going to start sitting, I will not give that matter a priority because I know that in two weeks time, you have an opportunity to handle that matter. 

Or, if it is expected that the President is due to address us on a certain matter, and I notice this is one of those that will feature, I may not put the question as a priority because I know it is going to be answered. But if we have a landslide in Bundibugyo, certainly I will have to bring that matter forward because it concerns people who are dying and they need food from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, that kind of thing. I do not know whether that satisfies you.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the issue raised by hon. Kiraso is properly catered for under 28(2). If there is an emergency, if there is a crisis, you do not have to use the normal procedure we are talking about now. But I want to support hon. Musumba, because I put in questions last year – one on mob justice, another one on street children. I put another question only a few days back, but these questions are still pending. It would be wrong for my questions to be mixed up with the people who put their questions yesterday, and maybe by lot, they get precedence over the questions I put last year. Therefore, I think it should be first come, first served.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, about the street children, I remember that question was asked on your behalf in your absence. I was in the Chair.  The Member for Kibaale asked on your behalf. I know that because I was in the Chair. But Chairperson, what do you think about the proposals?

MR WACHA: You have really answered the question, Madam Speaker. The issue is what emphasis do we put on questions, on a particular time, on a particular day. Which one should come first and which one should not? You might have a hypothetical case where at one particular hour, all of us put in questions. How will you now come in? How will we answer such questions?  

We were trying to give the Speaker some discretion to determine which questions are really relevant at that particular time, and which are more important than the others. I really do not have any strong feelings on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I assure the members that the Speaker really does not delay these matters.

MR MUSUMBA: Much obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 29 do form part of our rules

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 30:

MR OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the Chairperson on Rule 30. The rule deals with conditions for admissibility of questions. It has given the conditions from (a) to (k), but there is no provision where if questions are asked and they are not admissible, the questioner may be informed.  Can there be a provision to that effect. 

In case a member asked these questions, and they are received by the secretariat, and they simply say, “this is not admissible”, the member may be sitting thinking that actually there may be an answer to the question. Is there a provision within the rule to the effect that a reply would be given that your question is received and will be answered? I seek clarification.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam. If hon. Okumu looked at 28(7)(c), he would have got the answer. 28(7)(c) says: “There shall be a Question Record book to be kept by the Clerk which shall be open for inspection by Members and in which shall be recorded - 

(c) questions not admitted and the reasons for their rejection.”

MR AACHILLA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Chairperson of the Committee in respect to (g). Part (g) seems to be so restrictive. In my understanding, when we say that the subject matter should not vary, it should be of one specific interest. 

If it so happens that a member puts a question which is related to security, and you know security has so many wide dynamics, it may digress to other areas of political interest. And you know that most of the questions which are brought are of a political nature. I do not really understand how somebody can bring up a question which only restricts them to one particular aspect in this case. 

I look at part (g) as asking members to give academic questions, which need specific answers, but I do not think it is so. When you say that you should not have excessive length, I would like to get clarification, because this is a debate. I do not know how many words you may need in a particular question or how many paragraphs will determine the non-excessive questions. Thank you.

MR WACHA: I guess what that means is that you should not write an essay when asking a question.  Some people might want to write a love story. 

Secondly, your question must be to the point. It should only deal with one subject matter. If you intend to ask a question on another subject matter, then you ask another question. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 30 do form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 31, agreed to.

Rule 32, agreed to.

Rule 33: 

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I wish to move an amendment at this stage on statements by ministers.  But before the statements by ministers, I would like to propose that we insert a new section before this one namely, “statements by the President”. And we say, “all statements and messages made to Parliament by the President shall be debated”. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.  

The justification is that other than the State of the Nation address, there are times when we interact with the President, and the address which he makes is not debated by this House, and yet there are very important issues raised. Some of these issues touch on matters of policy and legislature. So, I want to move that we insert a statement by the President, and then I will later move an amendment on the statement by ministers. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This touches on Article 101 of the Constitution. The President’s address to Parliament is not just on the state of the nation, but also under Article 101 (2) of the Constitution he can address Parliament.

MR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think what is being referred to is Article 101(2) because in (1), normally debate ensues on the State of the Nation address by the President. That one is really not an issue. 

It is in sub article (2) where the President may, in consultation with the Speaker, address Parliament on any matter of national importance. It is with regard to this that there seems not to have been a provision for that speech to be debated. I think this is what the hon. Member is proposing.  

In practice, those of you who have attended such addresses have left the International Conference Centre after making only a few comments and dying to go into full debate. I personally would not object to the inclusion of this statement to be debated by honourable Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a little difficulty. Under rule 33(2), what was the rationale for there not to be a debate following a statement by the minister; if I could be assisted on that one? I have difficulty with the President’s statement too. Or do we need time to reflect on it? What was the rationale for the rules to state that the minister’s statement will not be debated? If the minister’s statement cannot be debated, what about the higher statement?

MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, I am just being reminded that I only answered half the question, is that correct? I thought the question was that the statement of the President under Article 101(2) should be debated after delivery. I said there is no problem with that. But I am being reminded that the question had two segments, is that correct? (Ms Kiraso rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you had finished asking your question, was there another segment?

MS KIRASO: No. I just thought he had put the question to me, Madam Speaker, because I am the one who stood and moved that amendment. On the amendment I moved, I think the Attorney General has already pronounced himself, or given us his view. 

The other amendment which I think you must have seen on a piece of paper, I have not yet moved it. I am going to move it under rule 32(2), to cater for what the Speaker has just talked about - not to debate or to debate the minister’s statement.  But for the time being I am talking about the President’s statement and messages.
  
MR WACHA: Well, the Attorney General has –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay. 

MR WACHA: In which case, Madam Speaker, I think there should also be a consequential amendment now in respect of rule 32(2).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. That is what I was saying that if the President’s statement can be debated, then it follows that the minister’s statement should also be debated.

MR WACHA: So I will accept Madam Kiraso’s amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I now put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed by hon. Kiraso.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 33, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 34 agreed to.

Rule 35 agreed to.

Rule 36 agreed to.

Rule 37 agreed to.

Rule 38:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, there is a small amendment to 38. We have added “or”, to read, “any motion related to an appeal from the President or a reference from the Committee on Appointments under rule 143.”  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 38 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

Rule 38, as amended, agreed to.

MR WACHA: There is another one. We also added another amendment to read, “any motion made under rule 74.” We have not -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So there is no 38?

MR WACHA: 74 is secret voting.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So there is (o) or (p). 

MR WACHA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 38 be amended by the addition of two more sub-clauses. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 38, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 39 agreed to.

Rule 40 agreed to.

Rule 41 agreed to.

Rule 42 agreed to.

Rule 43:

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to seek a clarification first of all from the Chairperson of the Committee. Rule 43(1) says, “any member may move the adjournment motion for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance, and if: 

(a) not less than five members rise in their place in support; and 

(b) the Speaker rules that the matter is a definite matter of urgent public importance; the Speaker shall appoint a time on the same day when the motion may be moved.”

Will then the motion be carried? Is this supposed to be both or in the alternative?  

If the intention is to say, five members must rise and in addition, the Speaker rules then I am wondering whether it does not fetter the Speaker’s discretion. Can the Speaker on his or her own not rule that this is a matter of urgent importance, if there are no five Members who have stood?  Must we have both situations, because according to this rule it is only after five Members have arisen that the Speaker can rule. Can the Speaker not rule without a minimum of five Members standing?  I just wanted to know whether we must have both so that if the Speaker does not rule, then five Members can stand up and cause the Speaker to examine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the provision in the present rules of the 6th Parliament, and to the best of my recollection, they are to be used together but that does not bar the Speaker from using his or her discretion to determine the matter for urgent public importance.

MR MWESIGYE: I had what you have just said in mind, that the raising of five Members adds weight to the importance of the subject which a Member wants to raise as a matter of urgency, and therefore, the Speaker bases on the weight to determine whether the matter should be put forward or not.  So, I think the two factors should go together; there is no conflict, Madam Speaker.

MR AYUME: Madam Speaker, I think the word “end” is conjunctive, meaning that the first event as well as the second should take place.  Now as to whether a thing like that would fetter the Speaker’s discretion, I think in the subsequent sub-rule in Rule 43, that is sub-rule (3), it is clear that in the final analysis, it is the Speaker who determines whether the matter is of urgent consideration, and he or she is supposed to take into account the matters that are listed in sub-rule (3); so his or her discretion is still retained.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that Rule 43 do form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 44 agreed to.

Rule 45 agreed to.

Rule 46 agreed to.

Rule 47 agreed to.

Rule 48 agreed to.

Rule 49:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, Rule 49 was re-debated by the Rules Committee and they agreed that it should not be part of the rules, so it has been revoked.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are deleting Rule 49?

MR WACHA: We are deleting it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your justification?

MR WACHA: Madam, if you look back, the Speaker may, at any time take into account national security beside that matter which is before the House to be debated in camera. So, it was decided that this particular rule would be duplicating what is already provided for.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I know that the Committee might have had a lot of discussions on this.  But, why this was necessarily brought in is because of the history of legislating that has been going on in public, in this House and on FM Radios, on issues that sometimes are taken lightly but when they are such deep and important security issues for the nation and for the security of the people.  

What this rule was supposed to do was to ensure that guidance is given to people who are going to talk about national security to go through some procedure, so that somebody does not come here and start releasing national security secrets anyhow.  I really like to appeal that it be retained, and I am happy with what the Committee had presented; it is elaborate; it is giving the procedures one can take so that we avoid blundering while other countries are very strict on this.  

It is actually in the Penal Code on how you speak about national security but it does not cover how we proceed in Parliament here.  That is why this rule is important, and I appeal to Members really that it is in our interest and it does not infringe on anybody’s freedom if we retain it.  I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Of course I do not agree with hon. Lt Gen Tumwine.  One, there is no provision like that in the Penal Code, and if there is any, cite it.  Two, this is the Parliament of the Republic of this country; we have got the right and obligation to debate all issues touching the affairs of this country. There is no doubt on whether we should debate on security, economic, whatever.  The only matter which arises, Madam Speaker, and the Committee considered this very seriously, is that when Parliament is debating matters that touch national security, Parliament can move into camera and discuss those issues. But these other procedures that had been provided for are very unnecessary.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to be clarified by the hon. Lt Gen Tumwine.  I wanted to be clarified –(Interruption).

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I have already expunged this from the rules. I do not know what people are debating.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, you see, this is a proposal that I believe came from your Committee and they have the text.  (Interjections).  The Committee issued the amendment; hon. Members there is no Rule 49.

LT GEN TUMWINE:  I thought that all issues that have been presented to us were subject for discussion and the Chairperson had included this for discussion.  It happens that while he has his views, like he has had on previous items, it does not deny the House from expressing itself on any matter that has been presented. In that regard, I thought that while he might have a different opinion, the House could have another opinion. I moved that we discuss it and include it because it is so important. 

From what hon. Katuntu has said here, it shows how dangerous it can be; that anything can be discussed in this House without precaution. That is very dangerous, and I would like to warn the House that we do not take this lightly and just go over it. I appeal to you to discuss it like we have discussed all issues where the chairperson agrees or does not agree.  We should include it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiraso, you can complete your clarification.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with hon. Tumwine. Much as the Committee felt this one should be deleted, and he thinks it should be there, I think we should be given a chance to talk about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me make this clear. This was a new innovation. It is not part of our existing rules. It was a proposal which is now being abandoned by the proposer. This is a proposed new section not in the rules of the Sixth Parliament, and the person who proposed it has abandoned it.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, we can get out of this by having a formal motion that introduces a new 49 along this. I move that we have a new Rule 49 added onto our draft rules, which reads as follows: “debate on matters relating to national security -(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: If you look at page 13, Rule 14(2), I think this is catered for.

MR MWESIGE: I am moving on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker, because hon. Musumba had already moved a motion to re-introduce Rule 49, which had been expunged by the committee. Before hon. Sabiiti brings up the argument about 14, I would have expected hon. Musumba to move his motion first and then we can proceed with the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but I think re-introduction is also not the right word, because it was not there in the old rules. This is a new creation. So, can you move for a new 49.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I beg to introduce a rule to be known as rule 49, entitled “debate of matters relating to national security”, and it reads as follows: 

“49. (1) No member shall move any motion or introduce any matter the discussion of which touches on national security unless the member has first obtained leave of the Speaker.  

(2) Where a member applies for leave to move any motion or introduce any matter under sub-rule (1) of this rule, the Speaker shall refer the application to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and the Committee shall as soon as practicable, indicate to the Speaker its recommendation on the matter.  

(3) When considering an application under sub-rule (2), the Committee may sit in camera.  

(4) If any question arises during a debate whether or not a matter touches on national security,  the question shall be determined by the Speaker whose decision shall be final.  

(5) Where a member raises a matter touching on national security while holding the floor, the Speaker shall draw his or her attention to this rule and require the member to comply with the requirements of this rule.”  
I beg to move.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I oppose this amendment.  First of all, I want to draw the attention of members to Rule 14(2), which states,

"The Speaker may, with the approval of the House and having regard to the national security, order the House to move into closed sitting.”  

The purpose of this is to make sure that the fears which were expressed earlier by Lt Gen. Tumwine, that matters of national security could be discussed irresponsibly and in the open, would be taken care of.  

Secondly, if you see the elaborate method of introducing motions or discussing matters of national security as introduced by hon. Musumba, you see that you will not be able to determine what a matter touching national security really is. In the final analysis, you might not be able to discuss or debate anything at all in this House.  

Thirdly, the method is highly cumbersome. You are stopped in the middle of your speech, and then you are made to refer the matter to the Committee, which will sit in camera. In other words, you are not even allowed to attend that committee meeting because you might not be a member. They will discuss you in private, and you will not be able to put up your side of the story.  

In subrule (5), as he introduced it, a member will be stopped here midstream by the Speaker to say that the matter touches on national security. You must first apply to me, and then I will refer you to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.  

We must be able to understand our role here as Members of Parliament. First and foremost, we are supposed to be responsible citizens of this country. We are supposed to handle all matters which affect the well being of this country.  

It is only when the Speaker, in his wisdom, decides that what I am now talking about is so sensitive and other people should not hear it, that he closes the debate and says, “let us move into a closed sitting”.  

This elaborate system of going to inform the Speaker, going to a committee which you are not allowed to attend, being stopped midstream in your debate, I think is going to gag us in this House.  Madam Speaker, I reject this motion.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I will go back to seek clarification from Lt Gen. Tumwine now that the motion has been moved formally on the Floor.

He talked about national security secrets. In this Parliament, we have got 10 Members of Parliament who represent the UPDF. Those, to me, are the only members who are privy to the secrets of national security. Where would the rest of us get those secrets from, other than guessing and making allegations which you would have had a chance, as a member of UPDF, to stand up and refute here if they are not right.   

Secondly, with the freedom of speech and freedom of the press, if something is said or reported somewhere, and a whole Parliament fears to touch that issue to get clarified from people who know better so that the record is made straight, then what national security are we talking about?  Actually it is insecurity, if something is talked about elsewhere and here we keep quiet in fear of exposing national security.

Madam Speaker, then why do we not put something not to talk about the economy, because if we say the economy is not performing well, we may chase away investors.  Why do we not stop talking about public health, because if we talk about the matter of public health, cholera and you know spreading of these diseases, then we will be scaring people from freely interacting either in pairs or in gatherings. (Laughter).

I would like to agree with the Committee that in view of 14, which has been read to us, which is in these big books, 49 be deleted from the Rules of Procedure.  I beg to move.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The formulation in sub-rule 14 reads: “No Member shall move any motion or introduce any matter the discussion of which touches on national security unless the Member has first obtained the leave of the Speaker.”

Madam Speaker, this is just intolerably too broad.  It is tantamount to gagging.  Matter of national security, now what is it?  How do you estimate which one is so paramount though secret that nobody should talk about it?  I think this one was really outrageously dangerous, and it presupposes that we, Members of parliament here have no interest at heart on matters of national security.  This is invested in one individual or some group, whose matter of national security is so important to them, and it is their prerogative to handle it and the rest of us would just be onlookers. 

I think, as a Parliament of an independent country, a Parliament elected by people to represent them here, a matter of national security, unless we define the phrase “matter of national security” this formulation is too broad and could cause a lot of problems in this House.
  
In fact, when do we discuss the Ministry of Defence’s budget?  Does the entire Ministry of Defence budget not include national security?  When do we discuss the bill on the army or national security?  Would there not be provisions there, which are touching on a matter of national security?  And it is saying that no Member shall move a motion; it is only the Executive that can move this motion. I think this is really removing from Members of Parliament their right to be the watchdogs of the Executive on all these matters, including on the security of the people they represent here. 

I think, whoever brought this - I do not even know that the Committee could have brought it here first and then on a second thought dropped it. Otherwise -(Mr Wacha rose_)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, hon. Epak is insinuating that the Committee might have had second thoughts about this thing, that is why it is expounding it.   As a matter of fact, the compilation of that book was done without consulting the present committee.  Is he therefore in order to insinuate that first we must have wanted it and then now we are expounding it? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, he is not in order! Please conclude your contribution.

DR OKULO EPAK:  I thank the honourable Chairman of the Committee for that information; and that probably the Committee was not a party to this inclusion.  I am most grateful!  I really would like very strongly to oppose this motion and state that as a citizen of this country, the matter of national security is as important to me as anybody else, and the provision in sub-rule 14 is more than adequate for the purpose of our national security.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry I have been away for sometime.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Nasasira, it means you do not think about me when you are not here. (Laughter).  Please proceed.

MR NASASIRA:My apologies, Madam Speaker. While some honourable members might be concerned about the deleted 49, and while the Chairman of the Committee was referring to 14(2) to be adequate, I personally think we should find the middle of the road. First, there are worries that the procedure for 49 is wrong; and secondly, is that everybody might be stopped in his or her debate because of 49. But at the same time, for the 14(2) which we have passed, the Speaker can only make that ruling with the approval of Parliament, but there should be a section where the Speaker could make a ruling and say “honourable Member there you have reached a raw nerve”, and then you move to the next one.  

So, I think if we cannot accept 49, then we should be able to recommit 14 to give the Speaker a better way to rule when matters of national security are touched. Otherwise, we would leave it loose. And what Lt Gen. Tumwine is saying is true that there are areas which might be of national security that an honourable member might not know.  Suppose the security forces are tracking some saboteurs, or there is some military intelligence going on over a pending invasion by a country, and you an honourable member you are not aware of where they have reached and you come here and you release the cat out of the bag and the country is attacked, you will turn back and say I was not informed. But there must be a check.  

Yes, honourable members should be free to debate national security and this is not just general security, this is national security. So, who will decide that when the honourable member is going to speak he does not touch on something that can be of tremendous security?  I think there must be a check, and at the moment, 14 is not giving enough check and 49 might have clauses which are not giving enough freedom for honourable members to speak. I think, we should recommit 14, either to cure that, or we should think of amending 49 and remove the worries of the honourable members. 

MR WACHA:  Madam Speaker, we have had discussions here with the Attorney General and we agree that at an appropriate time we will recommit 14. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  In that case we did not –(Lt Gen. Timwine rose_)

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I thought that a motion is on the Floor and we were debating the motion tabled by hon. Musumba which I seconded. I wanted to speak to that motion as a seconder, and then we dispose either of that motion and whatever comes out rather than just close it off.  I wanted to request that I speak to the motion and second it before it is closed or taken or decided either way.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I thought you were one of the first people to make a statement on this matter?

LT GEN. TUMWINE: That was introductory, but the motion was tabled and I seconded it. Yes, that was to discuss this rule and he tabled the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, you speak to the motion.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My life is committed to the freedom of the people of Uganda to speak and discuss issues that concern the welfare of all of us.  I have no personal interest, or group interest for that matter, in the case of members of UPDF representing the UPDF here to say that we are pushing for anything that is beneficial to us as a group. 

But why I am seconding the motion is that there are many people in this House who are privy - to clarify what hon. Kiraso was raising -  to security information. The Prime Minister, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Security, and there is the Minister of Defence and the Committee on Defence. 

MR MWONDHA: Madam Speaker, the Chairperson of the Committee has reported to the House that they have conferred with the Attorney General, and I presume with the mover of the motion, and have agreed to re-commit 14, doesn’t that make the motion redundant?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was the mover party to that consultation?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have not yet withdrawn the motion formally. So the motion is still on the Floor. The motion is mine. I moved it and it was seconded. If the motion is to leave this Floor, either we vote on it or I withdraw it formally. That is the procedure. Madam Speaker since I have not yet withdrawn it formally –(Interruption)- since we have been notified that there will be re-consideration of this matter, I beg that it be stood over. My amendment should be stood over until we have recommitted the other one and we will choose between the two.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, the mover of the motion is proposing that the matter be stood over until we re-commit. So we shall re-Committee rule 49.

Rule 50, agreed to.

Rule 51, agreed to.

Rule 52, agreed to.

Rule 53, agreed to.

Rule 54, agreed to.

Rule 55, agreed to.

Rule 56, agreed to.

Rule 57, agreed to.

Rule 58:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, hon. Okumu Ringa is on the Floor.

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, can I be protected? Rule 58 is very tricky and it has always and ever been misused. It reads: “If a Member persists in irrelevance or tedious repetitions or uses objectionable words and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words and offer an apology to the satisfaction of the Speaker, any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that the Member using the objectionable words be no longer heard...”
 
This is in respect to that particular session or sitting. Could we be more specific so that such a Member is not intimidated to think that even the following day such a Member should not speak? He can at least be explained to the House. I would like to be explicit. That is the clarification I am seeking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, can you explain the rationale behind rule 58? But maybe before he clarifies, hon. Ringa, I do not recollect that this rule has been misused. But I think that certainly, if clearly Members’ utterances are irrelevant to the subject on the Order Paper, one would not waste time listening to those presentations. Or if, one is –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, I agree with you, but the aspect of saying that the Member be no longer heard, it should be in respect of that session.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. Hon. Okumu Ringa, if during this session a Member becomes irrelevant, one of the Members will raise a point of order to the effect that he has infringed the rules by being irrelevant. The Speaker will give a ruling and then he will have to stop saying that particular thing he has been saying. But that does not mean you do not speak again during the sitting. You will have to stop that particular subject you are discussing. I think it is clear, is it not?  Chairperson what do you think?  

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In fact, I was about to move a motion that hon. Okumu Ringa should no longer be heard. (Laughter). Madam Speaker, I do not think we should really labour so much on this point. The rule is very clear, the Committee considered it and if you involve yourself in irrelevance and tedious repetitions, they should not be heard anymore. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put that question that rule 58 form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 58, agreed to.

Rule 59, agreed to.

Rule 60:

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, rule 60 is usually abused and I am seeking clarification. It reads: “After a question has been proposed in the House or in a Committee of the Whole House and debated, a Member may move ‘That the question be now put’, and, unless it appears to the Speaker that the motion is an abuse of the rules of the House or an infringement of the rights of any Member, the question ‘That the question be now put’ shall be put forthwith and decided upon without amendment or debate.”  

My concern is that this is always abused. Is there a rule somewhere, which protects the Member? I would like the Chairperson to assure the House.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, this rule can only be abused with the connivance of the Speaker.  If the Speaker wants it to be abused, it can. But if the Speaker does not want it to be abused, he will always handle it appropriately, because the magical words are: “unless it appears to the Speaker that the motion is an abuse of the rules of the House or an infringement of the rights of any Member”.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we can rely on the Speaker to use his or her power judiciously, because sometimes, we have motions where there are more contributions, and sometimes where nobody is willing to contribute. On the other instances, if something is excessively repeated by many people, that is a situation where really one can put the question. But let us say that the Speaker will use his or her discretion judiciously.

I put the question that Rule 60, do form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 61:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, we propose to amend Rule 61 as follows: 

Dress Code: “All Members shall dress in a dignified manner that is to say: 

(a) A pair of trousers, jacket, shirt and tie, a kanzu and a jacket, or a safari suit for male Members;

(b) a suit, a jacket, blouse and skirt, dress or busuuti for lady Members; or 

(c) military attire for Members of the armed forces; and

All Members shall put on dignified shoes, save that a Member may, with the prior leave of the Speaker, put on foot wear which may not necessarily be described as shoes.” 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MR ALINTUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I strongly oppose this sub-clause (a) whereby someone prescribes to me what I should dress and when and how I should dress. 
 
First of all, by making this prescription, you are already conflicting with the first statement, because the first statement is saying that every Member should dress in a dignified way. That means that it does not mean that if I wear a jacket which is traditionally known here, which should even have a collar, that if I do not wear that one that I am not dressed in a dignified way.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am just saying that we should completely erase this sub-clause (a) and take it that each Member of Parliament should appear here in the House in a dignified way. 

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification and amend 61(b) if it must remain.  For example, if you say a suit for ladies, does it include trousers?  (Interruption).  Yes! Because we have to be very sure before we pass this. 

Secondly, as you may be aware, I am a princess and our traditional dress is a suka, which really looks very elegant.  So, it is not a busuuti.  Busuuti is completely different from a suka.  If this must stay, then suka should also be included in (b)- (Interjection)- Yes! I know it is Parliament but if we bring in busuuti the suka should also come.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. Members, this is important. I will give as many of you an opportunity to speak as possible.
LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I just want to be clarified.  61 (a) lists down what is for male. Of course, I do not intend to put on a blouse and a skirt, but does it mean that if a lady comes in a Kawunda suit is that already indecent dressing?  Because rule, 61(a) says male Members should wear,  “a pair of trousers, jacket, shirt, tie, Kanzu, jacket or a safari suit”.  Implying that a lady now no longer has to put on a safari suit to come, because you have said it is for male Members, and then for the ladies -  So this is the clarification I am seeking from the chairperson.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byamukama and then hon. Matembe and then we come to this side then I will come back here.  I will give all of you a chance to speak. This is very important.
Ms BYAMUKAMA: I have two concerns.  I think the main issue is to be dressed in a dignified manner. And as far as I am concerned, when you say a safari suit, I have a problem with the word ‘safari’ and I would feel more comfortable with the word “Kawunda” suit because if you are talking about dignified manner, I cannot see someone coming here in a safari suit and a person is considered parliamentary.
I would like also to comment on what my colleague hon. Kabakumba said under (b).   She mentioned suit.  As I said before, the most important thing is to dress in a dignified manner.  If I put on my trouser suit I do not see why anybody should be concerned about my dress because at the end of the day, the essence is, is it dignified or not?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.
MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, is dignified synonymous with decent?  Because a lady can put on a beautiful skirt, long up to the ankles but then have a slit up to here –(Laughter) – she can have a slit up to the waist or a slit both in the front and the back.  She is very smart and when she stands up, she is really a lady of dignity.  I just want to be guided whether decent is synonymous with dignified.  That is one. 
Then two; I just wanted also to be guided about this Kanzu.  Because when we say Kanzu, the first thinking is a Kanzu as of Buganda and as of Ssabataka, a muleera, a dignified Kanzu.  We know it.  But you see, I can come from Afghanistan or Pakistan and I come with my Kanzu which goes up to just past the knee with the sleeves also half way and it is a kanzu.  The question is, will you, Madam Speaker, throw me out when actually I have dressed in a Kanzu? 

I could probably put on a jacket as well, but here it says I could put on a jacket and my Kanzu is mutema. So, Madam Speaker, for me I was just seeking clarification on all these things.  

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do agree that members should be dignified and in fact decently dressed. There are however different ways of dressing in a dignified way, that you cannot exhaustively list them in this rule. For instance you can get what point hon. Musumba was raising, of these slits that reach somewhere there, even when the dress is so long and beautiful and dignified.  

Secondly, you state that a lady can wear a busuuti. I have a very dignified Kinyankole dress and it is not called a busuuti. So that means I cannot come with it here? The Banyoro have this style, a very dignified way of dressing too. Therefore I want to suggest the following, and I trust the Speaker of this House very much. He is a dignified Member and therefore I want to leave the responsibility of deciding the dignity of the Members of Parliament to the Speaker.

I would like to move that we say, “the members shall dress in a decent and dignified manner as the Speaker shall decide. The decision of the Speaker as to whether a member is dressed in a dignified way will be final on the matter.” It will help us very much because we run a risk here, for you can see I am really dressed in a dignified way –(Laughter). Very well and decently too, but I would be thrown out of this House if this rule was to be followed.  

On the other hand, a woman may come in wearing a blouse. If I removed this jacket for example – (Laughter)- I am wearing a blouse. Madam Speaker, I am wearing a blouse under this jacket. If I removed this jacket, I would qualify under the word “blouse” and yet I believe this blouse is not proper dressing to come to this House in, yet it is allowed. Therefore, let us save ourselves all these listings and just say “decent and dignified manner”, and the Speaker will determine and his word will be final.  

MR ARAALI BASALIZA (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support hon. Matembe’s statement. First of all, when we look at how the dresses have been defined here, especially for women, it is exclusive. We find that in our area, we have got women who wear dresses as well as sukas – the wrappers. You find that it is not included here.  

When you go further to define what one should wear, we find ourselves in a ridiculous situation by saying all Members shall put on dignified shoes. What are dignified shoes? Can we say shoes are dignified? So I support that all Members should dress in a dignified manner and the Speaker should define what it is.  We ourselves have after all been pointing out that such and such a Member is not dressed in a dignified manner and the Speaker takes a decision on it.  Let us remain with only the first statement, Madam Speaker.  Thank you very much.

LT GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (Army Representative):  Madam Speaker, I have been waiting for this day, and I beg to move an amendment on this very important matter of the dress code. The dress code of a country determines the pride, determines the economy, determines the dignity, determines the image and as an advertising man said, “image is everything.” 

I would like to move an amendment - a simple one. This matter has worked for this Parliament, which I have had the honour to be in for very many years and without sometimes having to follow the prescribed and written things. I would like to say that in addition to supporting hon. Matembe and all the ladies - by the way I would like to give credit to the ladies of the world, especially the ladies of Africa who, if you look around, are dressed in dignified African dress, in European dress, in different styles, open shoes, name it.  And they are clean and really dignified and decent. I have not in this House seen any lady who has been sent out of this House because of indecent or undignified dress –(Applause)- but they have been enjoying the freedom.  

You know, the Vice President expressed here a serious concern in regard to shoes and socks and what goes with it. This environment in which we are is the first dictator for dress in the whole world, in the history of mankind. It is the environment that dictates the style and the dress for a particular society. Our people were free, our people were liberated. Our people were wearing light things. They enjoyed the God-given sun and the fresh air. 

I really would like to move a simple amendment. It says, “all Members shall be dressed in a dignified and decent manner. In case of any doubt, the Speaker shall have the discretion.” I beg to move and I am sure this will liberate very many people.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tumwine, that one has already been proposed by other Members. Let me just take hon. Kamuntu. 

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema South, Bushenyi District): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If we take a mathematical approach, we should list everything. When you state that all Members shall dress in a dignified manner, then it means that anything that is not listed here is excluded or not allowed. That is the problem with this provision. 

There will be dresses which are not listed here, but which are dignified and if you go according to the rule, they will not be worn in this House. So because the list cannot be exhaustive, that leaves the proposal that we leave this matter to the Speaker to judge; this is the only exit clause.

Secondly, if for instance I was to use the example of hon. Matembe. She is dressed in a trouser and the colour of her trouser is not the same as that of her jacket. If you look at the listing of what is dignified for ladies, a suit by definition should be matching; the top and the trouser should match. You would have ordered hon. Matembe out of this House even when her dress is very dignified. 

I will take a humble view I would like to believe I am dressed decently, but if what I am wearing is not a suit, then even under – well the male side they say, “a pair of trousers”. So, I have a pair of trousers and a jacket and the shirt.  

The technical question which is the essential point is that by listing what is here excludes so many other things which are dignified, and because we cannot possibly list all the dignified fashions of dress –(Interjection)- let us leave it to the Speaker to judge. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if something has been said, please, do not repeat it. 
Hon. Member for Busiro, are you proposing something different from what –(Interruption)

MR MUSISI: Madam Speaker, I propose that this list serve as an indicator of what we should put on. Otherwise, you would find that in the afternoon, the Speaker might have to push out more than six or eight Members and the first part of our debate every day will be characterised by looking at who is decent and who is dressed in a kitenge. 

The other day, two Members here were pushed out of the House including an hon. Minister. I think we should have something indicative of what is generally acceptable and the phrasing should indicate the saying. So please, let us save the Speaker all the trouble and have some degree of dignity that we actually want to achieve in the House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sempangi, is that what you wanted to say?

DR SEMPANGI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the Chairperson respond.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The purpose of listing some type of dresses in rule 61 was to set a minimum standard – just a minimum standard. As on matters which are not clearly spelt out, Members should not lose sight of rule 8(1), which we have already passed. It says “In case of any doubt, these rules may be interpreted by the Speaker”.

In respect to ladies whose traditional attires are not mentioned here, I am persuaded to remove the word “Busuuti” and substitute thereon the words “or any traditional attire for Lady Members”. That is in respect to –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wacha, does that include the Karimojong dress?

MR WACHA:I was not coming to any Karimojong man, because the method of dressing may not be termed dignified. So, Madam Speaker, the reason is we should have a minimum standard of what we call “dignified” in the House. If any Member is in doubt, the Speaker will have the last say. And I am persuaded to say, let us have traditional attire for ladies instead of Busuuti. I beg to move, Madam.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I get uncomfortable with 61(a) where we are saying a Kanzu and a jacket. I know this as a Kiganda traditional attire. What about other traditional attires for male Members like the one for the royals of Teso? I feel we should amend it to incorporate all other traditional male attires instead of having a Kanzu and a jacket only.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, I just want to draw your attention to this. In the past we have had one Member coming here dressed in an animal skin and a pair of shorts. Is that decent?  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, if we are talking of culture, a Kanzu and a jacket is a decent Kiganda attire. Therefore, that attire is also decent in that person’s culture. We either delete this or include “other traditional attire for male Members”.

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Madam Speaker, I wish to seek clarification.  There was a motion that hon. Matembe read on the Floor and it was supported by people who spoke to it. But we do not know what has happened to it. It could be that we are still debating it, but I am seeking clarification nevertheless.  

I am also seeking clarification from the Chairperson of the Committee. What is in the listing? Because the more he adds on to his list, the more problems arise in relation to what he has left out. Somebody has said that that is what is exactly going to happen. What is in a list? In other words, why don’t we go with the Matembe motion and the Speaker will determine? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have not allowed a vote on this matter because the dress matter is very contentious.  I know that hon. Matembe moved a motion, but it is important to hear people’s views. It is a very, very contentious matter how we dress in this House.

MR OKUPA: I would have also loved to have this included in 61(c): “Military attire for Members of the Armed Forces and clerical collar for the Clergymen.” Thank you.

MR WACHA: Hon. Kiyingi wanted to know what was in the listing. I said before we wanted to have a minimum standard.  Members of the 6th Parliament will recollect that the amendment, which is being proposed by hon. Matembe, is exactly what is in the old rules, and we had a problem implementing it. There were attires on which people rise up and say, ‘so and so is not decently attired’ and then the ruling is made and people would doubt that fully. We were trying to set in a rule which will make the work of the Speaker easy in determining what is and what is not dignified. 

As to whether we should include in "male traditional attire", I really find it difficult to know whether our old traditional attire in my own zone which used to be a hide, which covered only certain sections, will be termed dignified here. I am yet to be persuaded. (Interjections)

(Pandemonium broke out in the House)

The House was adjourned until Wednesday, 10 April 2002 at 2.00 p.m.


