Thursday, 8 April 2010

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. I want to inform you that I have received a report from the Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to the effect that the committee has completed its work on the Bills intended to reform a number of our electoral laws. So, this is to put you on notice that from next week, we shall give priority to these Bills. I appeal to you to come and make your contributions to those Bills.

Some time at the beginning of the second half of last month, there was a disaster that happened at Kasubi Tombs, which is a cultural site of Buganda, but also a national heritage in which fire destroyed the tombs. Now concrete plans are being made to rebuild those Kasubi Tombs.

Definitely, I see there is need for money to help with the reconstruction of the heritage. Since Parliament was one of first the institutions to express its sorrow in regard to what had happened, I think it is proper that we, as an institution, find a way of contributing towards rehabilitating the destroyed tombs. My thinking is that maybe, we can constitute a committee comprising people from both the Government and Opposition sides to work on the modalities of how Members can make their contributions in one way or the other. I thought I should introduce this idea to you. If you approve of it, then we can start collecting whatever money we can to show solidarity with our people who are charged with the reconstruction. Thank you. 

2.44
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is in response to the communication you have just made about the disaster that occurred at Kasubi. First and foremost, I want to thank you because like you have correctly observed, Parliament was among the first institutions within Government and at individual levels to condemn the action that took place at the Kasubi Tombs.

We also supported the effort by Government to institute an investigation to establish who is responsible. However, most importantly, we know that in this time of reconstruction, we have seen a number of institutions and individuals come up either to pledge or make physical contributions. Just yesterday, we saw, through the media, the UNESCO officials fly in from Paris to come and make their commitment.

Allow me point out one thing that this Parliament has been known for. Whenever it comes to a national cause, we as an institution, have stood – for instance, when the Uganda Police Force was looking for money to buy vehicles, you mobilised us and we made a humble contribution in addition to the budgetary proposal that we supported.

When FUFA wanted money to support the Uganda Cranes Team, hon. Odonga Otto came to this House and made a proposal to you, Mr Speaker, and as an institution of Parliament, we supported that cause. 

My point is that when it comes to a disaster of this magnitude, I wish to propose that we set up a by-partisan committee comprising Members from either side so that that committee sits in the shortest time possible to prepare a proposal to this House next week on how best Parliament can participate in that reconstruction exercise. This will be in addition to our commitment to supporting any budgetary proposals that Government might bring in support of that disaster. Mr Speaker, I beg to propose.

2.47
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for raising this very important issue. I also thank hon. Dombo for his suggestion. I support the proposal that Parliament, as an institution, should make a contribution towards the reconstruction of our national heritage. This is a duty on our part; it is a responsibility we should have in mind and also work out modalities for.

However, Mr Speaker, I have some reservations on the issue of having a committee to work out modalities. I would like to suggest that we pass a resolution as Parliament that we deduct for example, Shs 100,000 from each one of us – I do not think anybody would have an objection to that - then probably what can be worked out, through your office, are the modalities on how that contribution can be delivered. (Applause) I think that will work for us. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.49
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I wish to thank you, Mr Speaker, for raising this matter. This is a matter that is so important to Ugandans generally and the whole world, that it would have been most unfortunate if Parliament didn’t come out to indicate its solidarity with everybody concerned. I think it will send good signals to the population and all our electorates that Parliament has taken note of what happened and is prepared to assist. 

The example that we shall give will also help galvanise the public to come out in support. Actually, as my colleague has said, I do not think we ought to go into forming a committee. This is something upon which we can take a resolution or which the commission can take up and we just make a general contribution and then we can find an occasion to go and present it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, it is being suggested that this idea is supported. Hon. Lukwago has suggested Shs 100,000 from each one of us – 

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I would like to second the proposal by hon. Lukwago that as Parliament, we today resolve that Shs 100,000 be deducted at source and thereafter we can find a way of delivering it – maybe a group of us or those interested can come along and share the grief with the affected people and the people of Uganda. But it is very important that we do it as soon as possible because as you rightly communicated, passing through that committee might delay the process. Why don’t we just pass a resolution today?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, my thinking is that it is a consensus that we resolve that we raise Shs 100,000 from each of us, collect and deliver it to those concerned. I now put the question to the suggestion? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Resolution adopted.)

2.51
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of great concern to the people that I represent. The matter relates to the power line to Kaberamaido.

Members will agree with me that the Sixth Parliament did pass a resolution, through a gesture of a loan to construct power lines to Kaberamaido, Pader and Bundibugyo – all together they were eight districts. I do not know how far this loan went. But what I know is that the power line to Kaberamaido was worked on with funds from the PRDP and it has taken power up to some place called Lwala, leaving some 11 miles to the district uncatered for. 

I rise on this issue because at the moment, there seems to be completely nothing concerning this power line and yet the power to this place was planned for together with that to Pader.

It would be in the interest of this House to know that next week the President will be commissioning the power line to Pader, which is now ready, while the one to Kaberamaido has only been done halfway with the most important point, which is the district, being left out.

This creates a lot of concern to me. I used to follow up this issue regularly with the former Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, hon. Daudi Migereko, who would give a listening ear with promises here and there. However, currently, even when I call and seek an appointment to meet the ministers of energy, I do not get any listening ear; I have never got any feedback. I have tried to seek appointment to no avail.

So, what remains of the power line to Kaberamaido? Where has the loan that was passed by the Sixth Parliament gone? Why is it that it is now discriminatively being used? Now that the President is going to commission the power line to Pader next week, what happens to the power line to Kaberamaido District?

It is my humble request that I get a response from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development; otherwise, we are losing trust in the performance of this ministry. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, the minister responsible is not here. However, the Leader of Government Business is here, do you have anything to say on this matter?

2.54
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Looking at the schedule of work for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, I thought I saw the line to Kaberamaido being included, but I cannot be very certain. I will have to find out from the relevant minister and point out your concern and need to actually construct that power line. I thank you.

2.55
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on an issue of national importance.

As you maybe aware, in the last Budget Speech, we heard a pronouncement on the ban of polythene bags commonly known as buveera. When that ban was pronounced, this honourable House did its constitutional obligation by passing the relevant Act of Parliament.

The ban was supposed to have been effected from 1 April 2010. However, as I speak, it has not been effected for the simple reason that when the budget was read in respect of it, we had conflicts relating to the implementing Minister of Water and Environment, who later conceded that she would implement the ban.

When a six-month period was given to enable the manufacturers and users get alternatives to the polythene bags, it was believed that from 1 April 2010, the ban would take effect. But as I speak, this ban has not been effected. I am reliably informed by the implementing Arms of Government and institutions like NEMA, that this ban has not been effected because there are ongoing negotiations. 

But if Parliament can enact a law to protect our environment and the minister does not implement it, it becomes something of great national concern. Polythene papers are undesirable products because they negatively impact on our agricultural sector, which is the backbone of this country; they kill our animals; they are used by some people as mobile toilets; and they are a health hazard. Therefore, the Minister of Water and Environment should come to this House and explain why that ban has not been effected. It has put institutions like NEMA in a dilemma. 

As I conclude, because this action in itself is contempt of Parliament, where we pass our laws - it is an Act of Parliament and the minister has not implemented it. Therefore, I would like to move a motion without notice – 

THE SPEAKER: What motion? Why don’t you wait for the minister to tell you what is happening? Depending on his statement, you may move a motion.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I was more disheartened to even proceed to the next step because as Parliament, the ministers who are here are part of this institution. And for an individual ministry to defy the Act of Parliament – it is contempt – we sit here and deliberate for the sake of our country and, therefore, we should show displeasure in the actions of such a minister. That is why I am moving – 

THE SPEAKER: No! You have come here to express your views on this matter and you want to be briefed on what is happening. I think we have to give chance to the minister to come and tell you what is happening. 

Although the minister is not here, the Leader of Government Business, the Deputy Prime Minister, is here. He will take up the matter and maybe undertake that by next week, the minister will come and tell you.

Depending on the answer you get, that is when you can come with a motion; but do not condemn somebody when you have not yet heard from them.

MS ANYWAR: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I hope by next week we shall get a report because it is getting out of hand and the country is waiting to see a total ban of kaveera in the country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Leader of Government Business, do you have anything to say? Can we say that we shall get an answer on Wednesday from the minister? Okay. 

Yes, hon. Nsubuga.

3.01
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise an issue of national importance. On 1st April, in the island called Lyabalume in my constituency in Lwajje Parish, Bweema sub-County, 40 houses caught fire and as we talk, about 200 people do not have shelter. We have contacted the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, but there is no response. 

I want to urge the Leader of Government Business that being a rainy season, we should expedite any assistance to help these people because as leaders, we just try but we cannot really manage. I urge Government to come in and assist. It is a small island with a population of 800 people. So, if 200 are homeless it implies that the magnitude is really big; out of four people, two sleep outside. 

This island is easily accessible. It is near Katosi Landing Site and so any assistance can reach them fast; it is not one of those islands that are deep in the waters. I urge Government to assist these people because if we don’t, an outbreak of diseases will occur. 

The cause of the fire has not been established; all they saw were their huts catching fire. I think the Police will establish the cause of the fire, but I want to urge Government to make sure that they expedite the assistance so that those people at Lyabalume Island are assisted. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Point noted.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable Member of Parliament should give more details of dates and when this happened. Because if that is the day when there was a big hailstorm which destroyed some places in Makindye – roofs were blown off – if that was the same day, it would be of interest to know so that it is properly coordinated because several areas were damaged in that corridor during the storm. If this was the day, it would be easier for the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to handle all these disasters under one stroke. 

He has not given any date and it is very difficult to know whether several areas in Mukono suffered the same damage as some parts of Kampala. I beg that the Member of Parliament clarifies with details, the dates and the extent of the damage.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, I suggest that apart from what you have said in the House, which will be on the Hansard, you write in detail to the Leader of Government Business and the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, and copy it to the Speaker. 

3.05
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will agree with me that we have a number of Ugandans who have lost their lives due to lack of blood as a cause of malaria, accidents and so on.

You will also agree with me that we have a problem in our blood bank and in our hospitals - we lack blood. For this matter, the Committee on Social Services is spearheading a blood donation activity that will take place on the 21st April 2010 in the Members’ lounge. 

I would like to appeal to my dear honourable members to come up as leaders and show an example to Ugandans. You will allow me to say that blood is not like any other medicine, which can be manufactured in factories. It is a medicine that should be donated by fellow human beings. So, because of this, I would like to appeal to all of you to respond to this cry so that we donate this blood on the 21st April in the Members’ Lounge. 

We shall be very glad if we can come up as leaders to show other Ugandans this good example that we really need to help and save lives of other Ugandans. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: I want to take this opportunity to welcome Nalongo Winifred. (Applause)

3.07
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much. I would like to make a response to an issue that came up yesterday. I was not in the House, but I thought as a chair of the Committee on Natural Resources, I should throw some light on an issue of Production Sharing Agreements - a brief one - and then we shall see the way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Yeah, but don’t you think you should be given a slot formally on the Order Paper - maybe on Tuesday - and you produce copies? I guarantee you will be given time, but let copies be issued to Members. 

MS MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I respect your advice but I hope it will not be an issue that Members will always believe that we do not have the PSAs. 

THE SPEAKER: No, they are reassured that you have a briefing to give, and on Tuesday you will be given a slot on the Order Paper to formally do so.

Hon. Members, in the Gallery, we have students from Uganda Children’s Centre. Can you stand up? You are welcome. Please sit down.

3.09
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Last Tuesday, I did raise an issue regarding the sugarcane carrying tractors between Lugazi and Jinja, and the Leader of Government Business promised to come up with a response or statement today explaining why they have failed to remove these tractors from the highway.

It is not captured on the Order Paper and there are no signs of him making a statement, and that is why I am seeking procedure. 

THE SPEAKER:  Which minister was responsible?


MR MUWUMA: The Leader of Government Business committed himself and he is around. 

THE SPEAKER: I think there must be a minister in charge of that sector.

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, I thought it is the Leader of Government Business - 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Leader of Government Business, what do you have to say?

3.10
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Personally, I was not here to hear the question that was raised, but I would like to assure the honourable member that on leaving here, I shall ring the Lugazi people since I know them, and we should be able to provide an adequate answer early next week.

THE SPEAKER: Wednesday.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

(I) THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FY 2000-2005 FOR THE MUNICIPALITIES

3.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for the financial years 2000 to 2005 for municipalities. 


(II) THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FY 2001-2005 FOR KAMPALA DISTRICT

3.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for the financial years 2001 to 2005 for Kampala District.

(III) ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2009

3.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the annual reports of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30th June 2009, including the performance report as volume 1, the report on central governments; the report on local authorities; the report on statutory corporations; and the value-for-money audits. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. And I think you must thank the Auditor-General for the efficient manner in which he has handled the work. June was just yesterday and for him to have been able to finish, we must say thank you very much to him. (Applause)

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

3.13
DR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to give a personal statement on matters affecting me in my constituency. This matter should have been presented some time last month, but all the same I am grateful for this time.

This statement is made under our Rules of Procedure - Rule 42, and it begins with a background. It arises out of the political persecution taking place in my constituency, which has not only affected me as a Member of Parliament, but it has affected the District Councillors, LC III chairpersons and over 30 LC Is. 

This is because an individual within the UPDF institution has blamed me and my supporters for the challenges and difficulties they are facing in the disarmament process in Karamoja. Those of us who supported the disarmament process are now being blamed and persecuted by the very people who have let us down in this exercise. 

You do remember, Mr Speaker, that this programme was supported by over 80 percent of our population. Why it has failed and why it has difficulties means that there is somebody who is not doing his duty.  Those blaming us are the ones who chose a strategy of a disarmament process which will take 10 or more years, and avoided one which could take six months. They are the ones who have made Karamoja security question a “chronic disease” which cannot be treated, and yet it could be solved.

Those blaming us are the people who have turned this disarmament programme into a project of making a livelihood instead of solving our security problems. The interest of those people persecuting us politically lies at the lower level. My opponents are aiding and abetting crime and sabotaging disarmament in Pokot area in order to cause despair among the people and turn them against us. They want the place to be ungovernable, and unfortunately, they are doing this with the help of some security personnel. This is the unfortunate part which I would like this House and the rest of the country to know.

Those security personnel are the ones misinforming their bosses in Kampala by writing false reports about us. They claim that the disarmament is failing because of Kiyonga and his group. Some UPDF officers are actually doing political work in Karamoja instead of providing security. They are doing this because they want to hide their weaknesses in security provision. 

This disarmament has had difficulties such as lack of fuel, poor transport, and few personnel on the ground. This is what is being attributed to us now as the cause of the problem. The UPDF has made us and our people fail to honour the disarmament process because of their extreme torture of suspects such as tying men’s genitals; this used to be a rumour, but I witnessed it last December. We used to hear of it in Kotido and other places, but it is now happening in Pokot.

The other one is heating people’s feet, where someone feels a lot of pain and can limp for three months.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiyonga I would rather advise that you read your statement.

MR FRANCIS KIYONGA: They hang heavy stones on men’s genitals and also tie people “kandoya” style while beating the flat side of the foot. 

They also extort money from suspects, starving them and causing loss of household property in the course of cordon and search exercise.

What is affecting me now is that myself and other counsellors have been suspected and interrogated by both the Police and the Army, arrested and others detained for more than two weeks in UPDF detaches. Others have been charged in courts over falsehoods and many have run away for fear of torture, even when they are not guilty of anything.

Today, I and my sister Paulina Chepar, are being denied access to our constituencies because the CID officers at the CID headquarters in Kampala, require us to be reporting to them after every three days in the name of investigations. My sister has been moving between Amudat and Kampala for the last two months.

Let it be known that those people in Pokot who are supposed to be witnesses and help the State in identifying armed road ambushes and cattle raids, are the ones being arrested and detained, including myself. The security personnel have failed to strike the guilty and are hitting us the innocent. 

The criminals in connivance with some highly placed personnel do this in order to kill evidence and truth. They do this to allow the state of criminality and confusion to prevail or continue in our area.

I would like to inform the President of Uganda, the Inspector-General of Police and the Chief of Defence Forces, that there are criminals in my area who have hijacked the sensitive offices of DISO, RDC and UPDF officers at division, brigade and battalion levels because they think they are more NRM than the rest of the people there.

One of those criminals who should be investigated by an impartial DPP’s office is one Lotem Lino, the self-imposed NRM chairperson of Amudat.

The UPDF and other security organs in Pokot are either repeating the bad mistakes of previous governments, which we were told about, or they are merely breaking new ground of becoming criminals in Government uniforms, because those government officers support confusion, which may soon spread from Pokot region to the rest of Uganda. Security organs in Pokot area have become law breakers, and they are breeding contempt for law, and inviting every person to become a law breaker.

Hon. Members, in case anything happens to any of us, especially after courts of law finding us innocent, it should be remembered that we have suffered political persecution because criminal elements have taken an upper hand in the Pokot area. They have succeeded by siding with some security organs as already explained above.

I and my supporters have been betrayed by security organs that have chosen to share our reports with criminals because they want to discredit us politically. They want to portray us as the only complainants of raids, road ambushes and supporters of disarmament.

Lastly, allow me to lay on Table some letters written by us, as complainants and exposers of criminals of cattle raids, road ambushes, extortion and looting by some UPDF personnel, during their disarmament programme in our place. 

These are six documents to prove that those heading our security organs and Government, have turned our heads upside down because the writers of these very reports - which I am going to lay here - are the ones being prosecuted as criminals instead of being taken as State witnesses. Then criminals are left at large, hence the need for those of us in this House, and other sympathisers in Uganda and outside Parliament, to hear this and appreciate the sad side of our state governance to the people of Pokot.

I beg to lay this on Table.

This first one here is the letter I wrote to H.E. The President, dated May 18, 2009 indicating over 33 raids – locations - and it affected 65 families. A number of people were killed and there was loss of 2,540 cows. I am the complainant in this. I beg to lay it on the Table.

The second one is a letter dated 13 January, 2010 written to the Minister of Karamoja Affairs, indicating a state of insecurity and political confusion in Amudat. I am also the writer of this.

The third one is written to the RDC of Nakapiripirit highlighting the report of the incident of Lemusui where we lost four soldiers. It is dated 31 December, 2009. It was written by the LC III Chairperson of Amudat, Lokeno Swale, who is also now being suspected as a criminal. He has indicated a number of criminals here and those who kill soldiers. 

The fourth one is written to the RDC of Nakapiripirit through the LC III Chairperson of Loroo sub-county indicating the report of a raid on Matheniko cows at Lokali by some Pokot - our own people - and how it has affected them. One peaceful Mzee called Aramtori – it has names of 27 suspects and how it has affected other people. The writer is Mr Aramtori Lokodu Wapale. He is a kraal leader of Loroo Sub-County.

This other one is written to the Resident District Commissioner of Nakapiripirit, dated 8 December, 2009 indicating the raid of Lomopus kraal on the 7th December 2009. This one affected the Pokot and led to the loss of 364 cows belonging to six people. The writer is an LC I Chairperson called Akwanaita Teko of Amudat.

The last one is written to the RDC of Nakapiripirit, dated 8 January, 2010. It reports about loss of properties of my people during the disarmament exercise in Nakasepan. It has details and is written by an LC I Chairperson called Loritei Loyaka. 

All these people I have mentioned are under interrogation, while these official reports are ignored.

Thank you, Mr Speaker. My statement ends here.

MR ERIAS LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am fully aware that under our rules, we are not supposed to debate this personal statement, but you will appreciate that the matters raised are so serious. They concern issues of security, loss of lives, property and what-not, and a number of documents submitted to us. The guidance I am seeking from you is this; shall we just sit by – probably this House could set up a committee to investigate the matter –(Interjections)- I know if – I know the air could have – I am sorry. I know that probably my colleague should have brought it as a petition. 

If one faltered on issues of procedure – I am not saying you faltered, you opted to bring it as a personal statement; personal statements are allowed. But if it were me, I would have brought a petition seeking for Parliament’s intervention. But shall we just hide under technicalities to sit by and we do not take serious action over these matters?  

Mr Speaker, I suggest that you guide us on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, my view is that we should avail the Leader of Government Business with copies of the statement and annexes, which have been brought by the honourable member so that after he has studied them, he comes and reacts to the statement of the honourable member. It is then that we can really have a debate. 

But the Rt. Hon. Deputy Prime Minister will be availed with the copies and maybe given a week or so to handle the matter and come back so that we start the debate. (Applause)

PETITION BY THE PRIVATE NOT-FOR-PROFIT HEALTH SERVICE PROVIDERS
      
3.32
DR MICHAEL BAYIGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

The Humble Petition of the private not-for-profit health service providers, whom I represent here in Parliament, and for whom I am speaking.

The petitioners are a forum of all medical directors and administrators of major hospitals, hospital board members, lower level health units, management committees and representatives of the founding bodies of the Catholic Church, the Protestant Church, the Othordox and the Muslim community. 

The petitioners are coordinated through their religious coordinating bodies: The Uganda Catholic Medical Bureau, The Uganda Protestant Medical Bureau, The Uganda Muslim Medical Bureau and The Uganda Orthodox Medical Bureau.

The petitioners inherited the healing ministry upon the departure of the missionaries who introduced medical care way back in 1897 and have managed the service to date through hospitals and lower level health units. They have a good reputation of providing quality services and ability to provide holistic care. 

They state that 30 percent of the health care facilities in Uganda, which include 44 hospitals and 558 health centres, and 21 health-training institutions, are managed by your humble petitioners and that 80 percent of the health care facilities are located in the rural, remote and hard-to-reach areas.

Mr Speaker, they also state that throughout the colonial period, the social function exercised by the petitioners was recognised and grant aid for recurrent-wage and non-wage was extended to them and that this support ceased in the 70s and was later resumed only in the late 90s only because the petitioners were no longer able to cope with the increased cost of service delivery.

In 1997/98, Government started extending support to the recurrent expenditure, none-wage only through the sector wide approach. This was followed by the sector wide approach in 2000. 

They also state that in 2004/05, the budget allocation started stagnating and later decreased up to date as Government began investing in its own employees. In 2007, a private, not-for-profit, public-private partnership for health policy was formulated ready for formulation and adoption by the Cabinet, something that Government has not expedited for the last three years. 

Due to the raising poverty among Ugandans, served by petitioners in urban and rural areas, there is failure to meet user-fee charges as per prescription,

AND FURTHER THAT your humble petitioners are aggrieved by their failure to attract and retain qualified staff because they cannot meet high salaries at Government pay rate, and now act as a recruitment ground for in-experienced staff for both Government and other providers who can pay better resulting in loss of efficiency, quality and resources invested in staff training. 

Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners are also aggrieved by the necessity to avoid stockouts of drugs while at the same time maintaining user-fees affordable to the poor and vulnerable groups. 

Your humble petitioners are aggrieved by the increased operating costs while maintaining quality assurance, equipment, buildings and work in a clean environment. 

Your humble petitioners are aggrieved by the fact that the cost of providing services not-for-profit sector always exceeds fees, and that there is rising cost of providing services while the primary health care conditional grant has reduced, a condition that has affected the access to the services by the poor.

FURTHER THAT your humble petitioners are aggrieved by the inability of the National Medical Stores to supply them with sectional drugs like Coartem and Laboratory credit lines and that the petitioners were excluded in the supplier’s agreement between Quality Chemicals and Government of Uganda since Joint Medical Stores was not part of this agreement. 

NOW THEREFORE, your humble petitioners pray as here under: 

1.	That Cabinet approves and adopts the PPPH (Policy Public Private Policy for Health)
2.	That Parliament recommends an increment in the national budget allocation for private not-for-profit through the PHC conditional grant allocation.
3.	That Government involves the respective faith-based organisations in health care decision-making at all levels in order to protect their mission of serving the poor and the vulnerable groups.
4.	That Parliament recommends the inclusion of Joint Medical Stores (JMS) in the supplier’s agreement between Quality Chemicals and Government of Uganda. 
5.	That Parliament recommends the recovery of 75 percent of essential drug programme arrears from the National Medical Stores to the Joint Medical Stores which supplies them.
6.	In order to reduce staff attrition from private not-for-profit, Parliament recommends salary and emolument equalisation between private not-for-profit and Government medical staff.
7.	That Government extends more support in terms of training, purchase of equipment and maintenance of infrastructure because the private not-for-profit health providers are serving Ugandans too and not in competition with Government, but in service of humanity. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much, Dr Bayiga, for this petition that you have brought to the House. Hon. Members, definitely, the gist of this petition is clear and it is relevant to all of us because it deals with health. And I think they are saying that they are doing a good job and definitely they are because these are hospitals that were being run by faith-based organisations, and you very well know the contribution which these faith organisations made not only in health, but even in education. I believe even in education, 80 percent of the education we have in Uganda was contributed by the missionary schools.

Therefore, they are doing a good job and they have brought this petition to us, which I think requires scrutiny and reaction from Parliament. Definitely, they will invite those concerned – Ministry of Health and others to express their views, but now, what do we do with this petition; to which committee do we send this petition? (Interjections) Okay, Social Services Committee.  

Let the Social Services Committee scrutinise it and then report back. But as I see, the nature of the claims in it are also relevant to the budget process; so, when dealing with the budget aspects, please take care of the demands that are being raised here. Therefore, the petition is sent to the Committee on Social Services. Thank you very much.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE TRADEMARKS BILL, 2008

3.42
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE, CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  Mr Speaker, and hon. Members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Trademarks Bill, 2008”, be read for the second time. 

(Seconded by Mr Ruhindi.)

Mr Speaker, the policy and principles behind this Bill are to replace the existing Trademarks Act, Chapter 217 which has been found to be inadequate, and we also seek to incorporate new developments in the trademarks law, and consolidate it into one piece - the statute law on trademarks, in order to make the trademarks law comprehensive and easily accessible in one statute.

There are some defects in the existing trademarks law which the new Bill seeks to correct. First of all, trademarks are defined as any sign or a combination of signs capable of distinguishing goods or services of one undertaking from those of another.

The current law on trademarks in Uganda is the Trademarks Act, Chapter 217. This one is based on a United Kingdom Act and it came into force on the 1 January 1953. Due to passage of time, some aspects of the trademarks law have become outdated, especially in light of present day policies; in light of contemporary international obligations; in light of globalisation; and in light of technological developments.

The Trademarks Act itself has not been reformed despite reforms in the original laws from which it was derived, and as currently written, the Trademarks Act impedes investment as a result of the inadequate protection that investors are given in case of infringement of their trademarks. There is, therefore, need for radical changes in the law to bring it in line with the current global changes.

Large sums of money are invested in devising trademarks to suit a particular product or service and to appeal to a particular market. More large sums of money go on promoting trademarks or brands through advertisement. If trademarks are not adequately protected by law, this means that rightful owners may lose business and goodwill. The effects on the economy may become manifested in few or no new trademarks being created, and the government will definitely lose out on revenue it would have otherwise got from registration of new trademarks. 

In law, however, trademarks have in recent years been a subject of increasing controversy. This has culminated in the need to reform the trademarks law in Uganda.

Various remedies are proposed in this Bill to deal with the defects in the existing law. The reform of the trademarks law is geared towards having modern laws supporting a competitive economy in a coherent and accessible form, while providing maximum freedom for participation to perform their proper functions, at the same time recognising a case for high standards and ensuring appropriate protection for all parties. It is further geared towards poverty eradication and promotion of Government policies such as the Poverty Alleviation Action Plan.

These reforms are also geared towards bringing Uganda’s legislation in line with her international obligations.

Trademarks today are a vital component of the whole structure of advertising and marketing, and are a strong feature of the commercial scene. Logs, catch phrases and images, all fall within the ambit of the trademark, and form a valuable part of the goodwill of the business which they are associated with.

The changes required to bring the existing law up to international standards and to make it user-friendly, require a new Bill that totally overhauls the existing Trademarks Act. The main guiding principles considered in the reform is to develop a trademarks and service-marks law designed to protect consumers from being confused or deceived in the market place; to enable investors to market and sell their products using trademarks as signs of quality; and to develop a law that will boost consumer confidence in a product that they have come to trust from their knowledge of the product and its trademarks. 

In brief, the Bill:
•	Includes a comprehensive definition; 
•	outlines requirements for registration of trademarks;
•	indicates the qualifications of the registration; 
•	outlines differences in various trademarks;
•	indicates certification marks; 
•	outlines the difference between certification marks and trademarks;
•	provides for appeals in case an application for a trademark has not been accepted; 
•	indicates the length of the protection of registration;
•	indicates the substantive meaning of registration; 
•	indicates remedies in case the trademark is infringed; 
•	provides for record keeping;
•	provides for establishment of an electronic register; 
•	provides for security for costs for persons who are not resident in East Africa; and 
•	provides penal provisions and new offences for infringements. 

Mr Speaker, this Bill received the first reading in this Parliament on 2 September 2008, and it was referred to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of this Parliament. My information is that the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee has completed its work on the Bill. I beg to move.

3.56
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Trademarks Bill, 2008. 

The Trademarks Bill, 2008 was read for the first time on 2 September 2008 and was referred to the committee for consideration and subsequent reporting in accordance with Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rules 113 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

In the process of considering the Bill, the committee discussed and received memoranda in various meetings with different stakeholders, including the following:
1.	The Deputy Attorney-General and the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
2.	Uganda Law Reform Commission
3.	Private Sector Foundation
4.	Uganda Manufacturers Association

Objectives of the Bill

The Bill seeks to repeal and replace the existing Trademarks Act which has been found to be inadequate, and to incorporate new developments in the trademarks law.

The Bill also seeks to consolidate into one piece the statute law on trademarks, thus making the trademarks law comprehensive and easily accessible.

Observations

The committee observed that:

The current law on trademarks in Uganda is the Trademarks Act, Cap. 217 and is based on the United Kingdom Act. The Trademarks Act commenced on 1 January 1953. However, as a result of the passage of time, some aspects of the trademarks law have become outdated, especially in light of the present day policies, international obligations, globalisation and technological developments.

The Trademarks Act has, however, not been reformed despite reforms in the original laws from which it was derived. As currently written, the Trademarks Act impedes investment as a result of inadequate protection that investors are given in case of infringement of their trademarks. There is, therefore, need for radical changes in the law to bring it in line with the current global changes.

The Bill is seeking to introduce new principles that have been applied globally over time, and that have been approved by the courts of law as binding principles. 

The new principles are enumerated as follows:

i)	Definition of trademarks in regard to the scope.

The Bill widens the scope of trademarks to mean a sign or mark or combination of signs or marks capable of being represented graphically and capable of distinguishing goods or services of one undertaking from those of another undertaking.

ii)	Current use of trademarks - clauses 37-39.

Despite the general rule that trademarks may be registered in respect of goods or services that are identical with or nearly resemble a trademark belonging to another person, to ensure that there is no damaging duplication of trademarks, the Bill introduces an exception to this general rule by allowing the registrar to register a trademark even where there is already an earlier trademark or an earlier right, for purposes of honest, concurrent use.
 
iii)	Protection of marks registered in Uganda and removal of trademarks from the register - clauses 45-46.

Clause 45 gives the registrar of trademarks power to refuse registration of a trademark if it can be shown that it is already registered in another country which has received proper arrangements with Uganda, if it is in respect of the same goods or services. Clause 46 empowers the registrar to remove a trademark from the register upon proof of prior registration in a country of origin. This is in conformity with Uganda’s international obligations and international conventions like the Paris Convention and the trade related aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.

iv)	Codification of Common Law principle of “passing off” - clause 29.

The Bill provides protection for owners of trademarks in situations of passing off, and specifically provides that nothing in the Act shall be taken to affect the right of action against a person for passing off goods or services of another of the remedies in respect of the right action.

v)	Remedies for infringement of a trademark.

The Bill introduces new remedies that are intended to give trademark owners more protection from infringement of a trademark as follows:
a)	Injunction; 
b)	prohibition on import or export of  goods bearing infringed trademarks;
c)	damages or rendering account of profit;
d)	cancellation of invalid trademarks registration; 
e)	costs; and
f)	seizure.

vi)	Security for costs against applicants not resident in East Africa.
vii)	New offences.

In order to protect trademarks, the following new offences have been introduced in the Bill:

a)	Falsifying or unlawfully removing a registered trademark;
b)	falsely applying a registered trademark;
c)	prohibition of import and export of infringing trademarks; and
d)	offences by companies and other bodies.

viii)	The committee further observes that the Bill, when passed into law, will attract more investors into the country and thus promote economic development.

ix)	The committee also observed that by enacting a trademarks law, Uganda will be complying with its international obligations under the TRIPS agreement and Banjul Protocol. 

Recommendation

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Trademarks Bill, 2008 be passed into law, subject to the amendments to follow. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman of the committee, for the report.

4.03
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Erias Lukwago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my capacity as shadow attorney-general, I would wish to send my sincere thanks to my counterpart, the Attorney-General for the wonderful work he has done to bring up this Bill. It is a long awaited legislation; there has been a call from the legal fraternity, that is, Uganda Law Society, a call from the business community, Private Sector Foundation, Uganda Manufacturers Association and all other members of the business community, to amend the laws regulating trademarks in this country.

The law regarding trademarks is archaic; there is no doubt about it. It is has been there for decades and it has not been amended; and there was need to amend this law to bring it in tandem with the modern trends of business. I, therefore, wish to commend the Attorney-General for this wonderful work.

Secondly, we commend the committee for scrutinising this Bill. I specifically want to point out that the laws regarding trademarks in this country are a subject of protracted litigation and if you looked at all these precedents, decided cases, there has been controversy about a number of doctrines under this law.  Actually, thanks to the ingenuity of their Lordships; we have not been having clear-cut provisions as far as trademarks are concerned. 

When you look at this Bill, it streamlines a number of aspects, subject to amendments that will be proposed by my colleagues at an appropriate stage. But largely, the Bill brings out a number of salient issues that touch on this matter and they have been pointed out in a number of decided cases. A bulk of these decided cases point out lacunas in the law. And it has been unfortunate that we have not been having amends to address them for a long time.  I thank everybody who has made it possible to have this Bill tabled, and I pray that my colleagues will work round the clock to ensure that we pass it so that we can address the concerns of the business community. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.06
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to be quite thankful to the Attorney-General for this presentation. It is going to make work much easier for not only the business people, but also for designers like myself.  

What I want to find out from the Attorney-General is the difference that occurs in the words that I have listed below: 
1.	Trademark
2.	Logo
3.	Emblem.

It is important to get educated on these terms, especially from the Attorney-General, before we proceed to fix a law on them.

The second case where I want the Attorney-General to help the House is the issue of the verification capacity, because in the report of the committee chairman, he says that an individual would have to go and find out whether the logo exists. But we know the type of people we have in our country; we know our level. I do not know whether it is going to be practically possible for a businessman or businesswoman from Nakinyuguzi in Makindye, or in Bukomansimbi, and if you like, Kyanamukaaka, to know whether really a certain trademark exists. So, I do not really know whether it shouldn’t be the work of the technocrats in the registry to advise on this, rather than the owner of a business who simply wants to register a trademark? 

Lastly, I would personally like to know whether the law we are going to put across is going to be tight enough or this is going to be – I just want to be clarified. These powers could be left to the registrar to see the closeness; the neighbourhood. For example, if a manufacturer uses a trademark of the Union locks and another one makes locks and they are not called “Union” but “Onion” how are we going to look at this? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled: “Trademarks Bill, 2008” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

BILLS
 COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TRADEMARKS BILL, 2008

4.10
Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): In Clause 1, page 5, the definition of the word “assignment”; the committee proposes to insert the words “or transfer” immediately after the words “means assignment”. The justification is to provide that assignment includes transfer.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 2(1) page 7, the committee proposes that the word “manual” should be inserted immediately before the word “register”. The justification is to require the registrar to maintain a manual register.

In clause 2, page 7, immediately after sub clause (1), the committee proposes to insert the following new provision and the Bill be re-numbered. “(2) The registrar may also maintain an electronic register of the trademarks, subject to prescribed safeguards.” The justification is to provide for the registrar to maintain an electronic register of the trademarks.

Mr Chairman, in clause 2, page 7, the committee proposes to delete sub clause (7). The justification is that it is redundant in view of the new sub clause (2), which we have proposed above.

THE CHAIRMAN: You have heard his three proposed amendments. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that immediately after clause 4 on page 8, we insert the following, and the Bill be re-numbered -

THE CHAIRMAN: Then let us deal with 4 because this is immediately after. I put the question that Clause 4 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now you can come in.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that after Clause 4, page 8, we insert the following and the Bill be re-numbered. “5. Applicant for registration of a trademark to conduct a search. A person who intends to apply for the registration of a trademark shall carry out a search to ascertain whether the trademark exists in the register upon payment of a prescribed fee.” The justification is to provide for applicants of trademarks registration to conduct a search in the register to avoid double registration of similar trademarks.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is a new clause before the original five. So, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 5(3) should be deleted. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment of a new clause 5 above.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clear? I put the question for deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, clause 7(1), the committee proposes that immediately after the word “goods” insert the words “or services” and (b) to delete sub clause (2) and the clause should be re-numbered. The justification is that sub clauses (1) and (2) are similar in content and only differ in the use of the words “goods and services”

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In Clause 10 on page 12, the committee proposes that on the head note we delete the word “advertisement” and replace it with the word “publication”. In (b) Clause 10(1) page 12, immediately after the words “prescribed manner” insert the words “for 60 days”. 

In (2) delete the word “advertised” and insert the word “published”. In (3) delete the word “advertisement” and insert the word “publication”. In Clause 10 (2) delete the word “advertised” and insert the word “published”; in Clause 10 (3) page 13 delete the word “advertised” and insert the word “published” and (2) delete the word “advertise” and insert the word “publish”.

The justification:

(a) 	Is to provide for a time limit within which an accepted application may be published and
(b) The word “publication” is used in reference to trademarks worldwide as opposed to advertisement.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think it is clear. I put the question that clause 10 as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, on page 13, the committee proposes that in clause 11(1), we delete the word “advertisement” and insert the word “publication”; clause 11(11), we delete the word “advertised” and insert the word “published” and Clause 11(12), we delete the word “Uganda” and insert the words “the East African Community.” The justification, Mr Chairman, is that the word “publication” is used in reference to trademarks worldwide as opposed to “advertisement.” 

The East African Community partner states are exempted from providing security for costs in either state.

THE CHAIRMAN: These are sort of consequential amendments because of the earlier amendments. So, I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that for clause 12(1), we delete the words “Part A,” and insert the words “Part A or Part B”. The justification is to enable registration of certification marks in both Part A and Part B of the register. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, on page 15, the committee proposes to move sub clauses (2) and (3) to be placed immediately after sub clause (7), and the Bill be renumbered accordingly; and for clauses 13(4) and (5), and 13(6)(c)(ii), we delete the word “regulations” and insert “rules.” The justification is for better arrangement and flow of provisions in the Bill, and to avoid confusion with the regulations made by the minister. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 15(2) on page 18 should be deleted and the justification is that it contravenes the principal that national law takes precedence over international law.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposal.

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, on page 19, for clause 18(1), the committee proposes that we delete the head note and insert the fowling: - “18. Status of trademarks removed from the register.” The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 19

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 19 be deleted and the justification is that it provides for associated trademarks which are provided for under clause 47. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, for clause 21, the committee proposes that we delete the phrase “head note” and insert the following:

i)	“21. Rights and exceptions of assignment, licensing and transmission of trademarks relating to goods and services.”
 ii)	Clause 21(1), (2), (3), (4), (6) and (8) immediately after the word “goods” wherever it appears insert the words “or services.” 
iii)	Insert a new sub clause immediately after sub clause (9) to read as follows: “10. For avoidance of doubt, the owner of the trademark may licence another person to use his or her trademark.  

11. The rights to a trademark shall be subject to transmission to the personal representative of the owner or on his or her death.” 

The justification is:

i)	The provisions of the clause provide for rights and exceptions to assignment and transmission of trademarks relating to goods, as opposed to powers and restrictions on assignment and transmission of trademarks relating to goods; and to provide for licensing of trademarks.
ii)	To avoid repetition of clauses, because the clauses are similar in content except for the use of the words “goods” and “services.” 
iii)	To make clear that an owner of a trademark may issue licences to others to use a trademark, and also that upon his or her death, the rights under the trademark may pass on to the person representative of the owner.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 22

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 22 be deleted and the justification is that in view of the new amendment in clause 21, it is redundant.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 23 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 24 be deleted. The justification is that there is always evidence of payment whenever payment is completed, and secondly, assignment is provided for under clause 21.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 25 do stand part of the Bill.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 26 be transferred to immediately after clause 15 and references to “regulations” should be deleted and replaced with “rules” and the justification is: a) for better arrangement and flow of the Bill; b) to avoid causing confusion with the regulations made by the minister. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27 

MR TASHOBYA: Clause 27, Mr Chairman, on page 26, the committee proposes that clause 27 be transferred from Part IV to part III and inserted immediately before clause 18. The justification is that part III of the Bill deals with registration and clause 27 concerns the same.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, clause 34(1) on page 32, the committee proposes to delete clause 34 and replace it with the following:

Infringement by breach of certain restrictions:

1. Whereby a contract in writing made with the owner or a permitted user of the trademark relating to goods or services, a purchaser or owner of goods or services:- 

(a) 	enters into an obligation to the effect that he/she will not do, in relation to the goods or services an act to which this section applies, and; 
(b)	 the purchaser or owner of goods or services having notice of the obligation does an act or authorises it to be done in relation to goods or services in the course of trade or with a view to any dealing in the course of trade, the purchaser or owner of the goods or services shall be taken to infringe the rights of the use of the trademark given by the registration. 
The justification is for better drafting.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clauses 36, 37, 38 and 39

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that clauses 36, 37, 38 and 39 should be transferred from part IV to part III and inserted immediately before clause 18, but after clause 27, which was transferred, and the Bill be renumbered. 

The justification is that part III of the Bill deals with registration and clauses 36, 37, 38 and 39 deal with the same.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to those enumerated numbers to be transferred. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 40 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clauses 40, 41 and 42

MR TASHOBYA: The proposal of the committee is that clauses 40, 41 and 42 should be transferred from part IV to part III and inserted immediately after clause 26, and the justification is for better arrangement and flow of the provisions in the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question in respect to the transfer of these clauses.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 43 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, clause 47 on page 44; the committee proposes that clause 47 should be transferred from part IV to part III and inserted immediately after clause 19. 

The justification is that part III of the Bill deals with registration, and clause 47 deals with registration of a type of trademark called associated trademarks.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed transfer.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 48 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, agreed to.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, clause 49 in the head note; the committee proposes that in clause 49 - the head note, immediately after “goods,” we insert, “or services.” 

And in clauses 49(1) (a) and (b), 49(2), 49(3), 49(4) immediately after “goods,” we insert the word “or services.” The justification is that a trademark includes services.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 50

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause to be deleted. The justification is that the two clauses 49 and 50 are similar in content and only differ in the use of the words “goods” and “services”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 51

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that clause 51 be deleted. The justification is that it is redundant and it is already provided for under clause 49.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 52 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, agreed to.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that in clause 53 head note, we delete the word “registered” and we insert “permitted” and in clause 53(1), (2), (4), (5) and (8), we delete “registered user” and insert “permitted user” and the justification is to provide for a clear distinction between a registered owner of a trademark as opposed to a permitted user of a trade mark.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.
Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, regarding clause 76 on page 62, the committee proposes that immediately after the words “currency points,” we insert, “all imprisonment not exceeding five years or both.” The justification is to provide for imprisonment periods equivalent to the currency points.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 76, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 77

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, regarding clause 77 on page 62, the committee proposes that immediately after the words “currency points,” we insert “all imprisonment not exceeding five years or both.”  The justification is to provide for imprisonment periods equivalent to the currency points.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 77, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 78

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, clause 78(1) on page 62, the committee proposes to delete “forty-eight currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both” and insert the following: “One hundred and twenty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both.” The justification is to harmonise the imprisonment and the corresponding fines. 


THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 78, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 79

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, regarding clause 79(1), the committee proposes that we delete “forty-eight currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both” and insert the following: “One hundred and twenty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both.” The justification is to harmonise the penalties and provide for imprisonment periods. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 79, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 80

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman under clause 80(4) on page 65, the committee proposes that we delete the words “forty-eight currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both” and insert the following: “One hundred currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both.” The justification is to harmonise the penalties and provide for imprisonment periods.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 80 as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 81, agreed to.)

(Clause 82, agreed to.)

(Clause 83, agreed to.)

(Clause 84, agreed to.)

(Clause 85, agreed to.)

(Clause 86, agreed to.)

(Clause 87, agreed to.)

(Clause 88, agreed to.)

(Clause 89, agreed to.)

(Clause 90, agreed to.)

(Clause 91, agreed to.)

(Clause 92, agreed to.)

(Clause 93, agreed to.)

(Clause 94, agreed to.)

(Clause 95, agreed to.)

(Clause 96, agreed to.)

(Clause 97, agreed to.)

(Clause 98, agreed to.)

(Clause 99, agreed to.)

(Clause 100, agreed to.)

(Clause 101, agreed to.)

(Clause 102, agreed to.)

(Clause 103, agreed to.)

(Clause 104, agreed to.)

(Clause 105, agreed to.)

The Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Schedule stands the Schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Schedule, agreed to)

The Title 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title stands the Title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Title, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.46
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume so that the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.47
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE, CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House deliberated, “The Trademarks Bill, 2008”, and passed it with some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.48
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE, CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House which has just been received by this House be hereby adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion seeks to approve the report of the committee of the whole House on the Bill entitled, “The Trademarks Bill, 2008”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE TRADEMARKS BILL, 2008

4.49
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE, CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Trademarks Bill, 2008” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Trademarks Bill, 2008” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE TRADEMARKS ACT, 2008”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I must say that when we started, I did not know that we would be able complete this Bill. Thank you for your contribution. (Applause) 

Well, hon. Members, this brings us to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(House rose at 5.00 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 13 April 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 
