Wednesday, 7 April 2004

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery, we have our distinguished visitors, these are Kayunga Women Group from Ntenjeru South. They were brought here by hon. Ssempangi.  Bamaama, you are most welcome to your Parliament!

Honourable members, members of the Budget Committee, these include the ex-officio members and the chairpersons of committees, we have a meeting tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. in the usual place to start considering the budget process.  

Honourable members, following the disruption of PAFO meeting in Jinja on 5th March this year, Parliament on 10th March decided that a committee be set up to investigate all the circumstances that led to the said interruption and then make a report of its findings and recommendations in the premises.  The following honourable members are appointed to constitute the said Committee:

1.  Hon. Fred Ruhindi – Chairperson
2.  Hon. Martin Orech
3.  Hon. Capt. Steven Basaliza
4.  Hon. Idah Mehangye
5.  Hon. Sitenda Sebalu
6.  Hon. John Odit 
7.  Hon. David Wakikona
8.  Hon. Betty Udongo Pacuto
9.  Hon. Hilary Onek
10.Hon. Sylvia Namabidde Sinabulya
11.Hon. Philip Ntacyotugira
12.Hon. Saidi Nasur Okuti 

These are the members who will take up this work. I appeal to them to start the work immediately and then report soon.

2.27 
MR Aggrey AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Mr Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to raise a matter of national importance and urgency during or soon after the communication –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: In the first place, honourable member, I do not know whether I had ended my communication, but then since you are so anxious to do so, let me say “full stop”.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, my humble apologies for anticipating a full stop. I wish once again to thank you for allowing me to raise this matter of national importance and urgency.  Mr Speaker, yesterday while you were away in Bombo –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, I think you are alluding to something over which you wrote to me. I received a letter on the alleged demonstration by Makerere students, and I have written to you to the effect that if you have a petition from the said students, you are free to present that petition to the House and the House will decide on the best way to handle it.  I do not know whether they were students or not, the best way is for you to communicate to Parliament. I know we passed the Tertiary Institutions and Universities Bill, and there are structures at Makerere University, which can handle that issue.  Now, if you move a motion without notice, members maybe who are not here, may not be in position to participate effectively in that motion.  I have written to you a letter. I am surprised you have not received it.  I suggest, honourable member, that you get a petition in writing and something, which can be verified, you bring it here and then we deal with it.

Another issue, which you must consider, we have many schools and tertiary institutions, suppose there is a strike in a school in Kabale or in Kotido or in Yumbe, are we immediately going to deal with that strike without waiting for reports from organs concerned?  Are we not going to waste a lot of our time, if anybody or some people gather and call themselves students from this university or the other, they come here, and then we say the university is on fire?  Let us handle these matters maturely. Let us give the institutions we created opportunity to handle these matters.  Under the University Act there is a university council. If you read the Act, it gives you the functions of this Council.  Secondly, we have not been told the Council has failed; let us give our institutions a chance to operate.

MR AWORI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise words and guidance on this particular matter.  But, Mr Speaker, essentially when I came to see you, it was in accordance with your previous advice on the Floor that, “Should you have any matter of national urgency, it is important you see me in advance,” and that is why I thought that it is important that I spell out the concern, and I had hoped that the relevant minister or a line minister would also respond to the matter.  Mr Speaker, it is not my wish to challenge your –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you proceed, since you seem not to have received the letter, let me read the letter:  “RE: Issue of National Importance and Urgency- Rule 40(1)(b): Refer to your letter of 6 April 2004. I wish to advise that if the students have a petition in respect of the complaints you have mentioned in your letter, receive it and present it to the House. We shall then decide on the best way to deal with it.  Signed, Speaker.”

2.32
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma county, Jinja): Mr Speaker, on 24th of March I raised an issue here. I appealed to the Prime Minister to impress on the National Political Commissar, the Minister without Portfolio, to come and give a briefing on the progress, which he has been making in his discussions with the political parties.  

Mr Speaker, this is now a matter of great national importance, we now know that the party talks have collapsed and it is very important that the people of Uganda- I would like to say the peasants- are properly informed about what is going on because one of the political parties is supposed to be –(Interruption)

2.33
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (Workers Representative):  Mr Speaker, I am raising on a point of procedure.  I have noted that the trend of debate in this House is changing.  As far as I am concerned, on the Order Paper, we have just received a communication from the Chair, is the member reacting on the communication from the Chair or is he seeking something outside your the communication? What is the right procedure?

THE SPEAKER: Well, this matter was raised before this House. I hope you have heard he wants a statement. He raised this matter a week or so, and he was promised a statement, but I think he is just reminding us.

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS)(Mrs Hope Mwesigye):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  It is true this matter was raised on this Floor and the Prime Minister took appropriate action. He has directed the National Political Commissar to come with a statement to this House.  So, the National Political Commissar is in the process of preparing one, which will be presented to this House in due course.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is it okay?  

DR NABWISO: It would be okay if we were given proper time so that we know when this statement will be made in this House.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, the NPC is not here, but she has volunteered to pass it to him, and then she will let us know may be tomorrow.

2.35
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure, which would matter to many of you who are lawyers in terms of precedence.  On two occasions in this Parliament, Members of Parliament have collected signatures from us that they want to do something, which we said we believed in.  Now we have set a bad precedence because our rule on criteria of censuring ministers reads: “ Any signature appended to the list as provided under Sub-Rule (2) shall not be withdrawn.” That is Rule 84(4).  

An ordinary man like me who is not a lawyer, it implies there must be progress in terms of the entire censure business.  Now we are lost, we have signed twice in a period of two months. We do not know whether the censure is on; we do not know whether the professor is at large; we do not know whether it is an Easter gift. We should know where the problem is, because it is going to be difficult for this Parliament to censure other undisciplined ministers.  If we have forgiven him, someone should communicate to us that it is all over.  We have not received any formal communication. I do not know whether it is the Speaker to help us out of this. We are lost, because this is serious, next time it might look a joke when we want to seriously censure someone.  So we really want to know where things are, and if we are lost, we might even decide to just change the heading of the censure to the person who tried to joke with us by collecting our signatures- (Laughter).  

So, the people of Pader whom I told I signed twice want to know how far we have gone.  Otherwise, it is becoming a comedy and the minister also needs some rest. He has to know whether he is now free or whether the guillotine is still hanging over his neck.  Mr Speaker, you guide this House on that point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, I must say I cannot answer for private arrangements.  I can only answer things that concern the Speaker, things that have been started through the Speaker’s office. Therefore, I cannot answer that question, it must be a private arrangement; the sponsors must know.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Mr Speaker, most obliged for your ruling.  But I have been wondering whether- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I cannot talk about something I do not know.  I am not in position to assist you, because if it is a censure for a minister, before you append your signature, the notice must be given before you start the process.  But if you are talking of the last notice, which came to my office, it aborted and that was the end of the matter.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I will utilize your Chair to ask Professor Ogenga to tell us how far we have gone with the private deal in an appropriate time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER:  Sorry, when I introduced our guests, I forgot our students from Jinja Senior Secondary School, which is in Jinja Municipality.  You are most welcome!

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2004

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES): (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2004” be read the First Time.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, the bill stands committed to the appropriate committee to handle.  Do you have a certificate?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA:  Mr Speaker, I have the certificate, but unfortunately it is not appended hereto.  I can bring it tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, then it is stood over until the certificate is produced.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2004

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)   (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this bill has been circulated, but on looking at it, I and the Chairman of the Committee of Finance, note that there are discrepancies which we have to iron out before we present it.  So I beg to be allowed not to present it today.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay!

MR MWANDHA:  Talking about discrepancies, it appears that the minister did not circulate the documents, which he laid on the Table last week and this is going to affect the work of the Budget Committee.  Can I find out from him whether we can have the documents before tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock so that we can proceed with our meeting?

THE SPEAKER:  I have been advised that they have been circulated.  

MR MWANDHA: No, there are two documents, one has been circulated, and the other one, which is the most important document has not been circulated, that is, the Revenue and Expenditure Projections. The Committee cannot proceed without that document.  Apparently the document was brought to Parliament, but was withdrawn because there were some mistakes in it, and it was taken back for correction.  Now, we have been waiting for this document, we want the Committees to start working, we have the deadline, and I do not know when the minister is going to get the document to the members.

THE SPEAKER: Well, in view of the legal requirements, the minister should take all steps necessary to ensure that the committee gets the copies of this particular document.  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, we need assurance that before 10 o’clock tomorrow, we shall have the documents.  If we do not have those documents, there is no need for us to go for the meeting.

THE SPEAKER: We shall address the issue, but my directive was that the minister gives you the necessary copies before you meet. I have announced the meeting is at 10.00 a.m.  So, I think let us give him the benefit of doubt.  

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE, 2000

2.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Dr Okulo Epak): Mr Speaker, honourable members, I beg to present the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Report of the Auditor General to Parliament on the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the year that ended 30 June 2000.

I would like to remind members that the Report of the Public Accounts Committee, which is a big document, is divided into two sections.  The first section, which goes up to page 26, is a summary of the details contained in the main report, department by department, issue by issue, and I am going to present only the summary. When we debate the report, we should debate the summary together with the details contained elsewhere in the report.  I thank you.

Introduction:
The following report sets out the findings and recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor General on the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the year ended 30 June 2000.  

The report is made in accordance with Article 90(3) of the Constitution that provides for the functions of the Standing Committee and following the mandate of Rule 134 of the Rules of Procedure that charges the Public Accounts Committee with the duty to “monitor all expenditure of public funds” and to report twice every year.

The report of the Auditor General was tabled in the House and referred to the Committee for in-depth work and further investigations with the Accounting Officers.  

The Committee used the report of the Auditor General as its primary source of investigations, and used it to quiz the concerned Accounting Officers.  The Committee is happy with the additional technical support it received from the Office of the Auditor General, the Office of the Accountant General (Treasury Directorate), Office of the Clerk to Parliament and Criminal Investigations Department during its work.  Allow me also to pay tribute to Members of the Republic Accounts Committee for their tireless effort to have this work done.  The names of the Members of the Public Accounts Committee are attached at the end of the report.

The committee interviewed the Accounting Officers of various Government ministries or departments in the process and set out time to meet with ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Public Service, Attorney General and the Solicitor General, to clarify policy matters that arose in the process.  

The Committee regrets that some Accounting Officers do not seem to treat seriously the annual reports of the Auditor General and the work of the committee.  This is the main cause of delay in dealing with the reports of the Auditor General.  The Committee has decided to handle these matters sternly and the Accounting Officers stand warned. All responses to queries raised by the Auditor General must either be dealt with or responded to fully before appearing before the Public Accounts Committee and the timetables for Public Accounts Committee meetings must be adhered to. All Accounting Officers must attend Public Accounts Committee meetings in person.  

The committee commends the enactment of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, which the Committee hopes will go a long way in filling many loopholes that had been taken care of by the Public Finance Act of 1969.  The Committee is of the view that the new law, the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, will give better impetus for ensuring compliance with financial and accounting regulations, and in particular the auditing of classified expenditure.

1.1.	Issues / Terms of Reference:

Further to the provisions of Article 164 of the Constitution, the Public Accounts Committee:
a) Evaluates the effectiveness, efficiency and economic value of Government projects and programmes according to their set objectives.

b) Assesses the consistency of budget outlays in relation to the increasing overspending by ministries and departments of Government, acts that amount to the violation of the Commitment Control System.

c) Request in writing from Government ministers or departments such information or public documents as are deemed necessary to further the assessment and fulfilment of its oversight functions.

d) Assesses the accounts of the ministries or departments and the overall management of public funds in paying special attention on allegation of fraud, waste, abuse or any sort of irregularity that may constitute abuse or misuse of monies drawn on the consolidated fund.

1.2.	Observations and Recommendations or Decisions:

Government continued to bar the Auditor General from auditing the so-called classified expenditure, which involves billions of an audited public expenditure every year.  

Ministries or departments continue to breach financial regulations and fail to comply with accounting instructions.  Common cases involve irregularities such as diversion of funds to meet travel expenses of ministers and top Officials, in the procurement and contracting of goods and services, in spending without authorities and nugatory payments. Simple things like lack of accountability and losses continue to be rampant, which reflect the lack of seriousness on the part of the Accounting Officers.  

There was also lack of competence and seriousness by some Accounting Officers in carrying out their work in relation to the work of the Committee.  Most of the queries should have been avoided or dealt with before appearing before the Committee, but the Accounting Officers chose to ignore the instruments provided to them by the financial regulations and the Standing Orders to take actions where it was necessary, presumably because it was not in their interest to do so. Accounting Officers are reluctant to take actions that correct the anomalies raised by the Auditor General and wait until they are urged by the Public Accounts Committee to do so.  

A number of Accounting Officers come insufficiently prepared when they appear before the Public Accounts Committee.  The Committee has been exercising some leniency by giving them time to respond.  This has resulted into delays in the disposing of the Auditor General’s Report in time.  The Committee has decided to be stern and warns that in future it will recommend withdrawal or denial of appointment of such Permanent Secretaries as Accounting Officers of their ministries or departments.

Mr Speaker, let me now highlight some of the main concerns of the Auditor General during the financial year under review: 

1.2.2 Independence of the Office of the Auditor General: In the performance of his duties, the Auditor General is supposed to be independent and not to be directed by any person or authority.  Although this constitutional provision is extended to him, his office and staff still remain within the ambit of the Public Service Rule and Regulations.  This omission has affected the calibre, remuneration and quality as well as retention of staff of the office of the Auditor General.  

Article 163 of the Constitution provides that the staff of the office of the Auditor shall be public officers.  What it actually means is that Auditor General cannot recruit his staff without going through the Ministry of Public Service. Since the office does not draw funds directly from the Consolidated Fund, its operations are seriously affected by the Treasury procedures to release funds to departments.  

It is regrettable that sufficient funds have never been provided to enable the office of the Auditor General meet all its constitutional obligations, including carry out value for money audits.  The committee has held consultations with Ministry of Finance, the Minister of Public Service and the Attorney General and it was noted that since this is a constitutional issue there is need to submit the matter to the Constitutional Review Commission.  The Office of the Auditor General has made submission to the Commission, as well as there is a process by which the Ministry of Finance will make a law for this office.

The committee urges the Executive and Parliament to amend the Constitution to make the office of the Auditor General fully independent and draw its funds directly from the Consolidated Fund.

1.2.2 Classified Expenditure: 

The Committee noted that during the year under review, the office of the Auditor General did not audit classified expenditure amounting to Shs42, 435,893,733.  This expenditure is related to the Office of the President, State House, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Uganda Police and the Office of the Inspector General of Government.  

The Committee noted with regret that in some departments the classifications of some these expenditures could not be justified.  The committee for example could not be given clear justification for classified expenditure under the office of the Vice President. The Committee also came across an incident under the office of the President where Shs 992,680,569 being payment to utility companies could not be verified as they were treated as classified.  It is interesting, though, to note that on further scrutiny these funds were found to have been meant for payment of salary and facilitation to combat insecurity caused by cattle rustlers in the districts surrounding Karamoja.

The Committee appreciates that by the time of writing and presenting this report, Government has already made provisions and produced regulations under the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 for all classified expenditures to be audited and reported on.  Public accounts committee advises strongly that this law should be fully implemented.

1.2.3 Outstanding advances: The Committee noted that advances totalling Shs 889,940,106 covering the following ministries/departments had not been accounted for: 

State House			Shs 9,000,000 						(USD.5000)

Health			Shs 32, 454,691
Agriculture			Shs 39, 153,115

Mbarara University	Shs 42, 573,323

Energy and Mineral 
Development		Shs 600, 000

Prisons Department 	Shs 79, 394,103

Police Department		Shs 686, 664,874

The Committee found lack of commitment on the part of the accounting officers to have funds advanced to their offices accounted for within the period specified in the standing orders, financial regulations and accounting instructions. The Accounting Officers have instead continued to give more advances to the same officers when the previous ones have not been accounted for.  

In all the cases under review, the Committee received and held the Auditor General to verify the late accountabilities.   For the accountabilities that could not be made or those that were verified and not accepted, the Committee directed that they should be recovered according to the rules. However, the committee is happy to note that responses on the recoveries have been prompt and effective.  A large sum of money will consequently be recovered and paid to the Consolidated Fund.

The Committee warns the accounting officers that it will not continue accepting late submissions of accountabilities and that those officers who fail to account within the financial year or as required by the regulations will be referred to the Solicitor General for prosecution or to the Public Service Commission for disciplinary act.

1.2.4 Losses:

During the financial year under review, losses amounting to Shs 2,219,693,980 were reported.  These losses covered the following ministries / departments:- Gender and Labour, loss involved, four safes and no cash. Health, losses involved cash amounting to Shs118, 300,329;Tourism cash release Shs108, 846,000; Judiciary Shs764,530; Judiciary again cash Shs 1,822,850;State House, cash amounting to Shs2,020,000; Defence cash in terms of salary Shs1,675,250,223; Defence,  cash salaries Shs5,352,98; Defence cash salaries Shs33, 473,891; Water and Lands Cash and Stamps Shs23, 565,000; Water and Lands - a Prado Vehicle, Shs70, 000,000; Ministry of Gender and Labour, a Toyota Hilix vehicle, Shs 58,590,000; Ministry of Gender and Labour, a Land Cruiser vehicle, Shs 70 million; NARO, a vehicle, Shs 51,709,059.

The committee was informed and it was verified that most of these losses were under investigations by the Police, but the committee was concerned that in many cases, such investigations do end in prosecution, but the prosecution does not recover the losses.  

Some of the losses are as a result of negligence of the Accounting Officers.  A case to mention was when Shs 118,300,329 was stolen from the Ministry of Health.  The money was withdrawn on the 23 December 2000, when the staff of the ministry were to go for Christmas holiday, and kept in the safe. The amount withdrawn was above the maximum imprest of Shs 6,000,000, which the Accounting Officers are permitted to hold.  The money was reportedly stolen on the same day it was withdrawn from the bank according to the Police report.

The committee also discovered through its discussions with the Accounting Officers that most of the vehicles that were lost by Government during the financial year under review were stolen at gunpoint at late hours of the night.  The reasons, circumstances and authority under which these vehicles were being driven at late hours could hardly be given.  

The committee in particular was not pleased with the losses under the Ministry of Defence, which seemed to be outrageous and caused a lot of concern by the taxpayers.  The committee feels that the accounting system in the Ministry of Defence is defective, and the Accounting Officer has limited control in the management of funds, particularly those for field operations. These funds are managed by persons who are not directly accountable to the Secretary for Defence or the Accounting Officer.  There is urgent need to review the accounting system in the Ministry of Defence.

The committee concludes as follows: 

1.That Accounting Officers are directed to put in place strong mechanisms that will guard against unnecessary losses. They must also comply with rules for accountability of advances.

2.The Accounting Officers are also directed to establish discipline in the use of Government properties to avoid situations that can cause such losses.

3.The Accounting Officers should follow up cases under investigation and make sure that they are brought to conclusion.

4.The committee recommends that courts should impose two penalties consisting of imprisonment and recovery of the funds lost or stolen.

5.5.5.	Violation of Commitment Control System:

Due to the persistent non-payment of bills by Government ministries/departments and huge accumulation of domestic arrears, Government introduced Commitment Control System.  Under this system, the Accounting Officers are barred from issuing orders to committing expenditure if they do not have sufficient funds to pay within 30 days of committing such expenditure. Furthermore, no unpaid bills on the recurrent expenditure are supposed to be carried forward to the subsequent financial year.  Examination of accounts, however, revealed that the unpaid bills totalled Shs 14,985,883,331 and US$2,872,935 at the end of 30 June 2000, which was carried forward to the 2000/2001 financial year in the following ministries: Ministry of Foreign Affairs -Shs5, 237,445,760; Office of the President – Shs 848,132,974; State House – Shs 935, 654,017; Ministry of Public Service – Shs 2, 047,795; Ministry of Defence – Shs 2, 694,724,006; Directorate of Public Prosecution – Shs 720, 000; Local Government Finance Commission – Shs 31,798,150; Movement Secretariat – Shs 157,585,287; Police Department – Shs 55,991,130; Judiciary Department – Shs 24,008,000; Ministry of Works – Shs 521, 460,302; Inspectorate of Government – Shs 127, 748,732; Ministry of Education and Sports – Shs 87, 375,570; Prisons Department – Shs 26,055,540; Ministry of Agriculture - Shs 12,265,285; Mulago Hospital – Shs 42, 403,290; Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment – Shs 3, 972,342,826; Education Service Commission – Shs 5, 648,200; Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry – Shs 39, 449,000; Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development – Shs 163, 027,467.

The committee observed that commitment of Government by the Accounting Officers on items that were not part of their budgets was not only tantamount to borrowing from the public without interest, but is unconstitutional and it constitutes spending without authority of or allocation by Parliament.  In terms of the economy, it leads to slow growth of the economy and in the long run may cripple the economy all together.

The committee has found out that since the Ministry of Finance operates a cash budget, most often the Accounting Officers do not receive what is allocated to them in their budgets in time and in full. The Accounting Officers contract the provision of goods and services anticipating that when Ministry of Finance releases funds, they would pay.  The Accounting Officers also pleaded unavoidable expenses such as feeding the patients and students and delay in receiving bills from utility agencies. Unfortunately, there are usually default in the releases, in that not all funds expected are released or some budget lines are suspended.  In the end, ministries or departments continue to accumulate arrears. 

The committee also having looked at various circumstances causing these arrears realised that the Ministry of Finance only put in place “threat of penalty” without implementing them, thereby making the Accounting Officers complacent and the committee feels at a loss as to the usefulness and effectiveness of the Commitment Control System.  Indeed the Accounting Officers are allowed to plead and in most cases are given supplementary appropriations by the Ministry of Finance.

The Committee discussed the matter of domestic arrears and failure to adhere to the Commitment Control System by Accounting Officers with the Minister of Finance, the Auditor General and the Attorney General.  Although the view of the Committee was that the Commitment Control System does not have the effect it was intended to achieve, the response from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was also collaborated by the Auditor General and Attorney General that the Commitment Control System has had impact on reduced domestic arrears.

The committee, however, noted that a lot of arrears still continue to be accumulated by the ministries /departments and decided as follows:

1.With effect from the financial year 2003/2004, the Ministry of Finance should take responsibility for some domestic arrears on a pilot basis as a step towards ultimately transferring all domestic arrears to be settled under the Ministry of Finance. The pilot ministries/ departments were to include, Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Mulago Hospital.

2) The situation of utilities in all ministries must be discussed seriously between the Accounting Officers and Ministry of Finance and utility bodies in order to adopt measures that ensures prompt billing and avoidance of domestic arrears. 

3) The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Public Service and the Solicitor General should agree on imposing the prescribed penalties on any Accounting Officers who are found to have violated the Commitment Control System because of its constitutional implications.

1.2.6 Non-Payment of Tax by the Judges:

During the year under review, the Auditor General reported that the Accounting Officer of the Judiciary did not deduct taxes amounting to Shs 593,847,000 from the salaries and allowances of the Judges.  

The Accounting Officer informed the Committee that the deduction of taxes from the salaries and allowances of the Judges would mean loss of privileges, which the Judges have been enjoying since 1990.  The Attorney General later by his letter reference No. MJ/AG/03 dated the 10 April 2002,gave a legal opinion in support of the position of the Accounting Officer.  Whereas the legal advice given by the Attorney General cannot be challenged, the Committee noted and observed that the decision had the following implications:

1) The Accounting Officer in refusing to deduct taxes from the remunerations of the Judges acted contrary to the terms and conditions of her service as she was not obliged to comply with any instruction, which contradicts her terms and conditions of service.  The opinion of the Attorney General was not available to her by that time.  

During the earlier questioning, she refused to provide all the relevant evidence and information to support her case apart from the provision of the Constitution, which itself was not supported or translated in the salaries and allowances of Specified Officers Act 1999.  

3) It amounted to extending the Statutory Instrument, which granted exemption on a different ground and for a limited period of time, which should have expired by 30 June 1997 at the time in question.  The Judges had asked for exemption and Government accepted it because their remunerations were very law, but with the coming into place of the salaries and allowances of (Specified Officers) Act 1999, this situation was taken care of.  This Act does not provide for such exemption nor does it explain all detailed privileges, which the Judges should be entitled.  

The privilege being referred to was specific on Income Tax but the exemption, therefore, would tantamount to exempting Judges from payment of any taxes at all.  The Income Tax Act 1997 gives powers to Parliament to only grant any person Income Tax exemption, but the Attorney General uses the provision of Article 2(2) of the Constitution to support this case.

4) Neither the Salaries and Allowances (Specified Officers) Act 1999 nor the Constitution specifies the privileges, which are to be enjoyed by the Judges.  Parliament did not give Judges tax exemption when it enacted that law.

5) Nevertheless, the committee feels and recommends to Parliament that this matter must now be dealt with fairly and comprehensively because similar Constitutional provisions affect other categories of public officers. 

The Attorney General must equally give his opinion regarding exemption arising from:

a) Article 128(7) with regard to other persons exercising judicial power such as the Magistrates.

b) Article 158 regarding other specified officers who derive their pay from the Consolidated Fund and would wish to claim the same privileges.  

The Committee brought the matter to the attention of the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Public Service who promised to consult with Government with a view to resolving the issue.  

The Public Accounts Committees stand is still the same that no one was exempted from paying taxes and therefore Judges must pay the taxes.  If the advice of the Attorney General is being implemented, then all other constitutional bodies, including other judicial officers should not pay.  

The Committee is referring this matter to the House to consider and make appropriate decision.  However, let me pause here and say that when we made the report for 1999, this issue was set to rest and the remaining responsibilities governing other officers and the amendment of the law concerned with salaries and privileges of specified officers was left to be handled by the Attorney General.  So, much of this has been overtaken by the decisions we made here when we debated the 1999 Report.

1.2.7 Accounts Submitted by the Treasury:

The Auditor General did the audit of the Consolidated Fund for the year under review.  A number of issues were raised, but after discussions with the Secretary to the Treasury, the Committee found that issues raised arose out of omissions and poor record keeping in the Treasury.  

The omissions that were reported by the Auditor General consisted of poor documentation of the Treasury Bill Transactions, non-compliance with the transfer of unapplied revenue from the ministries /departments to the Consolidation Fund, Poor record keeping of the public debt status and un-reconciled Treasury General Balance Sheet.  

The Committee noted in one of these omissions, a case in which funds amounting to Shs60,000,000,000 were reported to have been advanced to Bank of Uganda.  This transaction was done without proper records kept by the Treasury.  

The Auditor General reported to the committee that the Government advanced the bank the funds amounting to Shs 60 billion, and that during the audit he found out that Government also owed Bank of Uganda Shs 36,749,221,734.  As a result, the Auditor General had requested the bank to refund the balance of shs 23,250,778,266 to Government.  It was, however, found out that the bank had already irregularly and unilaterally paid itself by drawing without warrant Shs 36,749,221,734 from the Consolidated Fund.  

After record searching, verification and discussions with the Officials of the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Bank of Uganda, together with the Auditor General, the Committee established that: -
a) At that time, the accounts of Bank of Uganda had been impaired through a protracted period of time and a decision was made for it to be re-capitalized.  It was eventually agreed that Bank of Uganda should be recapitalised and the Auditor General had indicated a figure of Shs 60 billion for the purpose.  This was done, albeit, without prior Parliamentary approval, and this is the amount which the Auditor General thought and reported to have been an advance to the bank.  

b) The Committee was assured and shown records by the Treasury that the money was provided for in the budget as a statutory expenditure and approved by Parliament.

c) The committee on Public Accounts further found out that over the period Shs 131,904,045,676 had been overdrawn from various ministries’ accounts, and these funds remain reflected in the statements as owed to Bank of Uganda.  

The Auditor General reported that he had only verified recovery by Bank of Uganda of Shs 36,749,221,734 out of these funds, and that this amount was debited from the Consolidated Fund directly by the Bank of Uganda without audit warrant.  

The balance of unverified amount became directly the responsibility of Bank of Uganda and the Committee was told and proof given by the Bank of Uganda that the Board of the Bank of Uganda decided to write it off.  

The committee noted with a lot of concern the fact that so much money could be withdrawn from the Ministry’s account without proper documentation.  It further noted that the Bank of Uganda seems to be at the liberty to meddle with the Consolidated Fund accounts in the way it wants without the Auditor General’s warrant.  

The committee warns the Bank of Uganda to adhere to the Constitution and the rules of issuing and withdrawing money from the Consolidated Fund.  Unfortunately, the committee found out that the case of Shs 36,749,221,734 drawn in this manner could not be redressed.  

1.2.8 Divestiture Accounts:

The total number of enterprises divested by Government at the end of the financial year under review was 109.  Of the divested companies, 74 enterprises were privatised, four were repossessed, and 15 were struck off the Register of Companies, while 16 were liquidated.  

Included in the privatised enterprises was the Nile complex, which was sold under a joint venture arrangement, but the sale was cancelled after the buyers failed to fulfil their obligations under the agreement.  The hotel was then being prepared for resale.  

The committee further noted that a total of 51 privatised enterprises had been fully paid for Shs 224,545,737,195 as follows: Uganda Agip Limited, Shs 1,664,414,892, Blenders Limited, Shs 38,109,750, East Africa Distilleries Ltd, shs 731,063,195, Foods and Beverages Limited, Uganda shillings 670 million, Fresh Foods Limited, Shs900,000, Gomba Motors Limited, Shs8,200,000, Lake Victoria Bottling Company, Shs3,621,000,000, Kibimba Rice Company Limited, Shs 1,523,515,000, Motor Craft Limited, Shs 200 million, Lake Victoria Hotel, shs 5,924,775,855, Mweya Safari Lodge, shs 1,821,112,067 –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, are you reading the whole list? You just note its existence then we continue with the main report?

DR OKULO EPAK:  I thought these figures have to go into the Hansard.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

DR OKULO EPAK: If it is the wish of the House, I will definitely be pleased to just read the total, but the total does not reflect the individual companies.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed, since you have started.

DR OKULO EPAK: Republic Motors, Shs 148 million, Shell Uganda Limited, Shs 12,790,000,000, Stanbic Bank Uganda limited, shs 6,938,819,178 - It is rather a long list.  May I continue, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: Well, we can assume that you have read it and then the list will be captured in the Hansard- (Interruption)

MR KAGIMU:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Actually, Mr Speaker, I was also of the view that we skip the -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Hansard will incorporate it in their records. I do not know whether that satisfies you, but it is your report anyway.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I would urge the Chairman to read it, because there are some conflicting figures between here and the Auditor General’s report.

THE SPEAKER: No, that does not solve the problem.  What he is doing is for purposes of the Hansard but we can direct the Hansard to adopt this in its record without you having to go through it, then you proceed with the main text of the report. Then, when it comes to the debate you can raise the points you are raising, hon. Nandala. I do not know the views of the Members? Do you not think we can do that? Proceed.

DR EPAK: Much obliged. I propose that the sum of Shs 224,545,737,195 derived from the sale of parastatals do form part of the record of the Hansard, and as detailed in the report of the committee.

	ENTERPRISES	NET AMOUNT

1 Agip (U) Ltd.	1,664,414,892
2 Blenders Limited	38,109,750
3 East African Distilleries Ltd.	731,063,195
4 Foods & Beverages Ltd.	670,000,000
5 Fresh Foods Ltd.	900,000
6 Gomba Motors Ltd.	8,200,000
7 Lake Victoria Bottling Co.	3,621,000,000
8 Kibimba Rice Co. Ltd.	1,523,515,000
9 Motor Craft Ltd.	200,000,000
10 Lake Victoria Hotel	5,924,775,855
11 Mweya Safari Lodge	1,821,112,067
12 Republic Motors	148,000,000
13 Shell (U) Ltd.	12,790,000,000
14 Stanbic Bank (U) Ltd.	6,938,819,178
15 Total (U) Ltd.	5,645,992,433
16 Uganda Cement Industry Tororo	5,864,857,750
17 Uganda Grain Milling company	4,868,163,741
18 Uganda Hardwares Ltd.	18,200,000
19 Uganda Hire Purchase	240,000
20 Hotel Margheritta 	365,184,210
21 Moroto Hotel	40,000,000
22 Mt. Elgon Hotel	650,000,000
23 Rock Hotel Tororo	300,000,000
24 White Horse Inn	600,000,000
25 White Rhino Hotel	200,000,000
26 Uganda Industrial Machinery 	7,000,000
27 Uganda Motors Limited	300,000,000
28 Winnits (U) Ltd.	102,500,000
29 Uganda Commercial Bank	12,610,000,000 
30 African Ceramics Company Ltd.	270,000,000
31 Barclays Bank (U) Ltd.	5,000,000,000
32 Uganda Leather and Tanning Ind.	1,594,150,000
33 Tumpeco	693,350,000
34 BAT (20%) 	10,290,000,000
35 Uganda Consolidated Properties 
      Embassy House/Development House	11,250,000,000 
		against liabilities of 					(11,250,000,000)
       International TV Sales Ltd.	320,000,000
36 Nile Hotel Complex	26,900,000,000 
		against liabilities of 					Shs.26,900,000,000
37 Bank of Baroda	2,500,000,000
38 Uganda Telecom Ltd.	50,975,088,162
39 ENHAS	1,226,193,448
40 Uganda Clays	1,182,415,300
41 Second National Operators License 	6,664,000,000
42 Agricultural Enterprises Ltd.	2,199,841,534
43 Hima Cement Factory	17,948,945,000
44 Steel Corporation of East Africa	362,912,000
45 United Garment Industries Ltd.	850,000,000
46 SAIMMCO	190,844,460
47 Kakira Sugar Works	12,568,795,200
48 PAPCO Industries Ltd.	100,000,000
49 Government Central Purchasing Corporation	1,091,276,000  
		Off set against 
		terminal benefits 
50 Uganda Meat Packers – Kampala 	584,151,020
51 Nyanza Textile Industries Limited (NYTIL)	2,132,000,000
      Total		224,545,737,195

DR EPAK: The committee further noted that a total of 10 enterprises had defaulted on their payments to the tune of Shs 4,209,400,000 and they were in arrears for periods from one year to over four years. I propose that this amount go as part of the record in the Hansard and the details as contained in the report for the individual enterprises.

	Name of Enterprise	Buyer	Sale Amount	Outstanding Balance (shs) 
as at 31/12/98	Extent of default
(a)	African Textile Mills	R.S Patel	1,700,000,000,000	1,600,000,000	Over three years
(b)	Print Pak (U) Ltd.  	New print Pak (U) Ltd.	900,000,000	825,000,000	Over four years
(c)	Uganda Fisheries Ltd. 	Nordic-Africa Fisheries Co.  Patel Iceland Co. Ltd.	1,100,000,000	994,400,000	Over four years
(d)	Acholi Inn Hotel	M/s Laoo Ltd.	230,000,000	180,000,000	Over four years
(e)	Hill top Hotel	Three Links Ltd.	35,000,000	25,000,000	Over five years
(f)	Lira Hotel	Showa Trading Co.	250,000,000	200,000,000	Over five years
(g)	Uganda Meat Packers Ltd. Soroti	Uganda Meat Industries	300,000,000	150,000,000	Over three years
(h)	Uganda Pharmaceuticals Ltd.	Vivi Enterprises Limited	1,501,000,000	196,380,000	Over three years 
(i)	Lango Dev't Company		100,000,000	3,995,000	2 years
(j)	Masindi Hotel	Ottoman Engineering Ltd.	198,500,000	121,750,000	Over 5 years
	Total			4,299,400,000	

DR EPAK: The Auditor General reported to the committee that no interest charge on the above loans had ever been collected and no securities were being held by Government. The committee was also informed that the following loans were advanced to the private sector:

• B.M: Date advanced June 1996, amount advanced was Shs 1.0 billion, interest rate 15 percent, accrued interest to 30 June 1999 was Shs 450 million.

• Sembule: Date advanced June 1996, Shs 500 million at interest rate of 13 percent and as at 30 June 1999 the interest had accumulated to Shs 341 million.

• Rolling Mills Limited –– sorry there is a mistake the figure for Rolling Mills is not here. I would be able to collect it later on.

The committee was deeply concerned about the way privatisation was being handled.

(a) The committee wanted to know the authority, procedures and the conditions under which the loans were given because the Auditor General had not commented on these aspects.  The accounting officer was urged to produce and he produced the relevant documents for those issues queried to be verified. The documents were referred to the Auditor General for verification and reporting back but up to the time of writing this report, no such response had been given yet. 
 
(b) The delay to conclude sales was worrying as in all cases the buyers continued to enjoy facilities and to make money. The committee is of the view that the sales agreements should specify limited time of default and for what amount of outstanding pay on the basis of which the sales offer should be withdrawn and the property re-advertised for sale.

Conclusion:

The Public Accounts Committee is working to bring the exercise of clearing with the Auditor General’s report in time. It is its sincere hope that by the end of the 7th Parliament, Parliament will be up-to-date with considering the report of the Auditor General.

The committee draws the attention of this august House and any other relevant persons to the minutes of the meetings of the committee, which considered the report of the Auditor General department by department, annexed to this report. I also remind the House that in addition to this report, Members have agreed to deliberate on any specific issues raised on the report. I think this is a mistake, these are not the minutes, these are what I call details of discussions recorded department by department and issue by issue. It is wrongly recorded here as minutes. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the Committee for the report.  

3.33
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I am very grateful to the Chairman and his Committee.  But I would like to note, Article 163 (4) of the Constitution says: “The Auditor General shall submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause (3) of this article for the financial year immediately preceding.” Now clause (5) says: “Parliament shall, within six months after submission of the report referred to in clause (4) of this Article, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.”

Mr Speaker, this is a report of 2000 and now we are in 2004, this means we did break the Constitution. And the committee was very clever on page 1; the last paragraph says: “The report of the Auditor General was tabled in the House” it did not give the date, just to escape that. So, I think we should not break the Constitution, this thing was supposed to be done four years ago and within six months.

Actually, Mr Speaker, this book should be called the book of lamentations the way money is being –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think let us dispose of the first point.

MR KAGIMU: Okay.

THE SPEAKER: The first point, hon. Kagimu, the institution of Parliament is a continuing institution. This Parliament is handling matters that should have been handled in the last Parliament. The last Parliament handled matters that should have been handled by the National Resistance Council. I think, the Attorney General was requested for an opinion and said – because there was a time when we said let us deal with what belongs to our term, and they said no every report, even those backlogs have to be considered. That is why we are on 2000 because we dealt with many reports that would have been handled by the National Resistance Council. I think you bear with us.

MR KAGIMU: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. When you go to page 9, they talk of the Ministry of Gender where four safes were lost. But when you read further, it is not clear whether there was some money in these four safes. It seems there was money in those safes but the money was not specified. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of non-payment of tax by the judges on page 16, the Chairman reported that this issue was laid to rest. I remember you assigned hon. Katuntu to go and finalise that problem, but he has not reported to the House because the Article concerning judges 128(7) says: “The salary, allowances, privileges and retirement benefits and other conditions of a judicial officer or other person exercising judicial power, shall not be varied to his or her disadvantage.”  Hon. Katuntu was supposed to report on that. So, it is not correct that the matter was laid to rest.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I would like to thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to inform the House that, just like the Chairperson of the Committee said, this issue was laid to rest by the Attorney General and indeed the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs will look further into it. Therefore, I would like us to abide by what the Chairman has suggested for the time being.

MR KAGIMU: Okay, thank you very much. Mr Speaker, when we go to page 32, they have indicated that there were international calls, which were made to the tune of Shs 288 million and the accounting officer explained that the Office of the President remains open seven days a week, including public holidays. It is terrible! The bill is so exorbitant! How come on weekends and public holidays that is when the calls remained so exorbitant?  

When you go to page 33, there was a case whereby a man defrauded twice - this man defrauded, he was not apprehended and he defrauded again. I do not know what the Chairman has to say on that -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, are you just reciting the account of what is given in the report or you are analysing it?

MR KAGIMU: No, I am asking the Chairman to throw some light on this because it was not concluded. When they were concluding that issue they said: “The committee further noted that accounting officer had taken action by advising the Public Service Commission to dismiss the officer… but regrettably, the Public Service Commission did not respond. The Public Service Commission was urged to take action.” So, people were eating money and they are left hanging. These are things which I am trying to point out, Mr Speaker.  

Mr Speaker, for example, when you go to page 37, you find that a local company was supposed to remit Shs 410 million but it gave only Shs 249 million, Shs 161 million remained outstanding. The company did not have a contract and it is not the first time that there was no contract, so they could not take it to court. The accounting officer submitted that the case of recovery was before court. The committee noted that the case was before court and that is where the committee ends. You see, the committee does not bite, it just reveals and it leaves many cases hanging. These are the ones, which I am trying to highlight. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When the committee says, “The case is in court” what does it mean? It means somebody was pinned with embezzlement, but then he is disputing it. Probably after the court has decided, that is when they will know the position. I think that is why they made that kind of remark.

MR KAGIMU: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. There is another case whereby US$ 3.0 million was given to Government to construct the Joint Clinical Research Centre - something to do with AIDS - but the Buganda Government negotiated with Government for this Mengo hospital for 50 years.  Now, there in the report, it is reported that they are building another hospital for AIDS. Now, where is that hospital being built, and now if the government negotiated already for that Joint Clinical Research Centre, where is that US$ 3.0 million? Where did it go?  

About prisons, Mr Speaker, at Kigo Prisons there is a hatchery, which is supposed to give Shs 930 million if it is fully utilised. But because there is lack of facilities, it is giving only about Shs 160 million. So, I was of the view that they should enter a joint venture with UGACHICK so that the thing is fully operational?

Another issue, Mr Speaker, there was a case in the Electoral Commission whereby a machine was bought at Shs 690 million, but it was not utilised and they had to spend Shs 431 million to print their documents. The machine is now operational, but after buying it at Shs 690 million they went ahead to spend Shs 431 on printing documents. Secondly, the Electoral Commission is hiring boats at Shs 133 million. Why do they not buy their own boats instead of hiring when we have seen here that by hiring they spent already Shs 431 million, which would have been saved? (Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Thank you. I would like, Mr Speaker, to seek clarification from hon. Maurice Kagimu about the hiring of the boats. The Electoral Commission does not conduct elections on a continuous basis, so what is the justification for them to buy boats rather than hire because either way there will be a cost. So, what is the cost of the boats so as to justify your argument, hon. Kagimu?

MR KAGIMU: No, you can hire the boats meanwhile until the next election because this is very expensive - each election you spend Shs 133 million, tomorrow it is going to be Shs 200 million. 

Mr Speaker, there is the point of renovating Lumumba Hall at Makerere University at Shs 3.0 billion. Now, the experts gave the consultancy as far as the renovation is concerned, but they should also give us the figure to see how much it would cost to build a new hall. To me spending Shs 3.0 billion on renovating a hall, they would rather build another one.  

Mr Speaker, there is another sad case, it was somewhere –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But these are cases, which are in the report and the committee reports on those cases because it is not satisfied. Now, are we going to recite again cases or incidents in the report?  But proceed for one minute.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for highlighting these cases. But I am not comfortable with the committee’s failure to come out with some firm recommendations on some cases. The committee just regretted and dropped the cases. For example, on page 267 there was a firm, which was supposed to build urban markets in Soroti and the contract was cancelled.  Now Government paid Shs 600 million and you see how the committee concluded: “The committee was shocked by the way the Solicitor General handled the case. It appears from the onset that the Solicitor General had a bias. From the very beginning he admitted the liability without scrutiny of documents from Ministry of Works and Local Government. Although the Solicitor General is empowered under the law to give legal advice, this requirement in the opinion was not adhered to. There seems to have been connivance between the Solicitor General and the contractor.” So, that is how it ended. The Government paid Shs 600 million just like that and the committee does not take a firm recommendation to reprimand the Solicitor General; it is just citing the case and leaving it hanging. So, that is why I am saying - (Interjection)- yes, there should be a recommendation. The Solicitor General should be put to task to explain why this money was lost.

You will go to page 270, I wish I had time; it is terrible. If you read the whole report, people are eating money with impunity –(Interruption)- yes, the committee is not biting. It is not giving serious recommendations. I wish, Mr Speaker, you had given me a chance because the more I try to highlight, the more I become unsettled.  

Mr Speaker, when you go to page 228, imagine it is indicated: “Contrary to Treasury accounting instructions, the ministry does not maintain a building register to indicate plot number, occupants, location and the rent payable. Although the Treasury released to the Ministry Shs 335 million for purposes of updating the register, for unclear reasons the exercise had not been carried out by the time of issue of this report.” Now, how can you release Shs 335 million to update registers? That is a lot of money. We should be concerned. It is terrible.

Another thing which is interesting, Mr Speaker, you go to page 227, “Management of Housing Finance wrote to the ministry indicating that Government had earned interest of Shs 916 million from deposits into the mortgage fund. However, examination of bank statements … revealed that only Shs 88 million was credited as interest earned in June 1999. The Auditor General could not establish how the balance of Shs 825 million was credited into the account. Another amount of Shs 715 million and Shs 860 million was charged on the account as bank charges, but the basis used to arrive at the charges could not be established.” That is left hanging, you see.  

Now the man goes on: “The committee directed the auditors to analyse the entire case and inform the committee where the money is. The query was differed until this information is provided with the entire report within two months” and that was all. So, there is nothing. But where did this money go? The bank says that you are credited with Shs 916 million, you go to the books it is not there, instead you are debited Shs 715 million. It is very painful. In fact, as I said, it should be called the book of lamentations. It just informs you and then leaves the thing there.

Finally, there was a good suggestion that we should get permanent voters cards because during the last presidential elections, Shs 863 million was spent on printing the cards. So, now to avoid that, we should have permanent voters cards so that in future Government does not have to incur all that money. But the problem is, in five years people in the villages will have lost those cards. Now, how do we guard against that? I think the Chairman should throw some light on that. How sure are we that these voters cards will be kept for five years? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish I had more time.

3.51
MR NATHAN NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will start with selling of public enterprises. There are people, who owe Government of Uganda as a result of buying public enterprises, and these people are paying no interest, at the same time they are utilising these enterprises. I would have liked the committee to come out strongly to state that all those who owe Government of Uganda money for public enterprises, the board, should pay the outstanding with interest. (Interruption)

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much, colleague for giving way. Would you want to tell us which enterprises you are talking about for us to keep updated? Thank you.

MR NANDALA: I thank you very much. I think these enterprises were going to be read, but I will give a few of them. African Textile Mills for over four years Shs1.6 billion; Print Pak (U) Ltd Shs 825 million; Uganda Fisheries Shs 994 million among the few and that is very dangerous. We sold off thinking that we were going to get money and these industries would operate very well. 

But we have a sad case of UGIL. Government had invested $ 1.5 million, it was paying Shs 30 million to maintain it and it sold it at half a million dollars; and the committee says the director should always come up with all information when called. Such a person should have been sanctioned. How do you invest $ 1.5 million and sell something at half a million dollars?  

Nytil - I am sorry to say this - I do not know if the committee looked at their report clearly. By 31 December 1998, Nytil was owing Government of Uganda Shs 4,868,000,000; they had only paid Shs 2.1 billion. When we read in the report they are saying among the companies which have finished is Nytil and they have paid Shs 2.1 billion. Does it mean the committee exempted them of the Shs 4.86 billion?  This is a serious matter. All of you know the story of Nytil. This is a company which paid $ 100,000, it was given a title, it used the title to borrow money and after that it defaulted on paying money on the loan and it also defaulted paying the balance and they are walking here in town, walking near the ministers who sold them the enterprises.  Is this really serious or we are just playing with Government resources? 

Mr Speaker, I would request the committee to revisit the issue of Nytil seriously because the figures are here, and they should come up with a better recommendation; either we arrest those who sold or we arrest those who paid. I propose that those who bought Nytil, that is Picfare, should pay the balance of Shs 4.9 billion and if they cannot pay, I think sanction should be taken against them and even the Privatisation Unit, which carried out the selling, should also be held responsible because you cannot write off Shs 4.9 billion just by a stroke of a pen. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, is it possible for the honourable member holding the Floor to avail us his source of information so that we can share on the information he has? Otherwise, we are just basing on the report of the committee and we do not know the sources of information he has, which would greatly help this House in appreciating the matter further.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I want to thank my colleague for that. In audit, audit queries come from the previous period and when you are auditing, you go forward while comparing with the past. The accounts of 30 June 1999, which were signed by the Auditor General on – Mr Speaker, I will seek your indulgence on this.  Well, I will get the date. The accounts of 30 June 1999, which were signed by the Auditor General showed that Nytil was owing Government of Uganda - on page 131 of the accounts, which were submitted to the Public Accounts Committee indicate that Nytil was sold to Picfare Limited and the balance outstanding was Shs 84,860,000,000 and the period in default was two years. On page 132 of the accounts they say: “Nytil only paid a deposit of US$ 100,000 on signing” by then they had paid Shs 2.1 billion.

Now, when you read the report for the Public Accounts Committee, it is saying Shs 2.1 billion.  So, they are quoting Shs 2.1 billion leaving out Shs 4.868 billion. This is a serious matter - (Interruption) 

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleague, for giving way. Honourable colleague, I would want to inform you that since then, I think we have been overtaken by events. Nytil was sold to Picfare, which was put under receivership and finally bought by a company called Southern Range Nyanza Textiles. That is the issue that we should actually find out.

MR SABIITI: I would like to inform the honourable Member that we are handling a report of 2000, and you should have referred to the Auditor General’s report of 2000. You seem to want to use the figures of 1999. We are looking at issues raised by the Auditor General. So, I do not see why you are using 1999, when 1999 has been concluded and now we are dealing with 2000? So, if there is carrying figures to 2000, the Auditor General should have done so. It is the duty of the Auditor General to do that, for us we are looking at what the Auditor General presented to us. So, we cannot go back to 1999.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, my colleagues. I think it will be misleading for us to make big assumptions like that that, “You see a figure of Shs 4.8 billion being written off” and you say because it is not reflected somewhere. These are your reports. You have commented on the outstanding balance in the 1999 accounts and then in the current; you should have asked what happened. It is a serious matter because you are quoting the value, which they paid Shs 2.1 billion at that time and you are leaving out Shs 4.9 billion, which is illegal.

MR SABIITI: Could the honourable Member brief the House the figure that was quoted by the Auditor General in 2000?

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I am talking of the balance, which was outstanding in the year - let us use simple Mathematics. By 1999, Picfare had paid Shs 2.1 billion and there was an outstanding balance of Shs 4.9 billion. By 2000 accounts, we have been saying that Nytil had been paid for by Shs 2.1 billion; that means you are quoting the value, which had been paid by 1999. Where is the Shs 4.9 billion? Who wrote it off, was it PAC, was it the Auditor General or was it the Government?  That is the most interesting thing, and I would prefer you as my colleague, to help us because you are the one who is examining these accounts seriously.

DR EPAK: Can the honourable Member refer to the page, the paragraph, the subject – you know, you can stand there and say anything. I have to make reference. So, can you guide me which page, whether it is in the Auditor General’s original report or in the report of the Public Accounts Committee?  Otherwise, I cannot follow.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to give some information because the point hon. Mafabi is raising is not new to this Parliament. It was actually investigated by the Finance Committee during the Sixth Parliament, and the figures that he was giving as of 1999, it is true that that was the scenario then. The Public Accounts Committee Chairman and Vice Chairman are saying: “Let us stick to the Auditor General’s Report of 2000.” But the question of Shs 4.9 billion is something, which is hanging. However, the information I would like to give is that, a time came when Nytil-Picfare was declared non-performing, insolvent, liquidated and there went the money, which they owed Government. And actually it was not only the money, which they owed Government, but Government had also guaranteed some money, which Nytil-Picfare had borrowed. So, Government did lose money; hon. Mafabi is right, except that it is not a subject of 2000.

THE SPEAKER: Now, if it is not a subject of the report we are considering, how do we consider it?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, you see, Government is in business all the time. At the end of a financial year, they close the books and the balances are carried over to the subsequent year. So, when you are discussing accounts you cannot say, “No, do not talk about anything else, you talk about 2000.” You see, the accounts are carried before –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, I agree with you. I have no reason to dispute that. But then they are asking you, is it reflected in the report they considered? Unless you are criticising that the people who prepared, the Auditor General, should have done that and did not do it. But if he did, I think they are saying, “Where is it?”

MR MWANDHA: But, Mr Speaker, if we are going to restrict ourselves specifically to what the Auditor General said in a particular financial year, when in fact the same matter could have also appeared in the previous financial year, we shall be missing the point.

THE SPEAKER: Then are we going to bring all the records for 10 years to be able to effectively deal with the report following nine years after? Is it possible?

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I have the records myself.  I am going to help myself.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think with this report, we are going to get into considerable problems for no good reason. Because of the lapse of time, we are considering accounts of 2000 and since then, so many things have changed. Some of the debts have been retired; some of the liabilities have been cleared. So, I do not know how we should handle it because we are in the process of preparing a Treasury Memorandum, which will highlight on most of these issues raised here.  So, you may find that while by the year 2000 there was a liability, to date it has been retired. So, I do not know how we should go about it. I would propose that maybe for these queries where Members think there was a loss, we postpone debate until we have put a Treasury Memorandum before this House, which will clarify the position as it is today.  Otherwise, we are going to find ourselves in big problems with this report.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, basing on the information the minister is now giving, it would have been prudent for the minister to respond to that report so that he clarifies some of the issues which have been overcome by events, so that the Members would have debated the report and also taking into account the responses by the minister on issues which the committee would have made, and I think this would have been much better. But we cannot postpone the debate on a report, which is on the Floor of the House and wait for the minister to - I do not know what he wants to do - issue some statement. If he wants to say something, I think this is the right time for him to clarify anything because there are lots of issues, which really require clarification by the minister and would have helped the House if those issues were clarified.

DR EPAK: Mr Speaker, I think we are in the process of planning how to deal with the Auditor General’s reports. You see, the minister has no answer to give here because this report will go to Government and they will respond through the Treasury Memorandum. That is when the minister will have gone into detail, investigated queries referred to Government, queries referred to the Solicitor General like the hon. Kagimu was saying, and all those things will be answered in the Treasury Memorandum. So, I would find it superfluous for the minister to try responding to issues raised now by Parliament.  First of all, it is assumed they have not had this report until Parliament has considered it and they respond through the Treasury Memorandum. That is when they will give all the clarifications.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With the benefit of hindsight, it is all very good for the minister to say, “Since then, a lot of water has flowed under the bridge.” But in these matters, there must be a sense of continuity. From 1999, when did you leave off, from 2000 with what are you continuing, so that we can follow the flow of information especially regarding public funds? You just do not put a full stop where a lot of money is outstanding and then you say, “Oh, this is 2000, a lot of things have happened, we shall clear it later on” then as a Parliament, as people of Uganda we shall not be able to follow systematically what has been happening over a period. Thank you.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, what I expected since we considered the 1999 report, we should have discussed the response of the minister before we discuss the 2000 report. Because he would have explained to us what happened to that money in his memorandum, then we would consider 2000. But now when you consider these reports without him telling us what action he has taken on 1999, we shall miss these monies and that is why hon. Mafabi is raising this issue, “What happened to that money?” Because in the minister’s memorandum in response to PAC report, he should have explained, then we consider the 2000. But now we are considering the reports following one another without his response and there is a gap in between.

THE SPEAKER: So, are you saying you are handicapped now and you have no competence of effectively debating this report? Is that what you are saying, and if so, what is the way forward?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, we made the recommendations on the 1999 PAC report and we were expecting a memorandum from the minister showing us the action taken. Now, we do not have that and we are on the 2000 report. We do not know whether the minister has taken into consideration what we recommended or not.

THE SPEAKER: That I have understood and I am saying, what is the way forward?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: The way forward maybe we get the memorandum of 1999, then we discuss this one of 2000.  

4.14
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Mr Speaker, it does not help this Parliament to proceed discussing 2000 when all the faults, omissions and commissions, all the irregularities and defaults and frauds of 1999 have not been pronounced upon by the –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Formally then.

MR MWANDHA: Therefore, I wish to move formally that debate on the report of the Public Accounts Committee for the year 2000, be suspended until we have discussed and adopted and pronounced ourselves on the Treasury Memorandum from the minister, explaining the actions taken on the report of the Auditor General for the year 1999. I beg to move.

4.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Dr Okulo Epak): What you are saying in essence is that the Auditor General should not even proceed with doing any audit work until Treasury Memoranda on all the previous reports have been tabled here. That is unconstitutional. Once Parliament adopts a report of the Public Accounts Committee, it is sent to the ministry and the minister is supposed to respond in three months, not in one week, and it involves referring all the cases to different departments, collecting their answers and then putting them in a Treasury Memorandum. 

That Treasury Memorandum is tabled here, referred to the Public Accounts Committee, the Public Accounts Committee looks at it again and reports to Parliament. You will never get it here directly and the problems you will face are:
 
(a) For a long time whereas we have been discussing the Auditor General’s report in arrears, we still have a number of Treasury Memoranda, which have not been discussed even by the Public Accounts Committee.

(b) The Treasury actually got the 1999 report and prepared a Treasury Memorandum, which is ready, but they could not table it because the House had not considered that one. So, as soon as Parliament adopted the 1999 report, was it last week or so, we are expecting that the Minister of Finance will come and table the Treasury Memorandum in response to the 1999 report, and we do not know how long it will take the Public Accounts Committee to report back to the House.

Finally, what the honourable members are saying, the Auditor General also follows on queries, which are not fully answered by the time the Public Accounts Committee makes a report and in the Treasury Memorandum and those queries are raised again in the next financial year. So, to say that there is a gap is really not to tell the truth; there is never a gap. What happens is that if you notice Shs 46 billion was reported in the 1999 report and is not reported in the 2000, it means something has been done about it already. The Auditor General does not say –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Last time when we were discussing the 1999 report, hon. Musumba wanted to lay on the Table the Treasury Memorandum, which means it is ready. We do not have to wait for three months to get it. It can be tabled next week and we shall go through the Treasury Memorandum. Because we have to choose between going through the Auditor General’s report and the Public Accounts Committee report as a matter of formality so that, Parliament has received the Public Accounts Committee or we do a thorough job. I want to have a thorough job done, there are lots of serious faults committed during 1999, which this Parliament must address and hon. Musumba, if he was in the House, he had a document and he said: “My Treasury Memorandum is right here, I can present it.” But secondly –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the intention of the motion is clear. The intention of the motion is that as of now, because they do not have that Treasury Memorandum, they are not capable of dealing effectively with the report of the following year 2000 and therefore, they want to deal with the Treasury Memorandum so that they are able to deal with this report. This is the essence of the motion.

DR EPAK: The clarification is, this House is in arrears of considering Treasury Memoranda from 1996. We have not even completed the Auditor General’s report.

MR MWANDHA: But, Mr Speaker, in fairness with this House, why does the minister not present those Treasury Memoranda, which are in arrears so that we know actually what he has done about the various reports that the Auditor General has given?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a general debate. It is a debate, which is pegged on the committee’s report of 2000. This is what we are discussing; we are not discussing 1999 or 1988.  So, the motion is in respect of this report. Honourable members, the motion as of now is, before we proceed, let us get the relevant treasury memorandum of the preceding year. Now, shouldn’t we put the question?

4.22 
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): No, Mr Speaker. The way the Auditor General presents his report is different from the way some Members want the Auditor General to present the report because before queries are written, they will have met the relevant institutions or ministries. Once a query has been answered and the relevant institution has given an answer and the Auditor General says it is okay, it cannot be reflected in this report. What is reflected is the query, which the Auditor General feels the relevant institution has not answered.  What we can do now is, since the honourable members are querying the Shs 2.0 billion - because now in the 2000 report they are reflecting the Shs 2.1 billion - we could go back and ask the Auditor General as a committee, “What happened, you have not reflected this?” And he will come up with the documents to prove how this was done and then we can present this to Parliament. But this is not the way the Auditor General does his work.

4.23
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Mr Speaker, I would like us to move systematically on this matter. There is no way we should be pulling here and there when we are addressing issues, particularly those that concern all of us: the committee, the frontbenchers and we the backbenchers. In this matter, I would like to imagine that if we had the Treasury Memorandum, it would answer the many queries, it could enlighten us on how to proceed on those that are still outstanding and those already settled. So, I would think that instead of having those moving on and we are here in a situation where we cannot proceed, it is at this moment that I propose that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: I want to put a question on a motion by hon. James Mwandha.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, this means we will have to consider the Treasury Memorandum on a preceding report and then proceed with the report, which has been tabled by the committee.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I know, Mr Speaker, you have ruled and I do respect your ruling naturally. But what is bothering me is the Ministry of Finance to know that the Auditor General’s queries and the Public Accounts Committee’s report and indeed, the whole purpose of having a transparent accountable government is that sanctions must be taken and those sanctions must be reflected on every year’s Auditor General’s account. If that is not done, it becomes a ritual and the whole purpose is lost.  

THE SPEAKER: I have heard some people say it is there. If it is there, then we shall consider it as soon as we have it then we proceed with the committee’s work. Unfortunately, because we are proceeding with the debate but then you raised this issue, and I think the Ministry of Finance should take note of the concern so that in future this does not happen. If that has been the trend you have to change so that we do things the way Parliament wants them to be done. With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.26 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 April 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)



