Wednesday, 7th April, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The House was called to order)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

Clause 9

MR. KAHERU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Section 9 sub-section (2) be deleted and be replaced by the following, “9(2) The Chairman shall be elected by the delegates on recommendation of the President.”


I will explain the basis for my recommendation.  As I said before, Uganda needs a Constitution, which reflects the will of the people, and the constitution making process should not prejudice the final constitutional document.  Now, in case of the Bill, it says that the Chairman, shall be appointed by the President in accordance with the advice of the cabinet and yet the Constituent Assembly has determined, at least, partly determined yesterday clearly reflects the will of the people and there is need to blend the two points, one, the will of the people and two, to use the experience and the government machinery which the President would have in identifying candidates who could be presented to the Constituent Assembly for election.  It is important because even if the President recommends a candidate, the ultimate responsibility belong to the Constituent Assembly.  The Constituent Assembly has got liberty to pick and if they are not satisfied the Constituent Assembly can ask the President to bring another candidate.  This would work to the advantage of what we are trying to put up.  

There is another basic problem that would arise if this sub-section remained as it is.  The delegates would find themselves or would feel helpless when they know that the Chairman cannot be brought to order.  As you know, even Chairmen some times need to be brought to order or to be advised and be brought to order.  This can only be done if the powers of election are as I have proposed.  I know there is another proposal which is rather similar to the one I have made which may be coming before the House, that is of having three candidates, the President selecting three candidates from whom the House could select one but I find my proposal to be more flexible because apart from the three, my proposal would leave room for selection of candidates from outside the three.

I would also like to propose that when we are making a decision on the Chairman we should not provide for the selection of the Chairman from the delegates because the members of electoral areas will be sending a delegate to represent their interests but once a person is appointed as a Chairman, he will not be able to serve the interest or to make representation of the electoral area.  So, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. MATEKE: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to oppose hon. Kaheru’s Amendment.  The world over a democratically elected Assembly must elect its own chairman and if we want a constitution that will be respected by posterity, it must be presided over by a neutral chairman. Otherwise, if a Chairman appointed by the President makes a blunder here people will say he has been instructed by the President to do so.   Secondly, we would not like our President to be blamed for a mistake made by the Chairman and we would not like the future to say the constitution was NRM Constitution.  So with those few remarks, Mr. Chairman, I beg to oppose hon. Kaheru’s Amendment.

MR. PULKOL: Mr. Chairman, I rise to support the Amendment that has been proposed by hon. Zak Kaheru on the following grounds.  One, the institution of the Presidency needs transitional arrangement even if it is in a stable Uganda needs to be given the opportunity to steer this country forward in a manner that the present President, for example, has done wonders in this area as far as I am concerned and, therefore, should be entrusted the responsibility of selecting or proposing, in this case proposing even if it means five names or ten names and put these names before the Constituent Assembly, and the Assembly exercises its democratic rights of electing among these people.  It gives one the decision of the Present to participate in this process.  It is still a democratic process even in the world over as the hon. Member was talking about, even if you took the case of America, even selecting its Attorney General, for example, what is wrong in the President proposing names and put it before these elected members and the onus are upon them to throw them out or confirm them.  They could even tell the President to come with other names if they find that these ones the five the President has given them are not really rise to the occasion but what is fundamentally important is to give the institution of the Presidency the right and the opportunity to participate in this process.  

For these reasons, I find this to be an acceptable compromise as a way in which we shall be consolidating our democracy.  I see in these proposals checks and balances being in built rather than completely the President appointing a Chairman and imposing this Chairman on Members but rather let the originating of the proposal come from the President and let the democratically elected Constituent Assembly be able to exercise its rights to elect or reject and ask again the President to submit more names from which they will elect.  So this to me is an institution, is a check and balance system which will be good for our democracy and will not in a any way compromise a democracy we are ushering in Uganda.  With this I beg to support.  Thank you.

MR. WANENDEYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I stand here to support what has been proposed by hon. Kaheru.  It is honourable, Mr. Chairman, the best was of checks and balances unlike. hon. Mateke when he says that the world over it is the other way round.  On the contrary what the hon. Kaheru is proposing is the best way of checking and balancing and with those few words, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I am in a very awkward position.  I would like to concede partly but the formula is not exactly what I was considering taking on Dr. Higiro’s proposals, which I thought  -(Interjection)- yes, I oppose this one, I will support Dr. Higiro’s proposal. Mr. Chairman, to be fair to Dr. Higiro, I oppose hon. Kaheru’s proposal for the moment.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Question that the Clause 9 be amended as proposed by hon. Kaheru.  

(Question put and negatived).


DR. HIGIRO: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for allowing me to propose my amendment.  I am proposing that we delete 9(2) and (3) and instead replace it by stating that, “The President shall nominate five candidates from whom the Constituent Assembly will elect the Chairman and Deputy Chairman.” On my amendment there was a misspelling where it was five but actually they had written three but it is five.  The reason why I am proposing this amendment is this that the type of people we want to be Chairman of this Assembly are extremely high, well experienced, people of integrity and people who have been in public service for many years, they have distinguished themselves.  Now, such people, On the proposal that we should elect them from the Constituent Assembly delegates is that as you know such people do not normally come forward for elections.  They are near retired and they are respected and they are just above, they will not just come.  Secondly, as you might recall, we have already had complaints that when we elected Members of NEC, we had known them enough and, therefore, whereas we think that if we had taken six months we would have done a better job.  So that cancels out the idea of electing the Chairman from among us who will have been elected and hoping that I will be elected.

The idea of having the President appointing Chairman, is also not very acceptable since we are saying that we must establish the foundation of democracy.  Democracy must be started now and the President himself has emphasized that that the verdict of the people matters most.  Now, for that reason that is why I feel, and I hope with agreement from all of you that when we give the chance to His Excellency the President to see among the 17 million people he is in a better position, he is much in a better position, to pick these people together with advice from his cabinet and give the constituent Assembly those five eminent Ugandans and out of the five, with all the CVs we shall have been, then the Members of the Assembly elected and the man with the highest vote become the Chairman, the man who is second in amount become the Vice-Chairman, and for that, we are not going to say that the Chairman and for that the Chairman will be influenced by the Executive but as long as this Chairman and his Vice-Chairman will have been elected by people but at the same time they were selected by His Excellency the two sides are in unison.  For that reason, whatever the Chairman and his Vice-Chairman will do, nobody is going to say he has been influenced or that he was unqualified.  There are many advantages in this proposal.  One is this that if for instance we are to elect a chairman among the delegates that very Chairman will have no voice, will not speak, will not contribute, he will be just a Chairman whereas his people who elected would have liked him to speak.  For that reason, I would like to exclude the delegates from that role of Chairmanship so that they will all be there equally speaking for their own places, for those people who had sent them, these people should be free to speak and to vote.  For that reason, it is also true that once a person has been selected by the Members of the Assembly, then the two sides as I have said earlier would have done a job which is acceptable to the whole of Uganda.  For those reasons and many others I would like to move that we agree to this procedure so that Clause 9(2) and (3) be amended accordingly and there we shall have served this country to start real foundation of democracy, Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move. 

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Point of procedure.  I notice that the hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs has circulated an Amendment that is similar to the one of Dr. Higiro.  Now, my view is that, since the Minister’s proposal and that of hon. Higiro do concise will it not be proper, Mr. Chairman, that the Minister on behalf of the Government having adopted Higiro’s proposal; but having circulated the Government’s position should actually present the Government position we debate that and we either pass it or drop it, because it will take us a long time if we finish the one of Higiro and then the Minister of State comes with an Amendment which is similar to the one of Mr. Higiro.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR.NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, in all fairness, I would like to say that I discussed the proposal with the hon. Member the Mover and I tried to debate this one in a legal form the substance is the same but the presentation on paper is different.  At the time we started this Amendment has not reached Member and it would have been unfair to move it, now that you have it, I can only read it out for you for your benefit and for the record.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  

MR. NJUBA: I do accept hon. Higiro’s Amendment and we should proceed.

MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi): Mr. Chairman, I support the Amendment as presented for few reasons, one, it is a compromise between the Government position and the majority position and since we are saying that we want consensus and a compromise, I support the compromise.  The compromise is, that the President on the advise of the Cabinet will nominate five eminent Ugandans; present those five eminent Ugandan CVs and if need be the Constituent Assembly so deciding those people can present themselves in person, the CVs will be accessed by the Assembly and the Assembly will decide on whom to give the position of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman, it is a compromise that is point number one.  Point number two is that unlike where it slightly differ from my Colleague hon. Mateke and maybe, hon. Member is that this constituent Assembly is composed of delegates they are not representatives, they are no long free agents who will be coming here.  They are agents of those people who will have delegated them to come to the Assembly, and once you have made the Chairman, you know the job of the Chairman, you sit and listen even when you disagree you cannot say so and yet these people will come with Motions and emotion of the people who sent them here and they will not be able to present -(Interruption)

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor.  This statement has been made very now and then, that these people are only delegates not Representatives and yet this is supposed to be an Assembly where various views are going to be expressed, compromises reached and decisions made.  

So, I am wondering whether we should go on emphasising this point, this academic difference between delegate and representative when by implication we are saying as we are seated here, if a Member express an opinion which I do not come with then automatically I vote against and go back to seek mandate to ask whether I should take somebody’s opinion.  I think I need that clarification otherwise we shall end up with having people in the Constituent Assembly who will not have the chance to compare views expression and then and form an opinion on behalf of these who elected him or her to the Assembly.  So, I need the clarification, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, just to advise my Friend the hon. Minister, there is a world of difference between a delegate and a Representative and I do not want to tell him to go and read the speech by Edenburg as the representatives of Briston as to what he said about a delegate and a representative.  The name of Parliament is a Representative, I am a representative of Kajara but I am a Member of Parliament for Uganda. Therefore, I take the consideration of other people’s views and in my best judgement I reflect those views on behalf of the people of Kajara.  But if I am a delegate the people of Kajara will tell me that, and I will have campaigning during the campaign which we are going to discuss, I will campaign that when I go to the Constituent Assembly my position will be this and if they agree with that position they will vote for me and that is the position I will come here to defend.  So, there differences, and I am saying the delegates who will be coming here, will be reflecting those opinions at home, they will listen of course there will be compromises otherwise they will be dead rocks if they all take firm positions we will not move, there will be compromises.  But, a delegate is supposed to have consultation if possible constant consultation for example, when people are talking about electoral colleges in America, the electoral colleges in America are different from our RCs system.  Because the electoral colleges in America, people vote knowing what they are going to vote for next, while ours the RC system for example, you send there representatives not delegates you may want somebody and the man you sent to RC.2 vote for somebody else there is a world of difference.  So, I am saying those delegates we do not want to deprive the people who will have sent them here from discussing the very issues they will have discussed under which basis they were sent here to be able to propagate those information. 

I am saying, therefore, that this compromise avoids us having a bye-election immediately the man is made a Chairman, because if he is made a Chairman, it means those people who sent him will have to send another  person to represent their views and that is a costly exercise it delays.  Therefore, we are saying that let the President on the advise of the Cabinet send his five people from whom we choose two and once they are two - Ugandans, I hope, they will be the ones to chair the Session. They will be neutral, they will take the point that the person who have chosen them, that is the Assembly, is the one who can also sack them in case there -(interjection) So I think it is the best compromise.  I am saying that in support of this, we will be reducing the expenses we would be otherwise going into, we will be having a neutral position, we will have the delegates laying the role they are expected to play and we will move a bit faster and the universality of the position of the Chairman will be accepted to the House.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 9 subsection 2 and 3 be amended as proposed by hon. Higiro

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 9 as amended agreed to).

Clause 10

MR. MANZI:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  In Clause 10 subsection 1(d), I propose that we delete the words; a period of not less than 10 years, Mr. Chairman. Section 10 (b) reads; “has had experience in public affairs or in employment in a high public office for a period of not less than 10 years.”  Mr. Chairman, I wish to remove the period of 10 years because it is to restricting it is not always that the more years you have worked in an organisation the more intelligent you become or the better you become, you could have worked for five years and become or the better you become, you could have worked for five years and become or the better you become, you could have worked for five years and become even a better administrator than the one who have been there for 20 years.  So, why do we restrict years? I would like to move that we delete 10 years, leave it open but say a considerable experience.  

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I would like to oppose that Amendment, on the basis that we must have a cut point on experience.  Experience all over the world is judged by time, it cannot be left in limbo that somebody of great experience; what basis would you be measuring that experience.  In this particular case, experience is measured world over by time and a man or woman who has worked for 10 years in a responsible position is usually judged to have had a reasonable experience.  I would, therefore, like to oppose that Amendment, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr. Chairman, I wish to support the Amendment by the hon. Member that we have a living example in Uganda where our leader has not worked all these years, he has been fighting, he told us but he has done - he is the best President and he has done a better job. So, this work of being in the office for so many years. (Laughter)  So, since the House will have time to get the candidates, let us, leave the work to the House. Do not restrict the people who can come in and we just delete the whole thing and not coming to the question of so many years. Let the man or the woman, for that matter if he is capable, let him take over the Chair but not just to say ten years.  I support that Amendment.  

MR. ASIKU ROMANO: Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment for the following reasons we are expected to get a very experienced man to lead us discussing important Motion and definitely one of the experience is the period of services in a responsible position.  Honestly, when we are expecting a lawyer who have served in public offices during various trials, this one cannot be just a matter of experience of two years or three years or five years.  A man will refuse that through difficult time he is able to control himself and administer his office more successful, therefore, the ten years I stand to support them.  Thank you very much.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just would like to know what we mean by public affairs, if it means public office then it gets a limitation given our history.  Because as one hon. Member has said, in public affairs if we are to look at the record of most people that we have they would not have had that exposure and yet they are doing a good job, and I am wondering, unless public affairs is defined it becomes very difficult if it is not defined, then I find the ten years in the public affairs a bit very difficult.  I am just seeking clarification so that we know, because I am saying that, take the President, the only experience he had in public lies was when he was working in the Secretariat here.  So, would you have disqualified him because of that?

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Kanyomozi that if this becomes a law and the President has not been in handling matters of public for 10 years then he does not qualify, I do not see what is wrong with that and it is not true that because he is a President when you make a Law he must qualify.  So, I am saying if this becomes law, the example hon. Kanyomozi has given unless the President is a candidate for that post should have had 10 years of public experience and I want to inform hon. Kanyomozi that it is not true that we cannot tell what is experience in public affairs.  If I may share my understanding with him. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: If I may share my understanding with him, my understanding is, if hon. Kanyomozi can agree a person who has been in service which service involves him dealing with the public that is the person who has had experience in public affairs, because it is dealing with members of public whether you have enough experience handling matters regarding the ordinary people, and I do not think we should reduce this to a period which we define.  

Secondly, if we want to minimize the competition you cannot say do not narrow down, if you do not narrow down are you going to look at ten million people this helps you when you go to selectivity to reduce the bracket from which you can select.  So, I think the provision stands correctly it helps people who will select.  So, I think the provision stands correctly it helps people who will select to eliminate all people who have less than ten years, and likely hon. Kanyomozi it is a person who have more than 10 years.

MR. SIBO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I stand to oppose the Amendment. I believe really, we need a person in the Chair who commands respect and that respect must not only be know but must be seen and to be seen one of the characteristics is that he should have shown himself in a position of responsibility in public affairs for a given period of time and that period of time we are now stating, should be at least 10 years. Within that 10 years he would have shown himself to be a man you can respect, a man who is knowledgeable about certain things, a man of integrity.  I am rather old fashioned in the sense that when I speak of a man, it includes a woman, so the ladies will excuse me, anybody who wants really to assert to that position should effuse that respect of having shown himself to carry that responsibility, obviously he may find it problematic to conduct the affairs of the Constituent Assembly and,  therefore, I suggest and I appeal to Members to hold on with that period of time, I think it is important.  

MR. S. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, this is a very difficult question, I am inclined to oppose the Amendment because if the Mover had indicated some kind of experience some period I would have considered it, but simply to move the 10 to zero is, I think, unreasonable I therefore, oppose the Amendment.  

(Question put and negatived).


MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to move an Amendment on Clause 10(b).  The Chairman, I see no reason why somebody holding such a high political post cannot be considered for the position of chairmanship of the Constituent Assembly.  This proposal as it stands now is discriminative.  If a political leader can even be a President of the whole country, what difference does it make or what makes it so difficult for him to be the chairman of the Constituent Assembly? I think this is unnecessary and I think for good order, I think Members will agree that this be deleted.  After all, we have now said that the President can propose names and if we want, he can exclude political leaders.  We do not have to put it here.  I propose that it should be deleted.  

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the Amendment.  There is a reason why leaders of political parties cannot at the same time be chairmen.  I think we have already provided that political parties are going to be represented in their own right.  If you have a leader of a political party that is represented in its own right, at the same time a chairman of the Assembly that is trying to find a neutral Constitution for Uganda, we are going to be in a lot of problems. I cannot for example envisage a situation where say, hon. Tiberondwa becomes Chairman and we expect to get -(Laughter)- because Mr. Chairman, - (Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am amused by the reasoning of hon. Katureebe.  We have an example here.  We have a whole Vice-Chairman of NRM who is political and yet he is presiding over this House very well.

MR. KATUREEBE: Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that NRM is not a political party. It is a Movement that involves hon. Butagira and, therefore, here we are talking about political parties that we have specified being represented as such.  We are not even talking of NRM being represented.  I oppose the Amendment, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NDEGE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also stand to oppose this Amendment because the idea of the Constituent Assembly is to be as impartial as possible.  So, if we chose leaders of parties to become chairman, I think this could prejudice the whole position of the Constituent Assembly. The fact is that the Vice Chairman of NRM is our speaker here or Chairman is different because this House is different from the Constituent Assembly. The other one is a historical kind of House to put things that have gone wrong right.  So, we do not want again to say because Ndege was UPC and he was chairing this Assembly; that is why the Constitution is not like this.  Let us be serious, accept some sort of simple but very important points. We do not want to err at this eleventh hour.  So I wish to oppose very strongly this Amendment.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose this Amendment.  This Provision was very, very carefully thought about.

MR. ELLY KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I wanted the hon. Minister of Constitutional Affairs to advise the House whether it would be proper when passing legislation, to pass a legislation which is negative and which is discriminatory because laws are not made to discriminate against certain citizens of society or groups of people. Secondly, I wanted to find out whether it is in legislation, proper to stop, to tie the hands of the Cabinet and the President from taking a decision when they are nominating the people.  I am saying, we have given them power to do something and then we are stopping them from doing that act.  Whether this is proper because in my view, it is unlegislative and it is bad practice if we pass this type of law because it has already been administratively catered for.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of order. Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Member from Opposite to address the House before you catch his eye?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is not in order please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Chairman, this particular proposal does not hold any more after we have revised the mode of election of the chairman and vice-chairman.  Well, apart from being unconstitutional remaining it in the Bill or getting out does not make difference because the thing has now been overtaken by the previous amendments that we already made.  Mr. Chairman, it is desirable but this particular clause be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Is that a debate or procedure?

MR. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, there is nothing unconstitutional about the providing of qualifications for certain positions.  Now, regarding the last point for procedure, this particular provision ties even the President in making nominations.  There are guidelines that must be maintained at all times.  So, I oppose the Amendment.

(Question as proposed put and agreed to).

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.  Hon. Members, you are really delaying us.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I propose to add at the end of Clause 11 - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  We are on Clause, 10 please.

MR. NJUBA: Sorry. Mr. Chairman, there is a consequential Amendment on Clause 10(2).  We should insert on the first line, “The office of the Chairman or Deputy Chairman - because they are now going to be elected together.  This is a consequential amendment.  And on 3, if at the conclusion of the vote for the election of - insert chairman and deputy chairman. This is all; this is consequential upon change into the mode of election.

(Clause 10(2) as amended agreed to).

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I also propose an Amendment on Clause 11 on numbering the first Clause as sub-clause 1 and add the following sub-clause.  That the president at any time during the deliberations of the Assembly and upon an invitation of the chairman signified by the resolution of the majority of delegates may address the Assembly on any issue before the Assembly.  Mr. Chairman, you will not throughout the Bill that the President is not given an opportunity to come into the House.  This provision is to facilitate Members through the Chair to invite him to address them on their request on any matter they would wish to be enriched by his knowledge.  Now, I must make this quite clear that it is an invitation by the chairman supported by a resolution or a decision by the Assembly itself that the President should come and address us on this matter.  Now, without this kind of provision, we may have a problem while we want to benefit by the President’s advice on this one; collective advice, genuine advice and we might be charged that oh! we went behind the door.  So, let him come publicly to the Constituent Assembly, give his advice as requested and then he will go away.  Now this will be by a resolution of Members.

MR. KAVUMA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the amendment made by the on Minister because as I was looking through the Bill, I thought there was a lacuna in that law we are trying to make.  It is evident that from our methods of work, sometimes we have benefited from the presence of the President even when we meet as a political organ not as a legislature. It would be absurd if that kind of situation arose and there is no provision in the law to permit it.  Members may say that this will facilitate over-influencing of the rest in the Assembly.  I do not agree with that because first of all, I think the President as a Ugandan has a right also to influence what happens in the constituent Assembly but I think there is also a safeguard in the Amendment by the Minister that first of all, he will come to the Assembly on invitation and that invitation is going to be backed by a resolution passed by the majority of the Constituent Assembly.  Mr. Chairman, Members who can see the wisdom in this kind of legislation, I want to appeal to them to support the Minister’s Amendment.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to oppose the Amendment.  Mr. Chairman, we do not have to legalise for everything the President of Uganda does.  We do not need laws for everything the President does.  We must always look at the factors.  Every time we are trying to say look, we do not want a document that is going to be called Museveni/ NRM document.  People are going to jump to the conclusion that every effort is now wasted.  The President is doing it himself.  Therefore, as far as I am concerned, there are other methods by which we can work.  Even those of us who may not be elected into the Constituent Assembly, it does not mean that we shall fail to influence the outcome of the proceedings.  We shall be able to influence these but we are not going to legislate for method we are going to influence this being the outcome.  Therefore, in my opinion, I would rather spare the President; even that I would call embarrassment of being put in the front line of being the man who is actually writing the constitution.  Therefore, I would really appeal to the Minister to re-think the unwanted effects of the proposed Amendment and in that respect Mr. Chairman, I oppose the proposed amendment.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, I support the Amendment.  The President is coming to the Assembly on the invitation through a resolution made by the delegates themselves.  Mr. Chairman, we must acknowledge that the President  in this land is the most informed person State matters -(Interjections).  Yes, Mr. Chairman, the Assembly may require some information and they invite invitation of the delegates, why should we bar the delegates to decide to invite the President?

MR. EKEMU: Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, I oppose this Amendment very strongly.  It is useless for us to have crooked views.  It is a fact that the President and the Presidency exerts unusual influence by his mere presence.  We cannot run away from this fact so that we cannot eliminate a conclusion being drawn that influence was exerted if we make provision of this kind for the President.  So, on that alone, I cannot say anything but I oppose the Amendment completely.

LT. COL. SERWANGA-LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to support this Amendment because when I have been studying this Bill, I have not seen anywhere where we have given power to this Assembly to summon anybody in government or anywhere.  I think this Assembly should have power if it is seeking the information and the right person to be summoned is the President. (Interjection) Yes.  Otherwise, it might be government statement -(Interjection)- the Attorney General, we already reached him yesterday.  Yesterday, we voted against the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, the Attorney General and the Chairman of the Commission.

AN HON. MEMBER:  They are not even ex-officials.  

LT. COL. SERWANGA-LWANGA:  They are not even ex-officials.  The ex-officio thing was not adopted Mr. Chairman.  We must be very serious.  Let us not isolate this Assembly form government.  This Assembly should have at one time to call the President or even the Ministers concerned and I think this provision should provide for that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OKODI:  Mr. Chairman, the President of this country has got overwhelming powers.  He can address the Assembly when he wants.  Therefore, it is not necessary to make this a law.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I am giving clarification on this issue in opposing this Amendment.  We are providing somewhere that the Constituent Assembly can regulate its own procedures.  In those rules that the Constituent Assembly will adopt for the smooth running of business, it can also provide that it can invite anybody to come to the Assembly and address it and in that respect, the President can come in rather than legislate it in the Bill.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It would be a very sad way of doing business if the Constituent Assembly could not invite anyone who could assist it in making a very good Constitution for Uganda.  So, I take very seriously the views expressed that this might be another loophole where the NRM might be criticised for allowing the President more powers.  So, I would suggest that the Minister would not object if we modified his proposal and say address it on any matter that will be non-controversial.  I move, therefore, that we modify the Minister’s Amendment and say that, the Constituent Assembly shall have the power to invite any one.  The reasons Sir, I suggest that we put this positively in the Bill in that, there may be a question as the Minister has rightly pointed out somebody saying that the Constituent Assembly did not have power to be addressed by anyone.  This way, even any Ugandan of eminence, political experience can be invited and address the Assembly.  I thank you, Sir.

MR. OMADI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to oppose the Amendment. I am opposing it because I see that by bringing in the name of the President all the time is cheapening the position and the office of the President.  A President has a right even to go to Omadi’s home; at any time -(Laughter)- because he is the President of this country.  Our President has shown a true leadership expected of a President.  We do not want that type of Government of the 1960s where people used to say, “woligwa wendigwa.” When problem came, they took to their heels, Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.

THE HON. RIGHT PRIME MINISTER (Mr. C. Adyebo):  Mr. Chairman, it looks as if whenever an Amendment is concerning his Excellency the President there is always some dissatisfaction among some few Members.  This is a bit unfortunate.  If you can consider yourself they way you came in, I think the President has been part and parcel of the management of society where we all belong.  It is however noted with sadness that whenever we would like him to democratically legally participate in this process of democratisation which is almost coming to an end, in terms of a new Constitution, a few Members always resent such kind of proposal.  However, there is also necessity to make compromises; compromises so that all the parties involved in the play are satisfied.  I have been here following the debate; we have been here talking for two months almost; there has been political acrobatics in here; there has been political wrestling in terms  of Amendment.  There has been even tendency of political rustling! But in order to harmonise and minimise all this we need to come to amicably compromise; compromise so that all the parties -(Interruption.)

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I do not like the hon. Members of this House to be misunderstood and the submission by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister have been insinuated towards that.  The reason why some of us are opposing that thing - you can look at 16.  If you look at Clause 16, you would find that we are saving time so that people do not waste time on superfluous Amendments.  Clause16 is very clear; it brings out the whole gist we are arguing now; we have not reached there, yes, but if you read it and it would give the answer and that is reason why some of us have been opposing this whole show. Thank you very much.

MR. ADYEBO:  Mr. Chairman, I was saying that we need now to compromise so that both parties are satisfied in the following manner. I would propose now or recommend to the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs to accept amending this proposal such that, the Constituent Assembly will be empowered to invite by resolution any Ugandan to the Assembly that will cover His Excellency the President and that is my submission, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Nujba): Mr. Chairman, I accept the proposal by Dr. Kanyeihamba.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 11 as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 12 agreed to).

Clause 13

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, Clause 13, I am wondering about the provision of the commissioner who is an administrator in this Bill. I am suggesting that it be amended to read, ‘Chairman’ because by that time the Chairman will have been elected any way and I do not see how the commissioner should be in the meeting because the Chairman is already elected after the first meeting. So, I am replacing the word commissioner with the word Chairman.  In Clause 13, lines, one, two, three, four.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I think it is very important for the Mover to note that the delegates will elect the Chairman after they have been sworn in.  So, there will be no Chairman to swear the delegates in, so that Chairman cannot be - his Amendment cannot stand.  It is unworkable.  I ask him to withdraw it. 

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, the Chief Justice will be at the opening of the meeting at the swearing in.  You have the Chief Justice in place, you swear in the people, you elect the Chairman and the Chairman, takes over the proceedings of the meeting.  I do not see what the commissioner will be doing in that case.

MR. MAYENGO:  Mr. Chairman, I really see not reason why we should waste time on this formality or these oaths are formalities of the past; we are just sticking to them out of our failure to find something else.  I wish we could just leave it go and let it pass.  In other words, I am opposed to the Amendment; I think it is a waste as much as the inclusion of the entire section is.  So, you may as well leave him in the section. I hope I am clear, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NJUBA: I oppose this Amendment, Mr. Chairman. I do not think it carries much substance at all.

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 13 agreed to).

MR. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that this Clause be amended by deleting sub-clause (ii), Clause 14, by removing one, 

MR. ADAM:  Point of procedure. Since there are some Amendments before the Minister’s Amendments, would it be proper for the Minister to move his Amendment?

MR. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we delete Clause 2 of Sub-clause (ii) of this Clause.  The reason being that we have already been convinced that there is no need for using any other language than the official language that is English.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr. Chairman, if you look at the Rules of Procedure, section 4, the official language of this House is both English and Swahili; this is under section 4.  So, if we are going to follow the same rules governing this House, I think it would be unfair for the Minister to suggest that we delete that section; whereas our rules which govern us today allow somebody who can speak Swahilli very will to come and speak without an interpreter.

MR. KAVUMA:  That in this Statute, once it is provided that the language will be English, the rules are going to operate subject provisions of this Statute we are passing.  Therefore, his worry is taken care of.  Secondly, even if that was not the case, this House has the right to choose anyone of the officially recognised languages to administer the provision of any particular Bill.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).


(Clause 14 as amended agreed to).

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub-Clause (1) on page 11, we delete the number 140 delegates and insert one half of the total number of delegates.  This is in relation to the quorum, the quorum should be a half and we do not what that half will be, before demarcation of all the electoral areas.  

MAJ. GEN. ELLY TUMWINE:  I second the Amendment. (Laughter)

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 15 agreed to).

Clause 16

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Mr. Chairman, permit me to move an Amendment in the names of hon. Kanyomozi on Clause 16.  This is to the effect, if I am ready, the whole Clause, you will get it.  Clause 16, (i).  Except as otherwise provided in this Statute, the proceedings of the Assembly shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure of the National Resistance Council in force on the date of commencement of this Statute.  With such modification, as the Minister may by statutory instrument make and subject such modification, those rules shall apply as the rules of procedure of the Assembly.  The Amendment is that the modification by the Minister should be with the approval of the Constituent Assembly. 

So, it should read, so that the Minister may make modifications on the rules of the National Resistance Council that are to be applied to the Assembly with such modifications as the Constituent Assembly may approve.  It is important for the Constituent Assembly to regulate its own procedure and if the Minister is going to make modifications, it should be with approval of the Constituent Assembly. I move.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I stand to support that Amendment, Sir.  I had originally proposed an Amendment that is before we moved on other issues yesterday, but now since we made matters clear, I would like to substitute the Assembly for the NRC which I had before and the reasons apart from those given by hon. Kanyomozi through hon. Butagira, is that rules of procedure for this House, Sir, are approved by this House.  If we say that the Assembly should follow the rules similar to the ones we have here, but gave power to the Minister also to add to those rules, there would be an anomaly because the Minister’s powers would be equivalent to those of NRC. But if we accept the Amendment proposed by hon. Butagira, then, there will be equivalence between the Assembly and this august House; therefore, it makes sense and it is logical that we should say that when the Minister has made his draft rules of procedure they should be adopted and approved by the Constituent Assembly.  I stand to support, Sir.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I accept that.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 16 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 17

MR. LUBEGA:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an Amendment under Clause 17(3), where presently it is provided that where the Chairman has ruled that a matter be resolved by voting, or where a Motion proposed under paragraph (b) of sub-section 2 is supported by 50 or more other delegates, the following provision shall apply in resolving the matter.  Decision-making in the Constitution making, is a very, very important matter and when making decisions the Assembly should call for a division where some 30 members of the Assembly stand to oppose the ruling of the Chairman instead of 50.  My proposal is that instead the Assembly dividing on the opposition of 50 people it should divide on the opposition of 30 people.  30 people is quite a substantial number I envisage that the Assembly will be composed of about 300 people or less.  30 people is a whole tenth in the Constitutional making process, we do not have to wait for really such a huge group of people to expect their opposition on a matter or disagreement before a division can be made.  I appreciate that the decisions as much as possible in the spirit of the provisions should be taken by consensus.  But in matters contentious, I move to propose that 30 people are quite a substantial number, so to call upon the division of the House.  Thank you. So, I propose.

MR. NYAKATURA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support the Amendment.  You recall during my discussion of the Bill, I raised the issue neglecting 49 Members of this Council if we take the number of 50 as a number desired to create a division.  Now, neglecting 49 people in the Assembly, means neglecting nearly 4,000,000,000 Ugandans who are represented by those people, and that is about 1/4 of the total population of Uganda. So, I think if we insist on the number of 50 people, causing the division, we are actually disregarding the representation of nearly 4 million people in the country.  

Accordingly, I support the Motion.  In fact, I would even have gone further to reduce it to about 10. (Laughter) What is actually necessary is to indicate that a reasonable number of the representatives in the Constituent Assembly disagree on a certain point. And that those people who stand, have a point that must be considered and that for that purpose, a count must be taken to confirm whether or not that issue should be passed or not.  In fact, we used to have a division created by 5 people before these regulations were changed, and it worked very well.  In other Councils, the number is much lesser than the number being proposed of 50.  50 people are too many.  So, for that purpose, I support the Motion that the number to create a division should be reduced to 30 people.  Thank you. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I sometimes feel that there is a tendency for anarchy that we tend to encourage it somehow as if anarchy is a good thing.  Surely is a House is going to be held a Constituent Assembly with a period of 4 to 6 months, is supposed to deliberate from morning to the evening because of the limited time, you get 30 people who may have decided before they came, that they will keep the Council jumping up and down, that is supposed to be allowed.  I find that totally unacceptable.  Even 50 is really being very generous.  It is because there is an effort to bend backwards and say who even has an opinion, let it be incorporated.  If you cannot raise 50 people, then surely, I think Mr. Chairman, I stand strongly to oppose this Amendment because I strongly oppose anarchy.

MR. BARIGYE: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I seek clarification from either the hon. Minister or the Mover of this Amendment. Because I am unclear about this point.  Normally in our procedures, when we have 50 people standing up and asking for a division, it normally happens when you have asked for Ayes and Nos, and you have made a ruling, and hon. Member are not clear or feel that your ruling, they do not agree with it.  Then 50 people stand up and ask for a division. But the way I read this Clause here, it is not exactly the same situation. Because this Clause to me indicates that if discussion is still going on in the Constituent Assembly, the Chairman may make a ruling that the matter be resolved by voting. Or 50 people can stand up and ask for voting. In other words, the standing up and asking for voting here is not when they are challenging the ruling of the Ayes or Nos. But when they feel discussion should stop or a consensus has not been found and it is time to vote. I wish some clarification on that matter, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NEKYON: Mr. Chairman, I think it is good time for me to come in now -(Laughter)- because I think quite a number of us have not understood how the Assembly is going to conduct its own business.  We are equating our own function with of the Assembly.  That is why we are saying that we carry our procedure directly to the Assembly.  I want to say that in my opinion, the Assembly should be given free hand determine on how it is going to proceed.  Because the Assembly is going to be constituted by delegates not representatives. Here we are representatives, we can just say, yes or no, and that is the end of it.  But in the Assembly, we should have the freedom to go back from time to time to consult those who have sent us to the Assembly.  This is the normal procedure where delegates are involved.  

So, when there is a contention, the Chairman, will adjourn the Assembly so that Members can go back and consult on that major issue.  This is the procedure that is known all over the world.  If there is contention say, raised by those who want kingship, you cannot just say, let us vote.  The people who have raised issue should be given freedom to go back and consult their area and come back maybe with new ideas and you heard what others have said.  And this also should apply to other issues.  But if you are going to say, they have to proceed as we proceeding here, there is going to be confusion.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, on the point raised by hon. Barigye, its clear from Clause 16(i) that a normal procedure will be followed as forcing a division.  But what is provided for in this Clause, is a step where the Chairman is not challenged but he feels there is no consensus and he makes a ruling in that effect.  Or where he has not made a ruling and some members feel that no consensus has been found.  Now, facilitate, we have the ordinary case where the Chairman makes a ruling, but this is not the case where he has failed to make a ruling or where Members says there is no found; then we follow this procedure.  It is an additional procedure to resolve the problem. But I was going to oppose the Amendment by saying that it is only recently that we need this Rule.  This Rule is provided to operate as part of our law making, ordinary law making.  And in case or in a point in discussing a Bill, we can force a division by getting 50 people to stand.  The Constitution is the mother of all laws.  If on the ordinary law will ask 50, how can you on a mother of all laws cause a division a serious matter by 30 or less than 50.  I think it is unreasonable.  And it was on that base that we provide for this.  

Dividing this House is not simple.  I am asking Members to seriously consider or appreciate that dividing this House is a very serious matter and should not be taken lightly, and therefore, the number of 50 is reasonable and I oppose the Amendment.  Thank you.

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 17 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 18

MR. S. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, permit me to move an amendment by adding immediately after sub-Clause 3 the following sub-Clause; Four, without prejudice to the sub-Section 1, the President may upon the advice of Cabinet at any time before -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am proposing an Amendment on sub-section 3, but the Minister is moving sub-section 4.  I think that we should consider my Amendment first on Clause 3 before we consider the Minister’s Amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: On Clause 18?

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Yes, Sir.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, I also have an Amendment on Clause 18 Sub-section (1).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Move it, please.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, my Amendment is on sub-Section of Clause 18 on matters going to a referendum.  After the Constituent Assembly has decided on issues that are going to a referendum, the issues are settled there and then the issue goes to a referendum, the others are administrative.  I am wondering, therefore, where we need for the Chairman to refer that matter back to the Minister.  I am suggesting that you delete after the matter has been settled, you delete the Minister and the subsequent portion.  The thing goes straight to a referendum.

MR. KIGYAGI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to oppose hon. Kanyeihamba’s Amendment for one reason that this is just a matter of procedure.  How will this matter be referred to the nation without going through the Minister?  Because it is decided in the Constituent Assembly and as a procedural matter through the Minister, it will go to the nation. (Applause) So, it is  -(Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, I am saying that, that is purely administrative. Because once the issue has been decided, the role of the Minister is just to implement it.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that the statement he is making is exactly the provision in here.  The provision does not give the Minister any option to the referendum.  It is not telling him the Minister should decide whether. The provision says, once it is decided, then the Minister go and put this to the nation.  I think this obsession of the word Minister or whatever; let us try to forget -(Applause and Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Have you withdrawn your Amendment?

(Question put and negatived).

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I must thank the Minister for having included Clause 18 (1) and (2), which I agree with entirely and I think they are very apt in our circumstances.  However, I find difficulty in accepting Clause 3.  So, I am proposing an Amendment that Clause 18 sub-Clause 3 be deleted from the Bill.  My reasons are as follows: Anything that is Constitutional must pas through the Constitutional process.  Secondly, if anything is going to be included in our Constitution, then it must be decided upon by processes that are national.  If anything is to be debated locally with government or with anybody else, that should be covered by the ordinary law of the land or better, still by political considerations.  It has no room in our Constitution. (Applause) For that reason, Sir, I beg to move that Sub-Clause (3) of Section 18, be deleted.  I move, Sir.

MRS. JOYCE MPANGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think there are certain things in this country that affect regions, that do not affect others, and there is no reason why somebody it does not affect has to say, I do not have to have it or I have to have it.  So, I think the provision of this - gives us freedom to remain in unity but in diversity.  So that some of us in one corner if we like to eat our posho a certain way, we can eat it without anybody saying why are you eating it like that.  So, I think this provision should be left in.

MR. SSEBAGEREKA:  I stand to oppose hon. Kanyeihamba’s Amendment. Each country is unique, and Uganda is no exception.  What hon. Kanyeihamba put forward was a generalised way of doing things, but in this country we are trying to do what is suitable for us.  In a social situation, you can bring about stability either by force or by compromise.  I can see we have problems here.  We have been to put together by some sort of artificial rule because there was no natural country called Uganda. So, we are trying to get together by compromise.  If we are forced to pass everything through this Assembly when we know we have some regional differences, we are not going to be fair to the country and it is going to cause problem.  So, I feel that hon. Dr. Kanyeihamba should think again and abandon this Amendment.  Thank you.

MR. NEKYON: Mr. Chairman, I would like to say that we are almost being reckless.  If there is a big contentious issue like the question of Kabakaship or Kingship in Ankole or Bunyoro-Kitara, we cannot just brush it away.  Because a country like ours which is just growing internationally can be torn apart by such an issue, personally I would want. (Interruption) 

DR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I very much hope that this has not been misunderstood. Because for me personally, for example, if I were to be elected in the Constituent Assembly, I would vote for the Kabakaship of Buganda in the way it has been proposed.  But it will have to pass through this House or Constituent Assembly as a constitutional issue.  Therefore, I am not opposed to local issues or traditional rulers provided that they are done constitutionally.  For example, the Kabakaship of Buganda was unconstitutionally removed where he was.  I believe very strongly that he must be restored as a constitutional and cultural head through constitutional means, not through negotiations behind the back door so that when history is written, they say that this country, in its wisdom and deliberations, accepted the Kabakaship of Buganda to be restored constitutionally, not as a matter of negotiation between Government and Government.  I thank you, Sir.

MR. NEKYON:  He is emphasising the question of private negotiations.  What I would have preferred is that when such conflict comes in the Assembly, the matter should be referred to a referendum; to those concerned, not to the whole country.  Because, for instance, we had the issue of the lost counties.  You could not ask the Lango people to vote on the lost counties in Mubende and other areas.  It has to be a localised issue and it must be settled locally.  What we must avoid is to think that the Assembly is going to carry out its functions as we are doing here. The Minister said that the constitution is the mother of all the laws and, therefore, we must adopt the same procedure, the same numbers.  I say, Sir, there is a marked difference.  In the constitution making we look for consensus, not just breaking by voting as we do here. In making law about thieves, about pick-pocketing, you do not need a consensus, because you cannot get a consensus from thieves. (Laughter) But in making a constitution, we want a consensus from everybody and I look forward to the day when the Assembly will adopt a spirit of negotiation to be behind doors.  Much of the work of the Assembly should be done behind doors.  When there is a conflict, we have committees negotiating on each topic. So, the committees come and report a certain agreed position.  This is what I would want Members to understand as my point of view.  But for us to think that every thing is going to be debated and then we say ‘yes or no’ and that is the end, you will see the whole country splitting up into pieces.

MR. WAPAKHABULO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to make my contribution on this one.  I would say that I am opposed to the Motion with a lot of respect still to my Colleague, the Mover.  First of all, purely from the point of view of the structure of this Clause, the Mover is already too late.  Because deleting 3 and leaving 1 as it is does not help.  Clause 3 is only the avoidance of doubt Clause.  It is just a clarification Clause, to make it clear in case the people’s minds were not very clear, but the operative Clause is 1 and we have already approved it.  One says the matter must be of a national character before you can refer it to a referendum so that you can argue that even if you remove 3, whether any proposition on Kabakaship, circumcision and or whether -(Laughter)- you will have in terms of 3 to settle the question whether or not it is a matter of national character.  Once you come to the conclusion that it is not, then it does not go.  But 3 was intended to say, to those of us who are reading this, that make it clear beyond doubt on issues of characters which are not national.  In other words, instead of leaving it hanging, the Minister is saying there is this other machinery of negotiation between the Government and those concerned.  Because if in the Constituent Assembly we come from Mbale and say having investigated that, we have how centuries, the question of circumcision is good for Uganda and it should be in the constitution that every male should circumcise. Is that a national character question or one of the Mbale people? Now the other way round it may be put that it should be abolished.  So, Mr. Chairman, my main point is that the Mover is already late.  He should withdraw his Motion.  Clause 3 in a mere clarification; Clause 1 is a controlling Clause.  Thank you.

MR. MAYENGO: Mr. Chairman, this little Amendment appears innocent.  But it actually holds the key to the success of this constitution and the entire exercise.  It is probably an accident that is totally beyond our own making that there are different groups of people in this country and there is nothing at the moment that we can do to change it.  However, we have made it our policy to slowly by slowly find a way of harmonising ourselves.  That means changing by evolution, not by revolution. In 1966 it is a revolution and you can see the miserable failure to which it is at the moment.  If we go on slowly by slowly, things are going to evolve in such a way that we become harmonious.  It may not happen in our time, but will certainly happen at some time to come.  This Clause when it was included, I thought the Commission was becoming wiser than I even thought at the beginning.  Because they realised what actually is important.  As long as one little portion of Ugandans somewhere remain feeling that they are being oppressed by the majority, then it is in that exact corner that trouble will begin and that the Constitution will get torn apart.  Small as they are.  So, Mr. Chairman, it is important that we prepare ourselves for evolution and this Clause provides for that slowly by slowly.  I know there was another Amendment.  I do not know why the Reverend has not move it, but I saw it in the papers.  It was entirely also intended -(Interruption)

DR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, with all due respect to all the people who may have become very enthusiastic about this movement, in light of the contributions particularly by my hon. Friend and Minister of Tourism, I think that this is a question that should be left to the Constituent Assembly.  I wish to withdraw my Motion. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 19

MR. S. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I had already raised to move this Amendment when we went back.  I would like to move an Amendment by adding on Clause 18 after sub-clause (3) the following new sub-clause. “(4) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the President may, upon advice of Cabinet, at any time during or after the deliberation of the Assembly direct that any issue or specialised issues be resolved by a referendum. (5) Whenever the President directs that a referendum be held under sub-section (4), any decision of the Assembly on the issue or issues presented for decision at the referendum will be confirmed or valid by the outcome of the referendum which shall be final and conclusive”. The reason for this is that there have been many Members who have argued for or against the referendum and it was necessary for Government to put their worries at rest by providing that where necessary Government reserves the right to appeal to the population to decide on any matter that is of national character, hence this Amendment.  It will be irresponsible for Government to ignore its existence and leave every thing to the wheels or pressures.  If the Government has a responsibility to the people and if it so feels strongly and people feel so strongly on any issue, they should be allowed to make their final verdict on it and the test the provision. It is the reserved provision that will put both sides at peace.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.  

MR. BAMBALIRA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With due respect to the hon. minister for Constitutional Affairs, I beg to oppose this Amendment. In the first case we shall be rendering the Constituent Assembly useless.  Because most of the work has been referred back for a referendum when actually it should be the Constituent Assembly that should be doing much of the work.  Secondly, I do not think it is a must that what the Constitutional Commission report contains must be adopted.  There might be some areas where the Constituent Assembly may not agree with the views in the report.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification.  I thought the Amendment that the Minister moved meant dropping other amendments he had circulated earlier on.

MR. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, it is true I had made an earlier proposal to amend, but then I have not moved that.  All I have moved is the one I have read and circulated latest.  I cannot withdraw that one which I have not moved.  I only gave notice of that one I did not move.  I have given notice this one and moved it on the Floor of this House.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LWANGA: In that case, it is in order for the hon. Member to continue debating an Amendment that the minister has not moved? The hon. Member is debating the earlier Amendment.  He is quoting the views of the Commission and whatever which the Minister has not moved.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is not in order.

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to support the Amendment moved by the hon. Minister. I think it is very important that we become consistent.  It has been argued here again and again that the people of Uganda are the supreme to make decisions about their future, about their prosperity and about their destiny.  Again and again people have argued that the only way they can do this is to exercise the ultimate right to vote on issues that affect them to their hearts. The referendum is the ultimate authority by which the people individually at grassroots exercise their most cherished right to determine how they shall be governed in future. I, therefore, find it inconsistent that the people who have argued here again and again that we should go to the people to decide about this Constituent Assembly, that we should go to the people to determine any issues that touch them can have cold feet and oppose a referendum when the people are exercising their ultimate authority.  I fail to understand that. I am not going to take any information because what I am saying is absolutely clear.  It does not require any information.  

This country expects its leaders to respect the people.  Yesterday we reached a very momentous decision and we said our people are the ultimate judges of what this country should be or is.  We must maintain that consistence and, therefore, the Minister in moving this Amendment has reflected what most Ugandans want.  On any issue, why do you not want the people to decide for themselves? I cannot understand why anyone should oppose the people of Uganda to determine their destiny.  It is with very strongest views, Sir, and conviction that I support the Amendment proposed by the Minister.  (Applause)

BRIG. M. KYALIGONZA: Mr. Chairman, I stand here to support the Amendment following grounds.  All along, we have been talking about the supremacy of the people.  There was a heated Debate whether we should accept to go back to the people to seek their mandate; and at the same time given the ultimate authority, we are investing into the people, we are at the same time contradicting ourselves.  We are contradicting ourselves by not accepting the powers of the people.  Therefore, this Amendment as brought by the Minister is the most appropriate and I support it.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 18 as amended agreed to).


MR. S. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we amend this Clause 19 by adding at the end the following new sub-clause 11, “The day to be appointed by the President under (1) shall be no later than 60 days after the day on which the Assembly enacts the Constitution.”  Mr. Chairman, the reason for this is the fear or the concern raised by Members during the debate that Section 19 leaves all the powers put into operation of the Constitution to the President.  We are proposing with a compromise that in exercising this power of starting to implement the constitution, he should do it within a maximum of 60 days. That is all I seek to provide.  I beg to move.

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have an Amendment that does not contradict the Minister’s and I beg your permission, Sir, to put it now. My Amendment originally was that, instead of the President promulgating the Constitution, it should be promulgated by the Constituent Assembly.  At that time the Constituent Assembly was in doubt.  Now that the matter has been resolved, I would, with your permission, wish to modify that this is going to be the most important day in Uganda - the promulgation of our constitution.  Therefore, all the authorities in the land should be present to witness the promulgation of that constitution on a day to be appointed by the President.  

Therefore, I move that the Constitution, after it has been completed, should be promulgated in one Chamber by the Constituent Assembly in the presence of His Excellency the President and the present NRC since it will still be in existence.  Therefore, I am suggesting, Sir, that we put an Amendment there to supplement the Minister’s that a constitution once made, drafted should be promulgated in the presidency of His Excellency the President, the presence of the Constituent Assembly and the NRC sitting together as a body representing the supreme organ of Uganda.  I beg to move, Sir.

MR. NJUBA: I am very grateful to my hon. Member.  I accept the Amendment.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 19 be amended as proposed by hon. Kanyeihamba and supported by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 17, as amended agreed to).

(Clause 20 agreed to).

(Clause 21 agreed to).

(Clause 22 agreed to).

(Clause 23 agreed to)

(Clause 24 agreed to).

(Clause 25 agreed to).

(Clause 26 agreed to).

DR, LUYOMBYA: Mr. Chairman, I want to put some little addition to Clause 27 by inserting the word ‘full’ between ‘the’ and ‘business’ and after that ‘and shall be made to refund the proceeds so far obtain.’ So, it should read like this, “Any delegate who, without prior permission of the Chairman or without good cause, fails to attend the business of the Assembly for more than seven days within one month during which the Assembly is sitting, whether the seven days are consecutive or in the aggregate, shall cease to be a delegate and shall vacate his seat. I want to add there and should be made to refund the proceeds so far he has obtained.” (Laughter) Mr. Chairman, I envisage that the Constituent Assembly will be a very serious House and, therefore, to encourage and force the Members who will sit in it, that provision should be added so that they take the seriousness that House deserves.

MR. S. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 27 agreed to).

(Clause 28 agreed to).

(Clause 29 agreed to).

(Clause 30 agreed to).

(Clause 31 agreed to).

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move that after the words ‘Attorney General’ we insert ‘in consultation with the Chief Justice.’ Because it is highly important.  When regulations are made for the courts of law to dispense and deal with elections or whatever crucial matter is, the consultation with the highest authority in the country such as the Chief Justice ought to be done so that the laws, the regulations and rules of such courts are orderly made.

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to support the Amendment moved by hon. Obwangor and in fact it is similar to the one I was moving.  My reason is that the court rules are made either by the Chief Justice or by the Principal Judge of the High Court.  In matters of this kind, I think this was an anomaly by the Draftsman.  I am sure they must have intended the Chief Justice.  I support the Amendment. 

MR. NJUBA: I concede.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 32, as amended agreed to).

Clause 33.

DR. LUYOMBYA: Mr. Chairman, I want to propose an Amendment in Clause 33 (1) to be divided into two parts. What was 1 to become 1 (a) and then 1(b) to read as follows: “The Constitution as promulgated by the Constituent Assembly shall be laid before the NRC for ratification.” My reason is that Legal Notice No.1 of 1986 vested power into the NRC during the Interim Period and this would be marking the end of the NRM Interim Period.  There must be agreement between who is going to hand over power and who is going to receive power. Mr. Chairman, by NRC ratifying that document, it will be prima facie evidence that -(Interruption)

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr. Chairman, is it in order for to produce an issue that we have already decided on?  We have already decided an Amendment on which shall promulgate the constitution and that was passed a few minutes ago.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, that he should deliver the same point?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not in order.

(Clause 33 agreed to).

The First Schedule

MR. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in the First Schedule we delete Item 1 and insert the following new Item, “One woman delegate from each district elected in each case by an Electoral College comprising of members of the District Women’s Council and District Resistance Council of the district.” 

When I first introduced this Amendment or gave notice of this Amendment, there were some voices of disquiet. I want to assure Members that we have searched a formula more acceptable than this and we have not been able to find it.  One that has been advanced has been that we elect these people directly and we put a box at each Polling Station.  With due respect, this is a most dangerous situation.  it will be counter to the sentiments of NRM whereby we are seeking to promote the ladies.  The minute you put there a box for women, all the voters will say; you women, this is your box, why do you compete with the men in their boxes.  So, it will be the opposite of what we are trying to do.  We would like to see the women compete with men in all the constituencies.  Now what do we do? This will confuse our population.  Others will say do not vote for that lady; they have got their own box.  Others will genuinely say why should we bother, she has another chance; let us give the man who has no chance.  So on this alone, we should rule out direct election of these women.  So, we thought that the best next would be on the day of the election to have our female friends to compete with their male counterpart on equal footing without any bias.  When that is finished and many of them have been successful, then we will wait for another day when the district will assemble together with the District Women’s Council and in a joint Session elect.  Because the other problem is this poor lady being subjected to campaign throughout the district when you as a man you are campaigning in a county or half a county.  So all in all, we thought this was a formula that was closest to justice and equity.  I beg to move.

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA:  Mr. Chairman, I think all the Members accept that each district should field at least a woman delegate.  But my objection is the manner in which the Minister is proposing to have that delegate elected.  I find that whereas a person to qualify to come here as a delegate from a Constituency has to have a support of 70,000 people.  He is limiting it to women representatives of 30 people.  I think the Minister should accept and expand that at least the Electoral College should come down not only up to the district level, at least all the RC III in the district should be involved in the election.  That is what I think will be fair to the ladies to come in.

DR. MRS. KAZIBWE:  Mr. Chairman, the main reason I am standing here is to further clarify why Members accepted to have one woman elected per district.  It is on the principle acknowledging the fact that it is going to be a long, long time before we can have women effectively competing with men in the constituencies.  Views were advanced that let the women choose their own women representative.  These have been views that have been expounded by Members.  The district women representatives are not women’s representatives.  We came in on the same principle.  So, I would go for the Amendment, which is further to the Amendment of the Minister, which widens the representation, and say that let the RC III form the forum for electing this woman.  It is going to make our job easier in the gender sensitisation exercise in having more people in the district electing women, not women electing women because the purpose is not to have women’s representatives in this Assembly.  Thank you.
MRS. OKIA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I agree with the Minister about the number of women to be elected - one from each district.  But some times this affirmative action, as far as women are concerned, goes a bit too far.  I think we are all individuals in our own rights.  There is no reason why a man can be elected directly and then women have smaller people to elect her.  What we want is direct election, and we are ready.  Do not sympathise with us.  We are ready to go out like anybody else and campaign.  If we are planning to go and campaign in these other constituencies, why not the district? Give us a chance and we prove our worth. We want to go out to the district and be directly elected by everybody, not just a small electoral college.  Because we can imagine ourselves coming here and then having women go to the Constituent Assembly and one bright person saying after all, your constituency is so small.  It is just RC III Electoral College.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Chairman, my coming here was to acknowledge the fact that it will be a long time before women effectively in their own rights.  I did not say that women should not compete for the Constituent Assembly.  But first they must be recognised. Women are encouraged and indeed I have been going out and encouraging women to stand.  But that does not make me blind to the fact that I am also the Minister of Culture and I know what is going to happen.  The women should stand on their own.  Members have recognised that not many because of the culture of our people will actually come through and that is why we are saying let that one woman per district come.  The mode of electing that woman is the point of contention now, not whether women are going to be stopped from standing.

MRS. OKIA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  But culture is socially constructed.  It is the society that constructs culture.  It is the society that makes a man from a woman.  Otherwise we are individuals like anybody else.  So let us not look into culture; we can go out and be elected in every constituency.  We can just expose our photographs and we are elected there.

MR. LUBEGA; Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have a substantive Amendment o this matter.  In view of that I oppose the procedure laid down for electing the women representative of a district.  We have already decided that each district be represented by a woman representative.  I have no quarrel about that.  That is the decision and I supported it at the very beginning.  

I support the procedure of electing women directly by universal suffrage so that everybody who is capable, who is 18 plus, can cast a vote for this district representative, because, I shall later on in my Amendment, I shall propose that the district for purposes of electing a woman representative be referred to or regards as electoral area for purposes of electing a woman, and that is all the rules governing elections of other delegates will apply if we refer to the district as an electoral area for purposes of electing a woman.  The fears expressed by the Minister that probably it will be cumbersome, because he is in envisaging a position or a situation where on Election Day we are going to have both the general boxes, one box and also a woman aside.  I am proposing as far as the method is concerned that we shall have a day when we can elect by universal suffrage a woman representative of that district, the district registered voters will be voting for the women candidates.  Thank you.

MR. S. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, maybe, if I say little more, it will help the Member to appreciate the complete of the position. Let me start by saying that I am persuaded to accept that we go down to the RC III.  Now, I said we cannot have the election on the same day without prejudicing the chances of our ladies.  Now, I granted we can do it on another day.  On another day, it means that in every polling station you will have a box, you will have all the returning officer back where they are, you will have also supervisors all they are, in other words you will have another full-fledged election for 39 and who is going to find this; even if you put it in the next day, the cost of running that election will double and there is no money.  

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I have carefully studied the interim rules of procedure of the National Resistance Council of Uganda, and I want to refer you, Sir, to provision 42.  Provision 42, indicates, under what circumstances a Member can be interrupted this new invasion; I have had of clarification, clarification it is not provided for in the Standing Orders.  So, Mr. Chairman, is it in order to prolong debates by using a new inversion of interrupting debate that is not catered for, in the Standing Orders?

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are out of order, please.

MR. S. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, my Amendment was on the Floor to the effect that model of election of the woman delegate should be by District Council and women’s district council, however, I was persuaded by subsequent modification that the participant in these elections should be on RC level, and RC.3 level, and I accept that.  Sitting together, of course.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon Minister, please, will you be very clear?

MR. S. NJUBA: We should amend that women delegate from each district elected in each case by Election College comprising of all Members of RC III; all Members of District Resistance Council, and RC III Councils.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I move that we adjourn to give us an opportunity to reflect deeply on this matter.

HON. MEMBERS: Seconded.


MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).
 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba): Sir, I beg to report that some progress has been registered in consideration of the Constituent Assembly Bill by the time the Committee of the whole House adjourned.  I beg to move.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to today’s Session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8th April, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)


