Tuesday, 8 April 2008

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I hope you had an enjoyable weekend and I want to congratulate our colleague, hon. Ahabwe, for the ceremony that took place in Kabale. I am happy. I used to have only one mobile phone number for him, but now there is a second mobile phone number, therefore, I will always be able to trace him wherever he will be. Congratulations! (Laughter)

We have to adjust the Order Paper to allow hon. Betty Amongi to make a statement and the statement of hon. Kabanda is deferred.

Yesterday as you heard, students of Kyambogo University were here. They had grievances to present but we had started handling these grievances in our structures here and I have contacted the Ministry of Education and a necessary statement will be made tomorrow on Kyambogo University. 

2.31
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I rise on a matter of national importance. I have a medical condition that requires me to receive treatment from the Nuclear Unit of Mulago Hospital and when I went there last week, I found very impressive equipment worth $3 million, clean toilets, running water, everything was perfect. I was highly impressed and the staff were very happy to have that equipment.

I learnt quickly however, that after the 19th of May this year, the Nuclear Unit of Mulago Hospital might be closed if the external auditors of the International Atomic Energy Agency come and do not find an atomic energy law in place. 

Mr Speaker, this unit looks after about 6,000 Ugandans who have cancerous medical needs. Uganda is required, like all other countries in the world, to have an atomic energy law to regulate the use of atomic energy for peaceful use. I learnt that we had this decree under Iddi Amin in 1973, but that decree came to an end after the 1995 Constitution of Uganda. The rest I am sure is familiar to this House. We are supposed to enact this law and we have been operating on grace periods; we have been allowed two grace periods since the enactment of the 1995 Constitution.

My worry, Mr Speaker, is that if the international external auditors come and they don’t find - as they will not find - an atomic energy law in Uganda and they decide to close the nuclear medicine unit and the use of other atomic energy in all other sectors such as water purification, NARO, agriculture and many other sectors in which we use it, what will happen to people who have no access to the facilities of being flown abroad? 

I am not one of those people who can easily access the facilities to get medical attention abroad and I am wondering, and I doubt, that most of the 5,000 people that I am talking about also have access to that facility. What will happen to them? What will happen to the water purification exercise? What will happen to the research that is going on in NARO and Namulonge? What will happen to the vector control programmes and all those other activities that use atomic energy in Uganda? 

Mr Speaker, it is very disheartening. I was indeed very disheartened to learn of the state of affairs especially since we are so busy discussing other very important Bills like the Land Bill and the Bill to tap our phones and all those. I think that we really need to give a lot of importance and attention to this state of affairs.

Finally, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are asking government to bring an Atomic Energy Bill and to my recollection, many months back, I think government tabled the Bill for the first reading and we have copies. May be you are just urging the House -(Laughter)- and the committee to expedite the process to have the Bill tabled for the second reading. That is the information I wanted to give you that the Bill has already been tabled and it is already within Parliament. Thank you very much.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information, which was – what do you call it? It was a mistake on my part because I do have the Bill. This Bill was tabled; it is actually dated September 2007. My worry is that on the 19th of May, a month from today, the inspectors will be here for three weeks and between the 19th of May to the 17th of June, they will decide whether that nuclear unit should be closed or not. So, whether we have the Bill or not, what we require is the law that regulates the use of atomic energy.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a minister.

2.37
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Beti Kamya for giving way, and hon. Baryomunsi for the timely intervention. 

As a mater of fact, the Bill is before the committee and this week on Thursday, the ministry is appearing before the committee so that we can be in position to provide detailed information to answer pertinent questions so that we can ultimately get back here in a timely manner. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, your concern is being addressed and we urge the committee concerned to expedite the process so that in May, when they come, we have already passed the law. (Laughter)

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I am glad. The 19th of May is not very far, honourable minister. Thank you. (Mr Kasigwa rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable from Jinja. I have no other indication from you that you want to make a statement. You did not come to me. Is he the shadow minister for energy? But we have solved the problem. 

2.39
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I think I have to raise this point here, which is of very great concern to us. We all witnessed a presentation here on the 1st of April by the Minister of State for Finance, presenting to this House the national budget framework paper document. 

Much as he tabled a copy here - and I think that has been taken to the library - he promised to submit to Parliament enough copies for all Members of Parliament to read and be in position to scrutinise the coming budget framework. He indicated to us that they would be ready by Friday; we have been trying very much to get him to present these documents here and up to today, we have not received the documents. All efforts to contact him have now failed and yet we are running short of time to scrutinise this document. 

So, I am just bringing it to your attention that maybe we shall be constrained by time because of this delay, and we request the Minister of Finance to actually give us the reasons, on record, as to why this has delayed for the last eight days. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. The Minister of Finance is not here but the Prime Minister is here. 

2.40
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am told that I am the acting minister of finance, but I am very surprised that hon. Okecho has been trying to get in touch with the Minister of Finance for the last eight days! That minister is available and if he had problems - as you know, I am always disaster-prepared. So, I am surprised that he came here to raise such a question. So, I want to make it clear that the minister will oblige. [Hon. Members: “Where is he?”]I am certain he must have a reason, more so since he tabled a copy here on time, and I want to urge honourable members of Parliament that if you get in touch with us, it may be unnecessary to come here and raise your issues, including hon. Beti Kamya. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, this is not a question of getting in touch because on presentation of the documents on 1st, he ought to have given us all the necessary copies. He did not. So, duty calls that he should be vigilant and diligent and produce the copies to us. The blame is not with us that we are not contacting you; the blame is may be with the minister not explaining why he has not carried out his obligation. 

So, what we need is that he should expeditiously give us the copies so that Members can start the work, because the committees have to submit the report to the Budget Committee by 25th and then discuss these reports and we have to send our reaction to the President by 15th May. So, time is of essence. So, I think it is your duty to remind the minister to do what is necessary. 

2.43
MR HARRY KASIGWA (FDC, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This morning, I read The Monitor newspaper and the headline on the front page was: “Now source of the Nile falls to an investor.” I am not against investment in this country and that should be on record. However, I would seek the indulgence of Parliament to find out who these investors are. 

They are Malaysian, yes, they came to this country, they promised the government that they would set up a commonwealth resort but they failed. They came up with designs that were very convincing to the President, but they did not have money to implement them; they tried to hawk the idea. Having failed to secure the entire piece of land that they were talking about, somehow fraudulently these so-called investors found their way round and convinced – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the question should be, is it true that this has been – I think if it is a simple question, you will get an answer because you are referring to a newspaper. Why don’t you ask whether it is true or not? 

MR KASIGWA: So, these gentlemen somehow got their way round. They are called Source of the Nile Resort Limited and one of their directors is –(Mr Musumba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable minister, what the honourable member is trying to raise is whether what has been published in The Monitor newspaper is true. I think he is trying to find out the position. 

MR MUSUMBA: To raise my concern, Mr Speaker, you have guided and the guidance has been very clear - the honourable member is a Member of Parliament from that area anyway. We would have expected that you first raise the question of whether this is true or not and then the responsible part of government will be able to give a response, the basis upon which he can now give his information. Otherwise, what is happening now are two things: One, we are proceeding on a basis that we have not established –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister, without taking a lot of time on this, is the minister concerned here and can he help us clear up the issue of whether what has been stated in the newspaper as referred to by the Member is true?

MR KASIGWA: Mr Speaker, if my colleague was only patient. I have some documents with me here that I will lay on Table subsequently. Hon. Musumba, be patient. I am sorry but somewhere somehow, these gentlemen moved round and secured the –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what we want to know is whether what was published in the newspaper today is true or not and we are asking the minister to tell us. Maybe it is not true.

MR KASIGWA: Mr Speaker, I am much obliged and I accept your guidance on this matter. However, with me here are certain documents that I had wanted to lay on the Table but if the minister is here to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think if he says it is not true and you think you have the evidence then you can challenge him with that document. However, let us get the answer from the minister.

MR DAUDI MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, with reference to the information that hon. Kasigwa has come up with, we need time to be in a position to get on board with the issues he is trying to raise. This is because we are not sure of the authenticity of some of the information. I will take this up with the relevant minister so that he can be in a position to respond appropriately. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it possible to get the answer tomorrow?

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I am going to pass this on to the relevant minister so that tomorrow –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So that tomorrow we can get the answer in the afternoon, right?

MR MIGEREKO: Yes, thank you.

PETITION TO PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA OVER THE MARGINALISATION AND DISPLACEMENT OF RESIDENTS FROM KAZOOBA CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE

THE SPEAKER: I must say that I had adjusted the Order Paper to allow hon. Betty Amongi to present her statement but she is not here so let us move to another item.

2.49
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am presenting a petition by the residents of Kazooba Central Forest Reserve and this is moved under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

The humble petition of marginalised and endangered residents of Kazooba Central Forest Reserve represented on their behalf by hon. Theodore Sekikubo, Member of Parliament for Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule. It states that the petitioners are residents of eight LC1 villages namely; Lumegere A, Lumegere B, Lwemirama, Makukulu, Kyatuuba, Bigaga and Kigando situated within Kazooba Central Forest Reserve, which is managed by the National Forest Authority. It reads:  

“Kazooba Central Forest Reserve being basically savanna vegetation, government constructed three water-for-production valley dams namely; Lumegere, Kawezike and Kempungu together with two primary schools and three trading centres among others;  

THAT in 2005, residents got to know that the National Forest Authority was inviting applications for licenses from those wishing to engage in tree planting in the Kazooba Central Forest Reserve. They complied and duly submitted their applications to the National Forest Authority, hoping to be given the first priority. To date, this has not been responded to;    

THAT the concerned residents have since learnt, in shock, that the National Forest Authority has indeed been issuing licenses to other forest “investors” that were not even residents of Kazooba Central Forest Reserve; 

THAT this practice and conduct of the National Forest Authority is threatening to render the current residents and occupants of Kazooba Central Forest Reserve marginalised and landless squatters on the land that they have lived on for generations and hence potential evictees;  

THAT in total unfairness to the residents, it has been realized that far from planting trees, the purported “foresters” have instead cleared the vegetation for pasture development for beef and dairy farming; 

THAT in Kyatuba village, one such licensed investor by the names of Boaz Turyamwijuka has blocked residents’ access to Kempungu public dam, which was commissioned just last year. He is using armed special police constables and LDUs. This was done in contravention to the presidential directive of maintaining the status quo of the forest reserve until guided otherwise;  

THAT as a result, residents particularly of Kyatuba are living under the shadow of fear, terrorised by these government armed men, denied access to water sources, pastures, herbs and shrubs and subjected to prohibitive and arbitrary charges for trespass amongst others. This is irrespective of the fact that these have been unfairly left to the full benefit and enjoyment of one individual. This has virtually reduced the people into destitute beggars;  

THAT this matter was reported to the Minister for Internal Affairs whose directive for the withdraw of the armed police and LDUs was simply ignored while the Minister of State for Environment urged patience without guidance or redress; 

NOW, THEREFORE, your humble petitioners seek to be entreated by your honourable House and pray that in view of these peculiar circumstances and predicaments faced by the residents of Kazooba Central Forest Reserve, Parliament be pleased to prevail over the responsible ministries and authorities to respond to this material cause without any further delay and your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray”.  

Mr Speaker, the petition has the names and signatures of 229 residents and includes the stamps and signatures of the LC1 chairpersons. The petition is also accompanied by, amongst others, the certificates of titles, which were owned by these people originally before the forest reserve was taken over.  

Mr Speaker, we also have the application letters for the inhabitants, whose applications were largely ignored in favour of certain individuals. The gist of the petition is, why doesn’t government come out clearly to explain the procedures over acquisition of land and why should the people there be continuously marginalized as land is secretly given out to people disguised as foresters but end up being ranchers and who are restraining people from using government resources like dams that were constructed to cater for these people who are the inhabitants of the place?

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that this petition be entertained.

THE SPEAKER: The appropriate committee, which is the Committee on Natural Resources should undertake the study of this petition and promptly advise Parliament as to how to handle it.

Hon. Amongi, we called you but you were not in so we skipped you. But taking into account the number of activities that you are involved in as Chairperson of AMANI, I will allow you, belatedly, to make your statement.

2.56
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you for your indulgence, Mr Speaker. This is a short statement in memory of 40 years since the death of Martin Luther King Jr. It is 40 years ago on 3 April 1968 when Martin Luther King Jr made his last speech, part of which I will quote: “Well I don’t know what will happen now, we have got some difficult days ahead but it really doesn’t matter with me now because I have been to the mountain top and I don’t mind. Like anybody, I would like to live a long life. Longevity has its place but I am not concerned about that now. I just want to do God’s Will and He has allowed me to go up to the mountain top and I have looked over and seen the Promised Land. I may not get there without you but I want you to know tonight that we as a people will get to the Promised Land”. This was in reference to his struggle for the American dream and was spoken on the very day he was assassinated.

Four decades since Dr Martin Luther King Jr was assassinated, the world is celebrating his legacy. Politicians and commentators have honoured the values that he committed himself to; the belief in equal opportunities and his hope that one day in America, white and black children would be judged by the content of their character and not by the colour of their skin. Martin Luther King Jr surprised and captured the attention of a nation during the Civil Rights Movement with his creed of non-violent resistance. As King emerged as a leader in the movement, he put his belief into action and proved that this was an effective method to combat segregation. 

King noted that racial justice was inextricably linked to economic justice and international peace. His non-violent approach is what I cherish and this was tested for him in 1955 when he called for a national boycott and urged all blacks to boycott travelling by bus because of the segregation then. He was offered an armed bodyguard because of threats to his life but he rejected this. Later, his home was burnt and bombed down but he did not react. He also told the people not to attack any white. 

In the aftermath, he committed himself to the non-violent approach. In his book, The Stride towards Freedom published in 1958, he laid down six key principles of the non-violent approach. 

They include:

1.	Non violence is not passive but requires courage.
2.	Non violence seeks to win the friendship and understanding of the opponent and not to humiliate him.
3.	Evil itself and not the people committing evil acts should be opposed.
4.	Those committed to non violence must be willing to suffer without retaliation as suffering itself can be redemptive.
5.	A rejection of hatred, animosity or violence of the spirit as well as refusal to commit physical violence. The resister should be motivated by love in the sense of understanding and good will.
6.	The non-violent resistor must have a deep faith in the future stemming from the conviction that the universe is on the side of justice.

He won a Noble Peace Prize for these key principles in 1964. Important to note is that, King was a great leader because he influenced a positive and long lasting way. Unlike many who called for him to stand for elective office, he refused to stand for political office but led his followers in a non-violent approach, which forced the country to take notice. 

In his resting place, he must be a happy man especially when a black Senator of Kenyan descent born in Hawaii and representing Illinois, Barack Obama is a leading democratic candidate in the US presidential race. Until his death, King urged that non-violent revolution was practical. In his book he again wrote: “Darkness cannot drive out darkness, only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate, only love can do that. The beauty of non violence is that it, in its own way and in its own time, seeks to break the chain reaction of evil.” 

Mr Speaker, I thank you and I implore honourable members, who are leaders in this country, to honour the legacy of Martin Luther King Jr by practicing the philosophy of the non-violent approach in the leadership of this country. I thank you.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE QUALITY OF SEEDS AND FARM IMPLEMENTS DISTRIBUTED BY THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE SPEAKER: I think that last time when we adjourned, hon. Alaso was supposed to take the Floor. Engineer also came in but I think it was hon. Alaso.

3.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, thank you very much and I would like to thank the committee for this report. 

Mr Speaker, let me correct a wrong impression that went into our records. In his submission, hon. Byandala said that the joint monitoring committee should in one way or another have been responsible for the fraud process. I do not agree with that. The Office of the Prime Minister presiding over this committee provides that this committee is just a policy organ, it makes policy guidelines. And when you are a policy organ, you do not go into matters of implementation. I think that when we are scrutinizing this matter we should look for the person who was directly charged with matters of the implementation. Otherwise, an attempt to implicate this committee would be erroneous given the fact that that was not their mandate.

Having said that, let me go straight to the committee. On page 25, the committee made a very substantive admission. On that page, the committee has a table which tells you that everything that was issued, whether hoes, seeds, sickles, anything – whether it was brought by the Office of the hon. Prime Minister or submitted by hon. Okumu or hon. Omolo, when they were tested they were all found to be wanting. 

That means that everything that was distributed in Northern Uganda in terms of relief, including what was donated, was substandard. I think we should get it on our record first and then we will proceed to look for the details because earlier on, the matter of contention was whether substandard implements had been issue. Now for the record of this House, all the things supplied in Northern Uganda, without exception were substandard. 

Having said that, the committee goes ahead to relate to us how the process of procurement was in line with the PPDA. I find this very interesting. Why is it interesting? Because the analysis of the committee should have highlighted that in matters of public procurement, the department that is securing services has responsibility and this is not clear in the report. You only say, “Yes, they acted in accordance with the PPDA”. But you do not highlight the responsibilities of the procuring department. 

If you look at section 34 (d) and (g) they tell you that in matters of procurement, the line department proposes the specifications. They should have told the suppliers, for example, that these are the specifications of the hoes, axes etc that we want to be bought. 

Secondly, in “g”, the law says they should report any departures from the terms and conditions of procurement. 

Now, this report falls short of this because they do not tell us at any one instance that the Office of Disaster Preparedness reported that the suppliers had departed from the specifications that they had provided for them. 

So, it is not enough to just say, “Faulty things were procured in line with the PPDA”, and you stop there. If you deliberately give wrong specifications, you get what you want. 

Mr Speaker, this is very disturbing because by finally not doing that, while we try to absorb the Department of Disaster Preparedness, it was their direct responsibility to ensure that this contractor was nullified or they should have pursued them and tried to get penalties in place for departure from the specifications they were given. 

And as a result, I would like to know why the committee never proposed penalties for people who caused the Government of Uganda such severe loses. Why didn’t you propose penalties for people who made wrong specifications or who refused to make specifications and caused us such massive losses in terms of money? Procurement is not just a ritual where you just bring anything and you satisfy us.

The other thing I would like to raise is the question of donations. This has been talked over for a long time; for the Government of China to give us very inferior, substandard foldable pangs and hoes, and give them to people who have spent 20 years in internal displacement; people who are trying to go back to their homes, who have no next meal – I find this very unfortunate. 

But again, the Government of Uganda is duty bound to protect the citizens’ interests. Why did government accept to use the IDP camps as dumping ground? By accepting to dump in the camps you have caused the people of Northern Uganda to have a failed crop harvest. No wonder people are crying out – they are saying, “We have no food even for this season.” It is because you gave them hoes that gave them false hope and seeds that refused to germinate. Why did you do that? It is unacceptable for the government to cheat its own people.

Mr Speaker, I also want to know how the Department of Disaster Preparedness could decide to just sit on their desks and ignore the need for a needs assessment! When you buy, for instance, Epuripuri – that variety of sorghum called Epuripuri – I am a typical girl from Teso. First of all, Epuripuri is white in colour and in Teso and Lango we use our sorghum to put into the cassava. Now you give me white staff to mix in white cassava!

Secondly, in those camps, people cannot afford grinding mills. The women in Teso have to kneel down besides a grinding stone to grind this sorghum and Epuripuri, and Epuripuri is very hard. So who did the needs assessment? Besides, it is also unpalatable; it is not nice staff if you intend to make Atapa. So who took over the business of making a needs assessment?

Mr Speaker, I would like to know the fate of the sickles that were not bought because in terms of budget performance, it was only up to 50 percent meaning the money was used half way. So where is the other half of the money; when will they be delivering the remaining items?

Finally, I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, now that this presentation has been made and it is on record that some of the seeds were not healthy, what arrangements are there for redress, because that harvest failed? The IDPs went home, they cultivated, had false hope that they would be able to harvest but unfortunately the seeds did not germinate, the rains came, the floods followed, everything went wrong and now as we talk they do not have food.

Before you issue the next batch of seeds, whether they will germinate or not germinate, what are you doing to do to help the IDPs? And the question of timing is crucial. If you are going to get seeds, I think they are going to be - I will give you an example: someone gave the Arrow Boys in Teso a tractor but up to date the tractor is locked up in the prison yard of Soroti Prison. It has stayed there for almost a year; the tyres are getting worn out. This tractor was meant to be used by the Arrow Boys for cultivation. For some reason that only the government knows, the thing is locked up in the prison yard in Soroti. What is the use of seeds; what is the use of implements that will not come in time? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us give ourselves just five minutes for each contribution.

3.15
MR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and I will restrict myself to the issue of poor seeds. I note that the committee realised that one of the precursors of the mystery of disaster preparedness was the low capacity of the formal seeds scheme in Uganda and this is very true. We observed that just a few companies - for example we have got I think only Victoria Seeds, Wanseko. They could not be in position to handle the large magnitude of seeds needed, and it was an emergency. But I would also like to note that in such circumstances, there are some institutions that the ministry could perhaps have run to; for example, the research institutes –(Interjections)- may I continue? For example when you look at the crops, which were supplied, the millet, the sorghum, and the groundnuts they are all being improved or researched upon at Serere Institute in Soroti and around that place, the researchers and scientists are acting as out-growers and they always provide what we call registered seed. That is, from the breeder seed which they get from the station, they grow it out, and they can always have pure seeds – pure in variety and pure in content, that is, the inert matter is low and so on. So I am saying here that in future that could be an area to run to.

In case somebody were in Lira or Gulu, then the place to run to would be Ngeta, the NARO zonal research institute; in West Nile, the area to run to for such a seed would be Abim and others, and so on.

The next issue on these seeds is again from the report of the Agriculture Committee, which stresses that it is always very important if one is taking out such seeds in such an emergency to have technical backup at all stages as the seeds go out. The report puts it that the certification services only came in at the stage of identifying the suppliers, but again here I will say that at the other end of the stage when the seeds were going to the farmers, again some assistance could have been looked at from these research institutes like Serere. They could have carried out very prompt inspection on purity and germination percentage and so on. These are just suggestions for the future.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to address myself to the issue of Epuri-puri sorghum, which has been debated in this report. I would like to say that I am – when I looked at the way Epuri-puri was supplied in these circumstances, I thought it was to meet the needs of these people who were coming from IDP camps to have a short term cash crop the in form of the Epuri-puri, which goes in for brewing. Definitely this is sorghum of only 110 days and in such circumstance, it would have been very appropriate for the people returning to their homes. But –(Interruption)

MR ODIT:  Mr Speaker, I think let us put the record straight. When Epuri-puri was introduced in the country, there was only a single market for it, and that was this industry, the Nile Breweries. A year later, they issued a statement that they had too much stock and nobody should waste time going into the production. Now this gentleman who is in charge of Akuku Farm Seeds, shrewd as he was, continued to buy Epuri-puri and have his stores fully stocked knowing very well that there was no market, but he insisted that government should assist him to find a market.

And so when the opportunity came to supply the emergency seeds, he actually got his way to government systems and forced government to buy Epuri-puri, which was against the interest of the people to whom these seeds found their way. We got this real story in Soroti; we got the story in Gulu. So it is not that the people who were in the camps wanted short term kind of food or crops for income, no. Their demand was specifically for food items, something which would be able to produce food immediately for them. Thank you.

MR SERUNJOGI: Thank you for that information hon. Odit, but also on the side of food, remember that Epuri-puri was not derived just recently. It came up as a variety way back in 1972 and then –(Interjections)- yes, way back in 1972. It was derived as a food sorghum -(Interjections)- yes, I know there is user preferences where we say that, “We people in Teso prefer the red type of sorghum”, but there is always a variation for other preferences, and this was derived for food. And when you look at the data from NARO, Epuri-puri can be used for a meal as Atapa or corn in case of the North; it can be popped as popcorn, it can be used for porridge -(Interjections)- yes, that’s right -(Interruption)  

MS AMUGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Unless we are taking this local brew for food - it is used for local brew by first soaking it in water to ferment; to make it softer so that grinding is made possible. You must know that when people use it for food, it is not because they prefer to use it that way; it is because there is no option.  

The other information I want to give to you is that the way China uses Uganda as a dumping ground is the same way that Uganda uses the camps. So, continue with it. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I think there should be a limit to provocation in this House. I also believe that, as Members of Parliament, we must be careful in dealing with countries. If you are talk about China without having established what actually happened, when this “defective accident” came and you blame the entire China, you may be making an error. Is it in order for the honourable member to say, one, that China has chosen Uganda as the dumping place and secondly, that government dumps unacceptable things in IDP camps, when the government has done everything it takes to make sure that life continues as normally as possible in the difficult circumstances, which the honourable member knows about?

THE SPEAKER: I think we should avoid being emotional as we debate this matter. China made a donation; it did not work but it was not intended to dump but to assist. Maybe, as I said last time, it was soft wood but we have hard wood and that is why it could not work. (Laughter) 

MR SERUNJOGI: Mr Speaker, as I finish I would like to say that while some of the information given to me is true, those Members do not have enough information. If you are to read the information from NARO on its technologies - and this book was tabled by the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy last time when we were debating NARO issues - you will see this. When you go to the NARO newsletter of June last year, it gives you how well you can utilise Epuri-puri not only in Atapa, but also into loaves of bread. You can also use it for preparing porridge. What I could suggest is that in future when such technologies are being taken to such needy issues, some information regarding the utilisation should go along with them. Thank you very much. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The honourable colleague holding the Floor has constantly insisted that this type of sorghum is meant for food. We the people from the affected areas who eat it know what we eat and we are saying, “This is not what we use in Northern Uganda, especially in Acholi where I come from, for food.” Is it in order for the honourable member to keep insisting on the research he has carried out to imply that we have to eat or follow what is researched and not what we practice? 

THE SPEAKER: The problem I have in deciding on that is that I am a lay person and the person you are talking about is a scientist –(Interjections)- no, no. As a scientist he can say, “This can even be used for food or brew.” I cannot dispute that; I cannot rule on it.

3.28
MS JESSICA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report on the sub-standard implements and seeds in the IDP camps –

THE SPEAKER: But, five minutes, please.

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, when you talk about IDP camps, you are talking about Ugandans who have suffered emotional stress for decades; who have suffered physical stress for decades and people with unspeakable financial distress. 

I would like to draw your attention straight away to page 30 of this report because I have interests in paragraph 8.12, which says: “A team of experts went to the field to verify and report accordingly.” My understanding of this statement is that the team of experts from the Prime Minister’s Office went to the field long after the sub-standard seeds and implements had been distributed to the population. That means the team went to the field to assess the damage, yet they should have made this assessment before the implements and the seeds were taken to the field.  

I also want to draw your attention to page 34 and I have specific interests in paragraph 9.6, which talks about the broken axes, hoes, and sickles with the poor quality tools that were donated. I think this is a sweeping statement. My understanding is that all the donors could do was to donate this. I am saying this because the report does not further mention the items that were donated by the donors that day. 

Mr Speaker, I just want to ask a question, but I do not want an answer. The question I want to ask is: did the technocrats from the Prime Minister’s Office receive these sub-standard items consciously or unconsciously? Because if they received them consciously that means that their intentions are questionable, and that makes me, together with the people who received these implements, have a right to believe that there is no difference between the Prime Minister’s Office and these donors.

Mr Speaker, I know that the IDP situation in Uganda is something that we all hope will end soon –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, Sergeant, is the AC working? It seems it very hot. Please, try to check. Hon. Member, you can proceed.

MS ALUPO: What I was saying is that when debating this report, we need to give ourselves a deep thought about especially the reasons that caused the creation of IDPs in our country. When I was still a student of political science at Makerere University, Prof. Gingyera Pinchwa used to tell us that IDPs can be created by either artificial or natural means. Incidentally the IDPs we have in Uganda, especially those ones in Teso, have been created by artificial means. 

So, I am of the thinking that while we debate this report, we should give ourselves a deep thought over how long we will continue having the IDPs in our country –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Alupo for giving me the opportunity to inform you. I do agree with you that we need to look at the reasons behind the creation of the IDPs. However, I would also like to inform you that it is important that while the IDPs exist, we treat them with respect; people who have the dignity of persons. That is why I want to think that as we give them food, we should consider their cultures. If culturally the IDPs do not eat Epuru-puri, even when technologists and scientists believe so, it should not be forced on them. I want to give you an example: in the Teso belt we do not eat grasshoppers at all; we despise them but here in Buganda it a delicacy. So it would be dangerous to try to impose Nsenene on the IDPs in Northern Uganda. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Oh! You wait for the season next month. Anyway, honourable members, I thought that we would use this report to prevent what happened from recurring. That should be the importance of this report. How do we prevent the recurrence of what happened? That is when this report will be useful to all of us.

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, I am in total agreement with hon. Alaso that while we have the IDPs, we should treat them with dignity. That is why I was even about to come to the point that last Saturday, in a meeting with the IDPs, the IGP said that both the Police and ASTU were supposed to work 24/7, I wondered aloud. Reason being that if they had worked like that in the first place, then there shouldn’t have been a security situation that caused the creation of these IDP camps.

As I conclude, I really want to call upon government to address the issue of the IDPs and their return to their homes or places of origin. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.37
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to make a contribution to this report. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee that produced this report, but straight away go to register my sympathies with them for the difficulties they experienced while carrying out their work. They have, in their report, indicated that they were unable to go to the West Nile region of this country owing to the conditions of the roads in that part of the country because at the time, it was the rainy season. This is a matter for another day, but I think if we have to operate only in seasons in this country, then there is little hope that we shall be able to develop.

This was a parliamentary committee, but there are district and sub-county officials who, on a day-to-day basis, operate under such conditions. So, I think this should be one of the calls to the Government of Uganda to do better.

I also would like to sympathize with the committee because they also had to handle hoes made out of cement. In the report – and I am surprised about this and I hope that this will be clarified as at page 22 where the committee report states that hoes were made out of cement – in my study of metallurgy, this does not exist. Hoes have got a chemical composition of manganese and carbon in different proportions.

With that said, I would like to say that reading through the committee report, I have noticed that there are a number of contradictions and discrepancies. So, I would like to be helped, especially by the line ministry, to sort out these contradictions and discrepancies.

On page 13, the committee report gives us items that were supplied to the internally displaced peoples in the North and Northeast, spelling out the different items, quantities and rates at which these items were procured, the total amounts and the amounts delivered. I would like to call the attention of this House and your attention, Mr Speaker, to an item that was supplied by the Chillington Company Ltd, and to say that these were hoes of the Crocodile brand. The quantity, according to the committee report, that the Solicitor-General approved was 300,000 hoes. However, when you turn to annex 6 -(Mr Bikwasizehi rose_)– Can I finish sir? Annex 6 -(Interjection)- I will give you the opportunity. I am not cooking up any figures; I am quoting from the committee report. 

Annex 6 is a letter written to the Permanent Secretary of the Office of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda. In their letter, Crocodile tools states as follows - I will not read the whole letter but just an extract that is relevant to my argument - “We confirm to you that out of the order of 345,000 pieces of hoes, we have so far delivered 184,840.” This to me means that the order that was placed was actually for 345,000 hoes as opposed to the 300,000 that is clearly stated here. So what agreement did the Office of the Prime Minister or the government, enter into with Chillington Company Ltd? Simple arithmetic shows a discrepancy of 45,000, hoes which can be valued at Shs 157.5 million - I will take the information now.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I informed the House last time that the 45,000 hoes arose because of money saved in the whole process and that, therefore, we got more hoes than the 300,000. I gave that information and it is on record on our Hansard.

MS AKIROR: I seek clarification from the honourable minister. The date on this annex is 03 November 2007. So, if there was a saving of 45,000 hoes, the committee report of February 2008 should have been able to, at least, appreciate that for once your ministry has saved something. Maybe the committee chairman can explain why he could not appreciate that saving of 157 million in his report?

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you very much. I would like to clarify that point further. Mr Speaker, the issue of the 300,000 hoes came about because we are looking at the concluded agreement between the OPM at the procurement time and the company, which supplies the hoes. But as the minister said, later when they saved some money, they were able to procure more using that money. But here we are talking about the actual contract and procurement at that time. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, the honourable minister and the chair of the committee. I am getting a bit confused here. The table on page 13 is on contract agreements. If you procured 345,000, you must have entered some contract agreement for procurement of 345,000 but if the contract agreement said that you have agreed, through the contract process, that the supplier supplies 300,000 hoes, was the subsequent supply bid for? Was it contracted? If it were, it should have been reflected in the contract agreement. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank honourable colleagues for those interjections but personally I think the question still stands and the question is: what is difference between the agreement signed with the Solicitor-General and that understanding between the Office of the Prime Minister and Crocodile tools that is referred to in the letter? 

The other contradiction that I see is between what appears on table 25 of the report and the various reports of tests that were issued by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. First of all, I would like to comment on the method of sampling, which I think was not scientific in nature. In statistics, you have a whole range of methods that can be used for sampling from a population. As such, what I would have expected the committee to do was to sample scientifically before bringing those samples for the test. I think that was an omission and therefore a weakness that would, in a way, affect the conclusions of the committee report.

With that said, I think when the committee writes or reports on page 25 based on the analysis carried out by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards that the samples that were tested were defective and they go ahead to say, “Look here, they are after all okay in their recommendation,” I  get confused. I would like to ask the committee to sort out that contradiction. The other contradiction that I notice, and this is a question that goes to the Office of the Prime Minister, is over quantities ordered as opposed to those delivered. I would like to draw your attention to page 18 of the committee report wherein under Katakwi District, the district received 17,000 pieces of hoes more than what the OPM claimed to have delivered. So actually you have not just 10 or 100 or 1,000 but you have 17,000 hoes delivered, way and above the requirement. This is just an example. It really needs God’s providence to sort out things in the Office of the Prime Minister, especially the Department of Disaster Preparedness. 

A lot has been said and you have given a very good example, Sir, of soft wood as opposed to hard wood. This is engineering in nature. I did not know lawyers actually understood some engineering. In the case of the donations from China, the requirement was hard wood but instead that donation came as soft wood, and I think our country needs to be fully awake on whatever comes from outside. If they are not going to serve the purpose for which they are required, then probably we would rather not do with them than to take them for the sake of friendship. 

Finally, the committee report is non-committal. Throughout the report they have continued to use phrases like, “could be”, “may have been”, which to me are non-committal. In this deal, my understanding is that the people in the driving seat are the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, and his staff. They are the ones who put across or initiate the procurement. They are the ones whose responsibility is to monitor the – (Technical failure)

THE SPEAKER: Let us suspend the proceedings for five minutes to examine what is wrong with the system.

(The House was suspended at 3.53 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.00 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

MR AMURIAT: It did not do due diligence on what it had been asked to perform and I would like to help them by suggesting that the failure was as a result of the failure on the part of the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees because he failed, absolutely, to supervise this operation. I would like to suggest that he should be made to take political responsibility for the failures of his department. We are not going to continue sitting back and watching matters related to relief and disaster being mismanaged and yet we have a whole minister who is responsible for this department. This kind of shoddy procurement has translated into what has just happened here this afternoon in Parliament. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think we have sufficiently debated this matter. Yes, Member from Kalaki county.

4.02
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise my concerns relating to the report of the Committee on Agriculture. I perused through the report critically and the first observation that I came up with was that the report was more of a defensive account rather than providing solutions to the concerns that were raised by the concerned Ugandans. 

Why do I say so? When you go through the report, on page 33, paragraph 9.3 and page 25, they are contradictory. Page 33 of the report, paragraph 9.3 reads: “Whereas the procured farm tools like hoes (crocodile brand), pangas (diamond brand), and axes (diamond brand) were of good quality except for the sickles that were provided by the Chinese…” But if you come to page 27, all that was said to be good failed to meet the test. That is one of the reasons that made me confirm that this report is more of a defensive account. 

Secondly, if you come to page 33, 9.2, it says that “The very low viability of the maize and groundnuts seeds in Gulu stores could have been due to the very poor storage conditions as well as overstaying in the stores.” But if you look at that - when the contractors or the suppliers were awarded the contract, they were supposed to be sure that they had storage facilities that could make the seeds that were procured viable for germination. So, it is not the responsibility of the government or the ministry to prove or to conform to the provisions of storage because I know very well the conditions under which the suppliers were qualified to supply. It was because they said that they had good storage facilities. But to this effect you find that it is being defensive by saying that the seeds could not germinate because they were not stored well. Whose responsibility was that? 

When you come to 9.4, it says: “Although the Epuri-puri variety of sorghum is multipurpose…” Mr Speaker, I come from Teso region where sorghum is grown highly, we have never used Epuri-puri for food. 

Let me go to the conclusions. In the terms of reference, the committee clearly stated that they were to establish the magnitude of financial loss but the conclusion that the committee gave did not establish the magnitude of financial loss. So, it proves to us that this report was more of a defensive one because as of now, the most viable thing that this august House should debate is to establish how much money government has lost in this defective contract but the committee has not come out with it. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Member for giving way. I am rising on a point of clarification. The honourable member is from Teso, the affected region. I have also heard Members from Northern Uganda where this issue squarely lies and most of you are commenting on the quality of the report. I just want to seek a clarification from the Members from the affected communities whether you had the opportunity to interface with the committee so that you participate in improving the quality of the report; or did the not committee invite you? I just want to be clarified, either from you or the chairperson of the committee whether you, as Members of Parliament from the affected regions, had the chance and opportunity to make an input to the preparation of the report. Thank you.

MR EUKU: I thank my honourable colleague for the clarification he is seeking. Mr Speaker, I am a Member of the Committees of Public Accounts, and Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I did not submit my presentation to the committee, so I am raising this as a concerned Member of Parliament on the issues that were raised. 

Mr Speaker, if you go to the report from Crocodile Tool Company (U) Ltd, it reads: “By our findings, 300 pieces of hoes meant for school children were loaded by mistake and we are prepared to have them returned.”  So, it now gives you the picture that when the hoes are supposed to be taken to school children, they are supposed to be defective. I believe it is our children who are supposed to be trained and the main theme of our economy is on agriculture. But if we begin supplying the school children with defective materials and tools, are we really going to groom them well? There will be a caution here, Mr Speaker. 

The last part is the report from Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) where the inspection of the above consignment from the Chinese that were imported. The national Bureau of Standards was not given a chance to inspect and it was done by one of the officers from the Prime Minister’s Office called, Mr Were. There was also a clearing agent called Mr Fagayo. 

Now Mr Speaker, why do we establish institutions and we do not utilise them? So, the officer who failed or denied UNBS an opportunity to inspect and to establish the standards of the tools that were supposed to be taken to the needy IDPs should be brought to book. And the negligence of the Prime Minister’s Office - the department of Disaster Preparedness should be brought to book. They have the authority; they also have the political supervision authority but instead they looked at the issue happening and were just quiet.  As I said, the report was more of defensive. 
 
Mr Speaker, I would have wished to give my concluding remarks by suggesting what the committee should have done. One, the Office of the Prime Minister, the department of Disaster Preparedness and in particular the ministers who failed the test of political supervision, leading to enormous loss of sums of money yet to be discovered, be brought to book and they should be disciplined by the appointing authority.

Two, the officer from the Office of the Prime Minister who denied UNBS access to inspect as mandated by law or operating legislations should also be brought to book and be disciplined.  Also punitive action should be taken on the suppliers who robe this country in broad daylight while the line Executive took the observation role. 

Mr Speaker, I suggest that the suppliers who knowingly according to the Penal Code Act, supplied defective farm seeds and farm implements and tools be brought to book for breach of contract with Government. I really pray that they be brought to book, be prosecuted and we make recoveries of the loss that Government has incurred. I thank you.

4.12
MR ODUMAN OKELLO (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I need to be guided by the line ministry, the OPM and also the committee based on page 13 of the report only. Now page 13 of the report gives us the quantities that were assigned, that were agreed to be supplied between the OPM and the suppliers. It also gives us the quantities delivered by the suppliers. 

Mr Speaker, my concern is on the balances because I have no idea whether the suppliers were paid upfront. I have no idea whether they were paid on the basis of deliveries but I am concerned about the balances that should be to the benefit of the people in the communities that were affected. 

A quick computation, Mr Speaker, will be shocking to us because the totals of the amount involved would need to be accounted for, for the beneficiaries. The first item Chillington hoes, the balance according to my calculations is Shs 533 million, which needs to be accounted for; pangas, Shs 139.4million; axes, Shs 336.6 million; maize, Shs 356.9 million; beans, Shs 401.6 million; sorghum, Shs 476 million; millet, Shs 351.25 million.  The grand total is Shs 2.604845 billion. 

Now, Mr Speaker, we need to know, Government agreed to help the people in the affected areas, contracts were signed, we do not know whether the contractors are still bound to supply those that are due that have just been announced. We do not know whether the contractors were paid upfront in accordance with the contracts they signed with the Office of the Prime Minister. We do not know whether they were being paid on delivery basis. Otherwise Shs 2.6 billion, Mr Speaker, is what we are talking about at stake and that is excluding the cost of the defective items that were delivered. That is just non-performance on deliveries. So, we really need to come clear and take political responsibility for what should have been for the benefit of the people of Northern and Eastern Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.16
MS REBECCA AMUGE (INDEPENDENT, Woman Representative, Lira):  I want to thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. Rt hon. Speaker, the IDP policy of August 2003 by the Office of the Prime Minister mandates the Office of the Prime Minister to take the overall responsibility for the matters related to IDP camps and IDPs. I want to thank the Office of the Prime Minister for having tried to make a timely intervention during the emergency period. However, to me I think that the problem was coordination. I think that the problem was coordination and I think people are not looking at this. I saw the Office of the Prime Minister in the districts moving in a very uncoordinated way. The department of production in then districts claimed that they were not involved except at one point when they were called for a seminar and that was the end. I think this must be corrected.

We are told that these seeds, which did not germinate were procured in accordance with the PPDA Act, 2003. I know in that committee, we must have had a technical person, who were those technical people who recommended that the seeds were right? 

I also want to bring to the attention of the House that these seeds which did not germinate had the tag with signatures of the persons who are in charge of seed inspection in the Ministry of Agriculture. Actually the signature of the senior seed inspector was tagged on these seeds which did not germinate. Where was the problem?

Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that we should have a clear budget line for the persons who are supposed to be involved in this kind of arrangement in future. How do you expect the districts to distribute the seeds in a timely manner to the persons affected yet without logistics? That was a very big problem which we must look at. 

 I am perturbed to read from the report that a civil servant who knows the standing order of public service ignored a senior member of the ministry when they are asked to perform some job. I think this brings a very critical issue here. I was thinking; could it be insubordination on the political wing? Could it be the way they were recruited? Maybe they have god-fathers whom they lean on. Or could it be our behaviour as political leaders in such ministries? Where is the problem? It is not the first time the civil servants tend to say, “I do not deal with politicians.” Or could it be because the senior political leadership is castigated before their subordinates openly to make them think they are also useless? That is to the ruling party. How do you discipline your ministers or other political leaders when they go wrong? Before the subordinates!

As I conclude, I want to find out - our people wasted their little labour and finances to prepare their fields and they got nothing out of it, who compensates them? As we speak, the people in Northern Uganda have nothing to eat. What plans do we have for them after these seeds have failed? 

The districts have centres like NARO and the ministry is simply ignoring them. Can we please use the structures that we have? And I am calling upon this House to unveil those companies so that we see the people behind them. We are not going to talk of “Crocodile”; who is this managing director or the owner of “Crocodile”? That is where they are always hiding. Corruption is so high in some companies because they keep on hiding behind the name “company”. But they are always the same  –(Interruption)

MR OCULA: I thank the Member for giving me way. When we talk about who are behind these companies, I take it from where hon. Odit submitted that a certain company called Akuku Farm Seeds had even the capacity to stock its own sorghum and even forced Government to buy sorghum from it. I take this from –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, this is the second time this statement is being made on the Floor of this House that Akuku forced Government – that is what he has just said. Is it in order for the hon. Member and the one before to say a private company has capacity to force Government? Can he demonstrate this? Is he in order to make allegations which he cannot establish?

THE SPEAKER: Are you in position to substantiate that there was force used? 

MR OCULA: In a bureaucracy like the way Government is handled, a Government can be forced to act only by people who can make decisions and that is by the minister responsible, like hon. Kabwegyere, who is responsible for disaster and for this sector. He could force Government using his powers as a decision maker for a company to-

THE SPEAKER: No, the point is about that company which you said forced the Government. Can you substantiate or you are just depending on somebody’s allegation?

MR OCULA: The point I am raising comes from what hon. Odit said earlier that somehow somewhere, this company actually forced Government to act. I am wondering and I want very much to know the directors of this company that can force Government to act in a certain way. Is it the minister who is in charge of the sector? Is it the second in command, hon. Ecweru? Who is the director?

THE SPEAKER: I take it that what you are saying is that you are just relying on what you heard from some other person. Therefore, you cannot substantiate. You have no information of your own. 

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, it is through hon. Odit. 

MS AMUGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I conclude, we are told that-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ocula, let us clear this.

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, the Member on the Floor raised an issue of companies which could have got involved in these shoddy supplies. Earlier on, hon. Odit had raised an issue – I am connecting these two now to the Akuku company which hon. Odit talked about which could cost Government. I am wondering how a Government can be forced by a private company to act in a certain way. 

THE SPEAKER: We said that the record should not consider his submission because it is not well debated. 

MS AMUGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I conclude, I plead for protection of farmers in this country. We were told that even roasted seeds were supplied to the IDPs. In our place, if somebody gave you roasted seed – the name given to such a person is different but I cannot mention it here. 

Mr Speaker, the farmers are the bulk of the population of this country. I therefore plead that they must be protected. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I intend to end the debate by giving opportunity to the Leader of the Opposition and to hon. Butime and then I will ask the minister and chairperson to speak.

4.27
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to make my modest contribution to the debate of this report. 

Mr Speaker, we in Parliament have the responsibility to the people of Uganda and to ourselves; and to ourselves that responsibility means that when we stand on the floor of the House and committee reports or Bills are given to us, we do honest scrutiny on these documents and we stand and make honest contributions. I have listened to many Members making their contributions. Of course, in the beginning, part of the debate clearly showed that member’s did not scrutinise this report closely. 

I remember the contribution of hon. Byandala who fervently defended the validity or the goodness of what has transpired. I took the trouble to read this report, and I cannot fail to register my disappointment with the report that is being debated and particularly elements in it which I did not expect my hon. brother, Deus Bikwasizehi, with whom we have been in the Committee on Agriculture for many years and who is a professional- he was in seed companies, he has handled procurement in Government – that this report went through his hands and contains the things that it contains is to me a point of disappointment. 

Let me just illustrate with elements in this report. In fact, Mr Speaker, I even reflected on whether we did not make a mistake in not asking the Vice Chair of the agriculture committee to chair this report because the chair and the principal minister, Prof. Tarsis Kabwegwere, comes from the same district –(Interjections)– yes, wait. This is because I would not want reports to be misconstrued. Allow me to go into the contents of the report then you will see what I mean. I will use two elements just to illustrate my point.

Honourable members, you remember that when the issue of seeds and fake tools came up, there was a major clash between the Chairman of Gulu District, hon. Norbert Mao and the minister. In fact it was their newspaper confrontation that prompted the issue to be considered important enough for the committee to resolve.

I would like to let Members know that we had the problem of seeds in my district, and then I went to Gulu and found the same problem of seeds. It was me who suggested to hon. Norbert Mao, I said, “Tell your technical staff to take random samples of the seeds, germinate them and you will get a fair picture of what kind of seeds were supplied to you and with that you will be able to make an objective statement about the quality of the seeds.”

Fortunately, they followed it up and in the analysis that was of critical concern, it was found that maize, of which 32 tonnes were supplied and by a very reputable seed company, Fica seeds is a reputable seed company, four percent germinated. 

For the groundnuts, 32 tonnes were supplied by Akuku Farm Seed Supplies; but I have been in the agriculture business and I buy seeds to plant, but I first heard about this company in the report of the committee, yet it was chosen to supply Government with seeds – 15 percent of the groundnuts germinated.

Now, let me refer you to the content of the committee report in regard to the seeds of Gulu. If you go to page 21, the first bullet, the report says, “In Gulu, the first batch of seeds was received on 30 January 2007, and it coincided with the rains of the first season. The seeds were, however, not distributed until May 2007. Long storage and poor storage facilities could have affected the viability of the seeds. 

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you, hon. Prof. Latigo for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prof. has indicated that I have been a seed expert and I worked in seed for seven years and I have certificates in that field. I visited the Gulu store and as everybody knows, a seed is a living thing. In the Gulu store, there is no way you can keep there seed for more than a month and you think it will be viable, considering the conditions, aeration and the temperatures. The committee had every reason to believe that this might have been the cause of the poor germination or the dying – actually the seeds were dying; equally groundnuts were there- there are actually still lying there and they are dead, as pointed out. So it is from our observation – the wrong storage of the seeds, that is seed store, which is not suitable, should have been the cause. And I talk from a technical point of view. Thank you very much.

Ms ACEN: Thank you very much. I would like to seek clarification from the Chairman of the Committee. I would love to thank them for the report. I also want to thank the Office of the Prime Minister – but then I have got one or two issues that I want to seek clarification on from the chairperson. 

There are two words that are commonly used by the Office of the Prime Minister - food supplies, seed and implements. Now what is food, that is an emergence to be eaten, and it gets finished. Seeds I expect, as my hon. Colleague has just said, it is something that we are to multiply to get more of its kind. 

Now the clarification I want to seek is, we are talking about seed certification. And this is done to control the quality of seed and it takes procedures; there is a process to seed certification, the parent material, the breeders, the basic seed, then the certified seed, we are talking about, that which was supposed to be given to the people of Amuria.

I want to seek clarification – what is the current situation of the seed farm that we read about in school, that Uganda has got a seed farm called Kisindi in Masindi District and research stations? We thought the research stations would be working hand in hand with the seed farms to supply certified seeds whenever a need arises. And then also the other thing is clarification-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is now question of procedure, because the hon. Member who was on the floor was Prof. Latigo, the Leader of the Opposition. Now when you stand up to give a clarification, either you give a clarification to the Member on the floor and you seek him to clarify, but you cannot seek clarification from a Member who is not holding the floor, but the points have been taken and I hope at an appropriate time they will be answered. Prof. Latigo cannot answer those points of clarification because they were directed to the minister; but they will be taken, hon. Member.

PROF. LATIGO: No, I think let me proceed because the points I want to make are important. The chairperson of the committee sought clarification. I will answer the clarification after I have pointed out the content of his own report.

If you went to page 28, the first paragraph, again talks about the same thing which was said on page 21; “this resulted in delay of some of the seeds in the district stored for over four months, this could have led to the deterioration of seeds for none of the stores was designed for seed storage.” So the information you wanted to give me you already have it in your report. 

Then at the bottom of that report it is the same thing. “The groundnut seeds that were still lying in Gulu.” - this is the third time you are referring to that Gulu case- “the groundnut seeds that were still lying in Gulu stores were poorly packaged, imperforated polythene bags were used to package the seeds. This literary suffocated- “- this is your statement, but you are still insisting on the deteriorated conditions. “The committee feels that this was unprofessional and could be one of the major causes of poor germination.”

Then you go to page 33, 9.2 in his conclusion, it is the same statement, “The very low viability of the maize and groundnuts seeds in Gulu stores could have been due to the very poor storage conditions as well as overstaying in the stores. The seeds which were delivered in January 2007 were not distributed until May. In specific terms, as for the groundnut seeds, the unprofessional handling including packaging by the Akuku farm seed company could have contributed to rapid deterioration.” That is okay.

Now, let me come to my point, and that is why I said I was surprised by the fact that it was my hon. Colleague who handled this. You know maize seeds, if you shield them after two years, you will still plant them and they will germinate. Secondly, if you went anywhere up country, and you look at where they sell these seeds; none of them have shops which have storage specifications. 

Thirdly, and I can bet because I did agriculture, in fact I taught the chairman- (Laughter) - I can bet you, that under the conditions that they found those seeds in Gulu, if those seeds were original good seeds, they would remain viable for more than a year. Because it is not anywhere stated that you found the seeds exposed to rain which would pre-germinate them before you supplied them; you merely talked about conditions, which conditions you have not specified. I happen to come from Pader district, where your own report says, and Parabongo sub-county, that is my sub county, where your own report says that the groundnuts which were supplied there did not germinate, and it was true, they never germinated. 

I wish we could use our professionalism to investigate a little more and say who are these suppliers? Who are these suppliers?  

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am really constrained. I did not want to raise this point of order. I have been waiting because hon. Latigo made a serious allegation and insinuated that some of the findings of this report could have been influenced by hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere coming from the same district as the chairperson, Hon. Deus Bikwasizehi and he actually stated that he wished that the Vice Chairperson would have been the one to handle this report. And he went ahead and said, we should listen to him, he is going to collaborate - I have waited and waited, the information he is giving has nothing to do with hon. Kabwegyere coming from the same district with hon. Bikwasizehi. 

Mr Speaker, when this report was debated, I thought it was the report of the committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries and not the chairperson as hon. Bikwasizehi and recommendations are for the committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries. Is it therefore in order for hon. Latigo, professor, Leader of the Opposition, really to try to link the findings that they could have been influenced by the chairperson coming from the same district with hon. Kabwegyere who happens to be the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I heard a statement some 10 minutes ago and it would have been proper at that time when the statement was raised to seek a point of order in the sense of improper motive, unfortunately nobody raised it and in our proceedings, we have limitations; having sat on that point for 10 minutes really, I would not expect you to come out. If you had raised it then -(Laughter)- if you had raised it- yes, I waited for somebody because that was imputation of improper motive but nobody did raise it. You cannot after 10 minutes come out and raise it.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much Mr Speaker and I would like to reassure the government side and in particular my good friend Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere and hon. chair of the committee that I meant no improper motive. May I proceed with where I was.

The other thing which I wanted to pick just to illustrate the difficulty -

THE SPEAKER: But professor, we are time constrained.

PROF. LATIGO: Just allow me – it is just to pick on one item, sickles. In this report 24,000 sickles were donated by China and then in the table, about things that were awarded contracts and delivered which is on Annex 2, 70,000 sickles; contract to supply 70,000 sickles were given out and the same table tells you 70,000 were delivered.

Then just go to the report -(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you very much my colleague. The information I gave actually on page 13, I said we disregard the column of the delivery, the actual fact – the 70,000 sickles which were contracted to be procured by the Office of the Prime Minister have never been delivered and I have inquired and known that up to now, they have not been delivered yet. What was delivered was poor quality so the office of the Prime Minister rejected that. So, they have not been delivered, save for the 72,000 which were donated by China, that is what was delivered. But the 70,000 have not been delivered. I beg to correct that. 

PROF. LATIGO: You see that is the problem I have – you see the problem with Annex 2 which confirms what is contained in the text is that they even have the vehicle numbers and the persons who delivered. You see, and when you go in that column in that annex 2, where vehicle numbers are quoted, the vehicles that delivered. So this must have been extracted from delivery notes- you actually find that 70,300 sickles were delivered, you see- then – now when you go to the content of the report, you really get confused. 

On page 13, the office of the Prime Minister also rejected sickles, which were supplied because they did not meet the required standards. Page 33 “..except for sickles that could not meet the specified standards by UNBS and were rejected by Office of the Prime Minister..”

And then on the same page they say no single procured sickle had been delivered to the beneficiaries and then on page 32, on the basis of that contract for sickles, signed in February 2007, selected supplier failed to deliver all that was required, that he delivered in part. Now, what is what in this report- you get completely lost. 

Arising from that as I conclude, arising from those two examples, I ran into a problem of, One, the management of the process. Now we know that the Office of the Prime Minister managed this process, but if you look in this document, you will never know who was responsible. It is not there, not the PS, not the Director of Relief or whatever. The only names from Prime minister’s office are these poor drivers who delivered and their signatures are on it and you ask yourself, who was managing this process? Did you investigate them? 

First, I want Parliament to really take keen interest on the role of the political leaders below: the Prime Minister; secondly, on the role of the PS and his technical staff; thirdly, I ask myself, what was these procurement process - the report says, “If procurement was done in accordance with PPDA....” But I ask my self, did you examine the advertisement for these supplies?  Did you examine the bidders to make sure that right bidders were the ones who were selected? Did you examine the contracts where the specific conditions for the supplies and the penalties arising from failure were done? 

When you look at this report, you even get shocked because the table quoted is actually a table from the Parliamentary Budget Office. So, I ask myself, “Where is the table from the Office of the Prime Minister whom we are investigating?” If you were given the table, why didn’t you annex it here for us to examine those documents, instead of attaching parliamentary documents – the minister can get up and deny the content completely and you will be stuck.

On the seeds, the committee talks about the seed certification people having been requested to help the process, but nowhere is it stated that they were part of the process.

Lastly, and this was said by hon. Oduman, I would have thought that the committee would have been very interested in verifying what had been supplied in real documentary terms. They were also supposed to examine the expenditures and to give us a record from the Office of the Prime Minister of how much each of these suppliers was paid. In the absence of all these, what are we supposed to do? Just accept that the committee has done its work and sit back? They are glaring questions, which I would expect the Parliamentary Committee - and they have done a good job before – to have come to critically help us. 

We are going into the rehabilitation phase of Northern Uganda and you are talking about more than $600 million. So, if you cannot handle seeds and tools, what is the Office of the Prime Minister going to do with that more than $600 million? That is why it is important, Mr Prime Minister, that the things that are happening in your office be cleaned up. My hope was that Parliament would help to clean it up. In the absence, I would suggest that over and above this report, a small committee should be instituted to review things that – you know, you find the committee has got findings and in its recommendations it is talking about bureau of standards, things that have nothing to do with their findings. You ask yourself, “What do we do, honestly? Isn’t something wrong here or I am just too dump? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.57
MAJ.TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kabarole): Mr Speaker, I have also read the report and I can appreciate the stages that one has got to go through to deliver seeds to the North and east. The stages are very many and there are technical officers almost at every stage. If one is not lucky or careful, he/she can have a problem at the end of that stage. You have got to check the standard of the seeds or implements at the first stage; the purchasing, procurement and storage at the Prime Minister’s Office in the stores, transportation of those items and so on. And when they are received at the district, it is the district disaster management committee to take charge; that committee is responsible, on receipt of those items. The minister relies on that district disaster management committee to help him deliver to the last person.

Therefore, the CAO of the district, who is the chairperson of the disaster management committee, if he is not well trained and careful, he can cause a problem and the minister in the Office of the Prime Minister will be blamed. So, it is the district disaster management chairperson, the CAO, who really takes responsibility at the district level.

Hon. Prof. Latigo is asking: “Who was managing the process?” At the Prime Minister’s level, it is the commissioner in charge of relief; at the district level, it is the CAO who is the chairman of the disaster management committee.

Personally, Mr Speaker, I am really satisfied that the items followed the process. The process on page 11 that there was a district disaster management committee; the process on page 12 on the types of seeds and farm implements to procure for the resettlement of IDPs; the process on page 14, on the regulatory bodies, which were involved in the process. It is only on page 15 –(Interjection)– I decline to take the information. I know the information she is going to give; we discussed it and disagreed –(Laughter)- so, I will not take it. 

On page 15, Mr Speaker, there is certificate number CM2007/155, where the sickles, which were examined, were found not to be of the standard expected because the standard here was the FAO standard.

Mr Speaker, I want to draw your attention to page 29 and this is my main point. It is about the donation from China. The committee says that the procured axes and pangas, all of Diamond brand and the Crocodile hoes by the Office of the Prime Minister were of good quality. However, the donation from China, hoes, axes and sickles, all of Ant brand, were junk; of poor quality. For the chairman to allow a report to refer to a donation as junk is bad politics. There should be a better word to use instead of the word junk because this was a donation. I think we are thinking of junk helicopters, junk what. Please, this is a sovereign country which donated to us sickles. You can use these sickles to cut grass, they are not for trees or timber; they are for grass and you can use them, but you cannot refer to them as junk. It is totally unacceptable! 

Mr Speaker, I request that this word be expunged from this report and we use a word like “quality not satisfactory” but not “junk”. (Laughter) I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now, can I call upon the chairman? Who starts? Oh, the chairman, it is your report. Is the minister not saying anything? No because this is his report; he is the one to conclude.

4.59
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done. I thank Parliament and you, Mr Speaker, for having handled this question with meticulousness that it has been handled with.

Mr Speaker, this question of implements is simply a tip of an iceberg. Government has been taking measures to deal with the situation in Northern Uganda arising out of the political situation that has arisen there. This honourable House is fully aware of the national policy for internally displaced persons. That document was discussed at many levels and I would like to point out what it says. The mission is to ensure that internally displaced persons enjoy the same rights and freedoms under the Constitution and all other laws like all other Ugandans. And the policy goal is to establish institutions for managing IDP situations, specify roles and responsibilities of the institutions and humanitarian and development agencies, the displaced community and other stakeholders while managing internal displacement.

The policy objectives: To minimise internal displacement; to minimise the effects of internal displacement by providing an enabling environment for upholding the rights and entitlements of the IDPs; to promote the integrated and coordinated response mechanism to address the causes and effects of internal displacement; to assist in the safe and voluntary return of IDPs; to guide development of sectoral programmes for recovery through rehabilitation and reconstruction of social and economic infrastructure in support of return and resettlement of IDPs.

Mr Speaker, this was published in August 2004. In mid April 2006, the document, which this also House is familiar with, our North Government Position Paper on Northern Uganda, and that also details what government has undertaken to handle the situation in the North.

On page 8 it says, political leadership: Northern Uganda. Over the last decade, the Government of Uganda, supported by international development agencies, has launched a number of processes and programmes aimed at addressing the crisis in the North. It is acknowledged, however, that these have at times been incoherent and not linked to the necessary humanitarian development and security system. As a result, 12 points - and I do not want to really to go into this because of the time but this document is available - were identified to be addressed in handling the situation in Northern Uganda.

In May, the joint monitoring committee was formed; the emergency plan for humanitarian intervention for the North. I would like also to bring out what this document was meant to do. First, the membership -(Interjections)- I would like to plead that this matter is so important and so we should address it logically. I would want you, Mr Speaker, to help me not be interrupted as I address this challenge.    

The committee of this House –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, arising from the report that was presented to this House by the Chairperson of the Agriculture Committee, there were clear questions that were put to the minister and I think it should have been the responsibility of the minister to respond to those questions. I am utterly surprised that the minister has come here to lecture the House on government policy which to begin with was not part of the report. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for the minister to dwell on matters that do not hinge directly to what is being discussed today, that the minister originates new debate on a matter that is quite clear as was presented by the chairperson of the committee? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is clear that we are debating a report submitted by the committee on items that went bad in the North. I think we should concentrate on that and how to prevent a recurrence in future. If I was handling it, that is how I would do it. This is history but in future this thing should not happen. Let us do this and the other.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have not in my own mind imagined that this is a lecture room. Not at all! I am talking as the person responsible for disaster preparedness and refugees which includes relief, and the issue that has been at stake is on the question of relief.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, their concern is that you are not dealing with the specific subject of the report.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, on 20 February 2007, I wrote a letter to the chairpersons of all the districts - I am going to mention chief administrative officers, resident district commissioners, district disaster management committees of Gulu, Amuru, Kitgum, Pader, Lira, Dokolo, Oyam, Kaberamaido, Soroti, Katakwi, Amuria, Adjumani and Masindi - regarding the resettlement kit containing seeds and agriculture implements: “I am asking you to confirm the arrival of the following items sent to your district with details of how, where and when they were distributed to the people as they access their land for cultivation this season. And these items include: Maize, beans, sorghum, millet, groundnuts, hoes, pangas, axes and sickles. It is imperative that these items reach the people in time for this season. 

As they receive them, we should also plan for the marketing of the surplus produce by the time of harvest so that the economic change and results can begin to compensate for the time lost in the camps. I am also aware, as well as you are, that there are other agencies which are contributing similarly to the resettlement kit. You are enjoined to keep track of what is happening so that we can maximise the resettlement impact. 

I am copying this letter to all the MPs with an appeal to them to join hands with the DDMC and the district sub-county executives and councillors alongside the chief religious leaders and the people of goodwill to intimately involve themselves in maximising the resettlement impact. For failure to do this is tantamount to committing a mortal sin against the people. 

I am however confident that every effort will be made to achieve the success of liberating people from camp life to self actualisation. Shortcomings and shortfalls should be brought to our attention as soon as possible so that remedial action can be taken without delay.” 

This letter was sent to all the MPs: hon. Ocan, hon. Omach – sorry, (Laughter)- hon. Alaso, they received this letter. This is the importance our office attaches to the implements that we send.

Mr Speaker, the issue was raised –

MR SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we can simply handle this by just dealing with the subject and ending it and trying to find ways of preventing recurrence. Yes, something went wrong –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I want even to argue very strongly that this report talks about shortcomings, which any normal human being probably could encounter. But I want us to own up that this job of resettling the people in IDP camps is a job all of us must participate in, including hon. Alaso – [Members: “Order”] - I want this House –(Interruption)

MR SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it is my prayer that we end this debate peacefully. We are coming to the end of the –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I think history is here for me to be understood properly. If this House drowns my contribution in loud points of order, I think it is a mistake that honourable members can make. I kept quiet when contributions were being made; I think I should be given a chance to answer as effectively as I can. If, Mr Speaker, you are going to allow the drowning of my contribution –(Interruption)

MR SPEAKER: I am not allowing it. Let us end this debate peacefully. Let us be tolerant of each other. He may not speak what you want to hear but let us listen to him and we conclude.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I withdraw hon. Alaso’s name from the record. (Laughter)

MR SPEAKER: Let us not get personal. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I have been considering how to present the answers to all the comments that have been made and I felt that the report speaks for itself. One can edit it, one can see the shortcomings, but I think it makes a point. One, that there was an intention arrived at, at a point in the advancement of efforts to change the situation in the North including these documents I was referring to, which seem to excite reaction, including these PRDP from which I wanted to quote. 

We addressed the emergency in many forms. The Office of the Prime Minister coordinates ministries: the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Water, the Ministry of Transport, Defence, Internal Affairs as we concentrate on addressing the challenges of resettlement. This issue of implements came in at a point when we were trying to emerge from the emergency phase. As people were now supposed to move from camps, we wanted them equipped to be able to restart their lives. And what a pleasure that it would be that as people leave they have a hoe, they have seeds and they can plant. 

I would like at this point in time to really thank the people in Northern Uganda who on getting the seeds, went ahead and planted them; and actually the yields were dramatic. (Laughter) If anybody is talking about sorghum and travelled during that period of sorghum, sorghum was extensively seen - maize, beans and so on.  

Mr Speaker, this was meant to help the people as they leave the camps to access the land, and the land has been waiting for many years. And this I must say, those who went out to do this did a good job. I would like, for example, to talk about Pader  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we received the report and we have scrutinized it. There were shortcomings and some of the shortcomings caused the damage, which we experienced. I think at this point it would be that we have appreciated the shortcomings and we shall improve on them so that this does not happen again. That should be the approach.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, if only Members who have had the Floor and have talked at length without interruption could also be tolerant; democracy is about tolerance. For example, it has now come to our knowledge in the ministry and I think in government as a whole that if we were to distribute seeds in the form of groundnuts, there has to be extra care different from what we undertook for the simple reason  –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of this committee and I had no intentions whatsoever to stand up and challenge the honourable minister who has appeared before us as a committee. However, I am compelled because the manner in which his explanations are going on is infuriating my side and I believe even those who have read the report on the other side. The Rt Hon. Speaker has tried all in vain to guide the honourable minister, a professor of sociology, that he should own up where things have gone wrong and move forward, but the minister goes ahead even to annoy us by saying that the seeds germinated and those which were planted had enormous production when the viability is said to be at 4 percent! I think the best we could do at this time –(Mr Amama Mbabazi rose_)- allow me to finish, Mr Minister for Security, allow me to develop my point. You see that is why you are failing to answer questions promptly and throwing the House into disorder.  

I think procedurally you should own up to what has happened and answer the questions that have been put to you. But when you begin going around, being proud and making whatever was mentioned as being wrong to be correct, I think you are missing the point. Own up, accept where you have gone wrong and see how we can improve for future performances. Otherwise if you continue going on this way, we might open up a debate, which may not be good for us. So procedurally, is the honourable minister right, instead of owning up to the report and accepting that things have gone wrong and where to improve, for him to go around in circles, is he procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us soberly handle this matter and conclude it.

PROF. KABWEGYRERE: Mr Speaker, I have nothing to hide. There is a report; my reaction to it should not be in the form of hon. Wadri’s presentation or anybody else’s. I have a history, I exist and I have a job so why should you not allow me to say what I want to say? It is only fair! You do not know how frustrated we can be in these positions! I want this House to know –(Interjections) To me, there is the historical truth; we have reached at a point where many things have changed. When talking about the North there was a time when it was believed that government was sending poisoned food but now we are talking of growing food! So, it is an improvement and this should be taken and understood in the history of Uganda and the politics of this country.  

We are not going to be gagged by people who probably do not want to know the role we are playing. I do not want for example, hon. Latigo, how can hon. Latigo a professor like hon. Kabwegyere say that because I come from Bushenyi, and he comes from Bushenyi that this can colour the quality of the report? I have taught for over 25 years; I never marked a person favourably because he was from my area. So, let us give each other a chance and address these challenges fully.  

I went ahead of these seeds, I went ahead of these resettlement kits to all the districts, except Dokolo and Amuria. Now, what was the purpose? And I was on radios saying: “These things are coming, please, be ready, the DDMC, RDCs be prepared because we want people to leave the camps”. [Mr Amuriat: “Motion”.] And hon. Amuriat, yes, you can move a motion but I am going to write what I am thinking now and put it on the Floor of this House because this is not fair.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the committee has tabled the report with views and recommendations. You, with government, should accept to look at this report and take action.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, Sir. I really would like to plead for your indulgence. Why should this House not also know that when you have a job to do you can face difficulties? Some of these difficulties probably arising out of this House, why should that not be known? Because when I go to a district like Gulu and I say, “Mr Chairman, let us go on radio Mega FM and we talk about how we can help people in camps”, and then we agree that we are going to be there and he does not come; so, what is it? When the last seeds from Gulu store were collected on the 19th and 20th of June, what is the explanation for that? 

The hon. Reagan Okumu here said we should consider the case of the CAO, politicizing the issue. The CAO is the chairman of the DDMC; seeds came and he refused to remove them from the lorry; I was there and he wanted me to go and offload them! There are problems, hon. Amuriat, there are problems. I beg to conclude with hon. Amuriat being part of the problem. (Laughter) 

5.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Deusdedit Bikwasizehi): Mr Speaker and hon. Colleagues, I want to first and foremost thank all Members of Parliament for the interest in this report judging from how many people have debated it. I want also to take this opportunity to thank the Members of the Agriculture Committee. As hon. Amuriat indicated, we could not travel to Adjumani because of the bad road. But I want him to know that we travelled to Soroti during the floods, we actually swam across a river and it was at night. It was very risky but I thank the members for enduring it and they were able to accomplish the work. I will not go into all issues but I want to make a response to some of them. 

Financial loss in this exercise: part of our mandate was to establish the magnitude of financial loss but the committee concedes that it could not be able to establish this. This can be established by audit and we did not audit. We feel that normally, the Auditor-General audits and he is going to audit as usual and then hand it over to PAC. This is not the end. The work is there and it will be done. 

The conflict of interest: during our investigations, we gave an opportunity to all regional MPs and here I want to register my disappointment as the committee chair. We invited the MPs from Lango region, Teso, Acholi but none turned up as a regional team. We went further to postpone and to request them further but none turned up. Nevertheless, the committee went ahead. But the issue of conflict of interest, we did not get it -(Interjections)- I am stating a fact that we invited them and they did not come as a team. 

There was an issue of explanation of the analysis by UNBS -(Interjections)- you have had contributions and I am pressed to finish in time. It is true from the analysis by UNBS that not all the items met all parameters but you would find that, say a hoe could meet some of the physical and chemical analyses and fail the hardness test. When it fails the hardness test, it does not mean that it does not perform; it means it will wear away very fast. This is the explanation we got from UNBS. That is why we recommended that these bodies should be mandated to do the work to protect the consumers in this country because sometimes as we indicated, some people can bring sub-standard products which go undetected on the market.

On the issue of the groundnut seeds, hon. Otekat requested that it should be supplied in shells. That means in the pod. Technically, this one would be wrong because ideally, the quality of seed should be determined by the size of the seed. In other words, you must open the seed, test it and see the germination and when it is in pod, you cannot determine the quality of the seed. Then it must be dressed up to guard against pastes and diseases. That is why we cannot recommend that the groundnut seeds be supplied in shell. 

Finally, the issue of Epuri-puri sorghum; the ministry of agriculture appeared before our committee. I have contacted the researchers and the breeders and in essence Epuri-puri was bred for food. But because it is white, its properties cannot be compared with a Sekador. Now it has got an industrial use of brewing and so it is used more for brewing than food. But it is not true that it was not bred for food. According to information available from the research stations in the ministry of agriculture, it was bred for that. But since people have got preferences, I am not saying it should have been supplied, but since people have got preferences for Sekador and other edible varieties, they should have been supplied since they had been demanded for. 

I will end with the attack on my personality. I have taken that one very seriously because the report I was presenting was a committee report and not a “Bikwasizehi” report and this is evidenced by the signatures that are there. I think at a future date, or outside here, I will contact my colleague, hon. Latigo, although he has not been able to substantiate it on the Floor. But I have taken it very seriously because he has attacked my personality. I thank all of you and I request the Prime Minister’s Office to follow the recommendations we have made.

THE SPEAKER: This concludes the debate. I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (PAC) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDING JUNE 2002

5.37
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Ssebuliba Mutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Another report is here to be presented to this Parliament. I hope all Members received their reports. 

Rule 148(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament assigns the Public Accounts Committee the duty of examining the audited accounts, showing the appropriation of the funds granted by Parliament to meet public expenditure of the central government, and the Judiciary. Of course, this is done in fulfillment of Article 163(5) and Article 164(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which also mandate Parliament to monitor all expenditure of public funds and report excesses of government as observed by the Auditor-General.  

This report is not only based on the findings of the Auditor-General for the financial year ended 30 June 2002, but also includes close scrutiny of policy matters relating to financial management. Compliance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, the Budget Act, the Appropriation Act and other laws governing public affairs were points of reference in our discussion with concerned accounting officers.

Section 1.2 deals with terms of reference, there are four bullets there, and you can read through. 

Let me go to 1.3, the procedure of the work of the committee: 

The committee tasked all accounting officers with audit queries or issues against their ministries/departments to answer the concerns of the AG. It also made consultations with some ministers on specific matters of policy under their jurisdiction. 

The committee commends the support and tireless effort of the offices of the Clerk to Parliament, the Auditor-General, the Accountant-General and the Director of Criminal Investigations Department in their performance of their duties.

On a sad note, the committee lost one of its active members, hon. Okulo-Epak (RIP) who did a commendable job in revamping the performance of the Public Accounts Committee in the Seventh Parliament. It is upon his tireless efforts that the committee is building to perfect its work. 

The general findings on accountability:

In this report, I will not refer to individual ministries or Votes but will summarise the main findings and recommendations made by the committee to improve financial discipline and accountability in ministries and government departments. 

Committee findings and recommendations for remedial actions for each ministry will be reported in the chapter that follows thereafter. Therefore, page 3, 1.4(1) talks about the treasury memorandum - we have received that but our committee report was in print when the minister was in the process of submitting the treasury memorandum but still we have to talk about it here.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, for every committee report that is approved by this Parliament, the Minister of Finance is supposed to give Parliament the treasury memoranda. A treasury memorandum is a report of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Parliament showing what steps it has taken to address concerns or deficiencies raised by this committee.

The committee noted with concern that despite its reports and recommendations approved by Parliament for the financial year 2000/01 no responses in form of treasury memoranda have been made by the Minister of Finance.

Mr Speaker, it should be noted that the minister responsible for finance has a general duty of the management and supervision of all matters relating to the financial affairs of the government. The treasury memoranda, therefore, shows commitment by the minister that government has taken action against the culprits for their omissions or commission in misappropriating taxpayers’ money. It is also an assurance by government to Parliament that such omissions or commissions will not arise again.

Then in 1.4: the functioning of the audit department. The Ministry of Finance exercises its oversight role through the Accountant-General who is responsible for the compilation and management of the accounts of the government and the safety of public monies, properties and resources and he is the chief advisor to the Secretary to the Treasury and the ministers on accounting matters.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, there are some variations within this report and the report he is reading because he is referring to the Auditor-General’s report of 2002. If you look at some figures - they should either be corrected or they remain as they are. For instance, the committee talks of Shs 7 billion and the AG’s report talks of Shs 3.5 billion. I do not know which is which. Should we take it as a correction or we take whatever is in the report?

When you go to page 7 of the Public Accounts Committee, in the Auditor-General’s report on page 8, it has the same. It says that Shs 3.7 billion was paid to Uganda Development Bank to raise additional equity. But here the Public Accounts Committee says –(Interjections)– I am also asking for guidance because you are quoting from the AG’s report.

MR SEBULIBA: I am presenting a report of the Public Accounts Committee. I do not know why he is jumping to go where I have not reached yet. This must be owned up by Parliament before you can come in.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I was asking for guidance.

MR SEBULIBA: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance exercises its oversight role through the Accountant-General, who is responsible for the compilation and management of the accounts of the government and the safety of the public monies, properties and resources, and he is the chief advisor to the Secretary to the Treasury and the ministers on accounting matters.

In fulfilment of these functions, the Accountant-General is assisted by three departments namely: the Treasury Officer of Accounts, the Internal Audit and Treasury Inspectorate.

Members may also wish to recall that the accounting officers are appointed by the Secretary to the Treasury in accordance with section 8 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003.

Section 2 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003 defines the internal audit as the process to measure, evaluate and report to the management of an entity on the efficacy of the system of internal controls to ensure the validity of financial and other information.

The committee, therefore, is of the view that since the internal audit department also audits the Accountant-General, it would be wrong for it to report to the same person. The committee has asked the Secretary to the Treasury to streamline the functions of the Internal Audit Department so that it reports to him/her directly instead of reporting through the Accountant-General.

Furthermore, provisions should be made to have the quarterly reports of the internal audit handled by an audit committee established under Section 8(6) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003.

On page 4, section 1.4.3 refers to classified expenditure. The Auditor-General reported that during the year under review, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development worked out draft accounting regulations for classified expenditure, which were sent to all stakeholders for approval.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, section 31(2) of the Pubic Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 provides that the accounts shall include the accounts of all classified expenditure. Therefore, accounts prepared at the end of a financial year should include accounts of all classified expenditure. 

Section 31(3) mandates the minister responsible for finance by statutory instrument to provide regulations subjecting classified expenditure to confidentiality. The committee noted that these regulations were made and were effective from 01 July 2003, and the main provisions of the regulations included:

1.	Definition of classified expenditure to mean expenses and commitments incurred by unauthorised agencies for the collection and dissemination of information related to national security interest.

2.	The minister appointed the Office of the President, including Internal Security Organisation (ISO), Directorate of Ethics and Integrity and Office of the minister responsible for security, the Ministry of Defence, including the CMI, State House, the police department, office of the Inspector General of Police, CID and special branch, and the office of the IGG as agencies to manage classified expenditure.

3.	All the classified expenditure must be budgeted for and appropriated by Parliament

4.	The authorised agencies are required to establish contracts committees to manage all procurements.

	In addition, Mr Speaker, all transactions of classified expenditure will be recorded and all supporting documents retained, save that they would be restricted access to such information. These will be audited by the Auditor-General in accordance to section 33(i) of the Act and accounting officers are required to submit accounts of classified expenditure for audit.

5. 	All accounting officers are required to ensure that officers responsible for accounting functions have the necessary professional qualifications and technical confidence necessary for the work.

6. 	The Auditor-General is expected to assemble a special team for purposes of auditing classified expenditure.

	Members of the team are to work under strict confidentiality and subjected to regulations applicable to persons with access to confidential information related to national security interests and undergo such training and sensitisation that may be necessary to give them reasonable appreciation of the nature and operations of the authorised agencies, and lastly the Auditor-General to report to Parliament on the audit of classified expenditure and such reports to be considered by a sub committee of the PAC in a closed session.

Mr speaker and honourable members, the committee was informed that the audit of classified expenditure is effective from the FY 2004/05, however, we were not informed as to what would happen to the accounts for the previous years. The committee recommends that the accountability of classified expenditure in the previous reports of the Auditor-General be subjected to audit.

1.4.4 Capital expenditure of referral hospitals
Mr Speaker, examination of the records from most referral hospitals indicated that expenditure normally classified as capital expenditure is met from the recurrent votes. The committee noted that this kind of expenditure constituted unauthorised expenditure because Parliament does not vote for them for such purposes. 

Accounting officers of referral hospitals informed the committee that there was no provisions made to the hospitals to enable them carry effectively their day to day delivery of quality service. The committee also noted a poor state of hospital buildings some of which are in a state of disrepair.

In some hospitals, there are even no kitchens and toilets for use by patients and their attendants, patients sleep on the floors due to lack of beds, the medical wards are ill equipped and in most cases patients are asked to improvise and in some cases roofs of wards leak, inconveniencing the patients and destroying patients’ files.

Mr Speaker, in some hospitals, equipment is too old and unreliable as they could pose a danger to patients due to the radiations they emit. Many hospitals have a problem of shortage of medical drugs and sundries.

The committee recommends a provision of capital development vote for referral hospitals to fund these activities.

1.4.5 Kisekka hospital

Mr Speaker, Ministry of Defence runs Kisekka hospital situated in Kampala. The hospital was purchased at a cost of US$ 640,000. In his report the Auditor-General observed that the hospital buildings were in dilapidated state, looked neglected and urgently needed renovation. 

The report further observed that water pipes were rusty and leaking causing unnecessary waste of water thus high water Bills. The report also observed that at a time of acquiring this hospital, it had equipment furniture and inventory valued at US$419, 648 but at the time of audit some of this furniture was in a dilapidated condition, others broken down, while others had gone missing.

Mr speaker, it is a considered opinion of the committee that this hospital had been neglected and the accounting officer should be held personally responsible in accordance with section 14(c) of the Public Finance and Accountability Regulations, 2003. The committee recommends that Government makes a quick decision either to utilise the facility or to dispose it off to avoid further loss.

1.4.6 Government land

Mr Speaker, inspection of land belonging to various institutions and departments of Government revealed that most of the land belonging to these institutions is not surveyed and titled. The Auditor-General further reports that this unsecured land has been encroached upon by the public in many locations. Most accounting officers attributed the problem to budgetary constraints.

The committee noted that this lack of seriousness on part of Government has led to loss of land to encroachers. 

The committee recommends that as a matter of priority, urgent release be made to institutions and departments of Government to survey and get titles of all Government land to avoid further encroachment.

1.4.7 Illegal transfer of funds by the Ministry of Finance

Mr Speaker, during the year under review the Auditor-General reported that although moneys had been paid to Uganda Development Bank to raise its equity, he was neither provided with evidence as to whether these transactions were entered in the assets register nor were the share certificates provided for audit. 

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I have read the Auditor-General’s report and there is no reference to illegal transfer of funds by the Minister of Finance in that report. Is it in order for him to present this section, which has nothing to do with the AG’s report?

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, the chairman has read many things and nobody says what he has read is supported or not supported. We have not come to that – at that juncture of assessing this. He is merely presenting what he thinks the committee has come to, but we shall assess and should you have that evidence with you, then we shall come to the conclusion that this is not true. For us at the moment we are just listening –

DR SURUMEA: I have the evidence; I have the Auditor-General’s report here.

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not disagree with you. We shall come to that- (Interjections)

MR SEBULIBA: Mr Speaker, this –

THE SPEAKER: you see the chairman is presenting you with the report of the committee that is the committee but then we shall come to say on what basis did you come to that. 

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the year under review the Auditor-General reported that although moneys had been paid to Uganda Development Bank to raise its equity, he was neither provided with evidence as to when these transactions were entered in the assets register nor were the share certificates provided for audit.

Since Uganda development bank denied receipt of these funds as capitalisation, the committee invited the minister responsible for finance to clarify on the matter. The minister informed the committee that he committed Shs 7.7 billion in 2002 as capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank but could not explain as to how or what the bank used the money for.

On further scrutiny of the documentation before it, the committee found out the following anomalies: (1) the law governing capitalisation of the bank that is the UDB Act, 1972 requires advice of the bank’s board of directors of directors before increasing its shares, that is capitalization. On this transaction, the then Minister of State for Finance used his own initiative and decided to capitalise the bank without advice from the board contrary to Section 52 of the UBD Act.

2. The Deputy Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Muhakanizi gave a directive, in writing, to Uganda Development Bank to transfer the funds through the bank as follows: 

i)	Shs 3.7billion to MS Apparel Tri Star. 

ii)	Shs 4billion to Phenix Logistics Ltd.

The alleged capitalisation was therefore, not true; instead the bank was used as a conduit to transfer money to serve other interests of the minister. This was confirmed by the Executive Director of UDB who said that the alleged capitalisation funds were treated as trust funds; that funds received from Government were with specific interest instructions as to who they should be loaned out.
 
iii) 	Out of the Shs 7.7billion, only Shs 3.7 billion was gazzeted as required by the law. The committee was concerned that although the Ministry of Finance operated a trust fund in UDB, the minister used his powers to abuse the good intentions of this trust fund. Monies were sent to the bank with specific instructions and for purposes that were not part of the bank’s roles.

The minister, since he showed no interest on how the Shs 7.7billion had been used, Uganda Development Bank itself does not recognise these funds as part of its capital. It is, therefore, apparent that these funds will never be accounted for as no provisions were made for their recovery.

The committee views this as an abuse by the minister, of the powers entrusted to him in the management of public funds. The committee recommends as follows:

i)	Recovery of the said funds is made immediately since there was no Parliamentary approval.
ii)	The Minister of Finance be held politically responsible for his actions in this transaction.
iii)	The role of the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury on the matter be investigated and appropriate action be taken.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the need to enforce accountability in the Government should be a concerted effort for all the institutions in place.

The committee has done its part and brought to the attention of House, a number of shortcomings and omissions or commissions on the utilisation of public funds. Several recommendations have been made to the treasury to follow and to come up with a treasury memorandum. Other omissions have been directed to the criminal investigations department for further investigations and prosecution.

Mr Speaker, the committee is concerned about the poor follow up on the recommendations of this House, which in effect could damage the credibility of the reports of the House. However, this is a matter the committee left for this House to decide on.

The Public Accounts Committee considers its report on the Report of the Auditor-General for year ended June 2002 as a job well done and we rest our case. On this note, Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Members of the Public Accounts Committee and all those who came and interacted with the committee. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek your guidance on a procedural matter. The Minister of Finance was rising at an inappropriate time to make the point that this report contains a fundamental error, which if it is retained obviously leads to a debate on the basis of falsehood. He was making the point that what is in this report of the PAC, is not in the Auditor-General’s report of 2002, which is the subject of the committee’s report. So, at what time will this issue be resolved so that we can debate a report, which is appropriate?

THE SPEAKER: Well, in its wisdom the committee has presented what it calls its report. At the moment we are not in position to examine the basis under which this report was made. When the House starts to consider its content that is when questions will be put on a number of points contained in there. We shall do that when we start because he was just presenting it; this was the first time that we are hearing their report. After we have heard it, we can say we start now or we give ourselves time to read it. I am saying this because we have just received that report. We can say let us give ourselves tonight so that on Thursday these matters can come out. They may come up as preliminary objections. It is important that we do it that way because other Members of Parliament have not participated in this. 

So, I would advise that you take the report as it has been formally presented and begin to crosscheck with whatever material you have so that when you come, you will be on the point with the evidence to support your argument. So, for the time being we cannot – we will be expecting too much to say that we start debating a report five minutes after it has been presented – I will give you time; I give you time overnight to go and study the report and if you are ready then we can handle it either tomorrow or on Thursday.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In light of what the hon. Amama Mababazi has said, I think it would also be procedurally right if he can benefit from the preliminary objection before the debate is opened up such that those of us who are not members of the committee will listen to their preliminary objection then we can debate weighing both sides.

THE SPEAKER:  No, one point, which the minister has made is that in the audit report of the Auditor-General of 2002, which is the subject of this report, there is no reference to the point of illegal transfers that he was making. So, you go and dig up the report so that when you come back you will be armed to start the debate. So this matter is stood over until Thursday when we will have a full debate.

I have been informed that the next item No. 7 cannot be handled because the minister responsible for the Bill, that is Attorney-General or his deputy are not here. So, we cannot consider that Bill. 

And on item 8, I have also been told by the chairman that the report is not ready. He has a report on another Bill which belongs to the Ministry of Education. So, I think tomorrow we shall correct this and put that Bill in respect of which we have the report. Perhaps tomorrow we shall deal with No.11, that is, “Presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the committee on National Economy on the state of the economy, for the first half of the financial year 2007/2008.” That we shall consider tomorrow. Therefore this means, we have disposed of what we could dispose of today.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow, 2 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.07 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 April 2008)


