Friday, 8 April 2005

(Parliament met at 10.14 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this meeting.

10.16
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I request that in future when we have sittings on Fridays, Members should be warned on the Monday of that particular week. Otherwise if we are just told on Thursdays we are normally caught up with commitments in our constituencies, and I think that is the very reason why we do not have enough Members in this Chamber.

THE SPEAKER: Who says so?  We shall consider it anyway.

MR SSENGO:  Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)(NO.2) BILL, 2005

10.17
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment)(No.2) Bill, 2005 be read for the first time.  By the grace of God, I beg to lay on the Table a Certificate of Financial Implications in accordance with section 10 of the Budget Act.  Mr Speaker, honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament. But, honourable members, you are encouraged, if you have any amendment to make on the Bill, to submit it to the Committee before we start the debate in the second reading.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)(NO.3) BILL, 2005

10.19
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment)(No.3) Bill, 2005 be read for the first time. Again, Sir, by the grace of God, I beg to lay on the Table a Certificate of Financial Implications in accordance with section 10 of the Budget Act. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Again the Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration; and, honourable members, any one of you who may wish to make any amendment in terms of Rule 108(4), you are advised to go and present your amendment to the Committee. The Committee should expeditiously handle these Bills. With this we have come to the end of –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was due to respond to the debate on my security report, and I know that on the Order Paper under Notice of Business to Follow, we have the intended motion by hon. Daniel Omara Atubo in which I will be debating. Because we have the Congo against Uganda case coming up in the International Court of Justice in The Hague, some of us who are involved will be engaged in that during the next two weeks. I seek your indulgence to allow me to therefore present the response upon my return.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is noted. 

10.21
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, while I appreciate the development, which has come as a result of yesterday’s Motion, I am a little bit worried because of the following: one; up to now this House remains to be briefed about the political roadmap.  Two; the amount of work associated to yesterday’s developments in terms of constitutional amendments should be brought in consonance with that roadmap so that the people we represent get their fears allayed that we will be able to meet the deadline.  I need some explanation in regard to that. 

10.23
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I should have sought your guidance for this clarification during communication. Mr Speaker, there is a procedure, which needs your guidance. You directed a Committee of Parliament to handle an issue related to Kakooza Mutale. But there is an event unfolding in the committee, which I think is out of the procedure of Parliament, where some Members of Parliament take sides with the strangers during committee inquiry, and I think this is improper. 

It is out of procedure that when a committee of Parliament is conducting an inquiry, a Member of Parliament takes sides with a person whom Parliament is conducting the inquiry on instead of the Member waiting for the report to be presented to the House and makes his or her case.  


This kind of approach, Mr Speaker, was witnessed by the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs where some members were blocking the Members of Parliament from conducting the inquiry. I think it was an ugly situation. Mr Speaker, you need to come up with clear guidance or remind members on how we should behave during committees when we are conducting inquiries. Thank you.

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: Mr Speaker, I would like to disapprove my honourable colleague that the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs was involved in the blocking members who were appearing before it. It is not the Committee on Presidential Affairs; maybe you are referring to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: I think, Kakooza Mutale’s, issue is being handled by the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, not Presidential. 

Well, honourable members, as I have indicated before, I have seen a number of us trying to scandalize the institution. In doing that the person who is scandalizing thinks he is sparing himself of this scandal yet if you scandalize the institution, you are also involved. When you say people are bribed, when you say these are this you are part of the institution. So, I think you should respect the institution and help it to keep its image. 

If you know there is any problem, you have channels through which you can bring whatever query you have to appropriate organize of Parliament so that the same can be handled. The public is not going to solve these problems for you by just going to press, doing this and the other. 

So, I take your concern and I think everybody takes that concern. This business of scandalizing the institution when there is no justification should stop. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 10.26 a.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 April 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


