Tuesday, 1 April 2003

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back, and I bring you greetings from the House of Commons and the Scottish Parliament, which I visited. I also bring you greetings from the Parliament of Kenya where I went last week to preside over the Executive Committee of CPA, Africa Region, in preparation for the annual meeting - (Applause).

Honourable members, in the Stranger’s Gallery we have students of Bethany High School from Wakiso District. You are most welcome. 

I am informed that the soccer team will undergo training, because they are going to face Kampala traders in a match at Nakivubo on Sunday.  Therefore, you need to train so that you can competently face the traders, who perhaps have more strength than you. Otherwise, I wish you good deliberations.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also wish to take this opportunity to welcome you back from the House of Commons. 

I have had a standing motion that was submitted to you and the Clerk over a week ago. The motion is urging the Ministry in charge of the Environment to review the forestry reserve allocations in Mukono, and several Members of Parliament support it. I would like to know why, in terms of procedure, this motion is not featuring anywhere on the agenda today.

THE SPEAKER: To give you a reply, soon I intend to call the Business Committee to programme any business we have; and definitely that business will be considered. Also, we plan to expedite the work that we are doing here, especially the questions. We have many questions pending, and I think we need to introduce certain reforms to be able to competently and speedily deal with this issue. So, your business will definitely be considered.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, let me also join those who have welcomed you back from Britain and from Kenya. I am seeking your guidance on a mater, which took place during your absence; but I am sure you saw it on the record of our proceedings. This pertains to a motion I moved in this august House regarding our foreign policy, and most specifically, pertaining to the current war by the coalition nations, that is Great Britain and USA among others, against Iraq.  

I had moved a motion to the effect that this House should urge our counterparts in the two countries to put pressure on their leaders to stop the war. However, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, hon. Butime, came up with an amendment, which was most appropriate. I amended my motion accordingly, to the effect that the Government supports the position of the UN. In other words, we uphold the principles and the charter of the United Nations, and we respect international law. 

I assumed that this is the position of the Uganda Government, since it was initiated by no other person than the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Mr Speaker, I am disappointed –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to tell me the point of procedure that you want to raise, so that I rule on it?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I said I was seeking your guidance on a matter, which took place in this august House. Should I believe the position of the minister or should I believe the position of the President?

THE SPEAKER: I ask the Leader of Government Business and the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs to assist us on this.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Okot Ogong): Mr Speaker, government noted the position of hon. Aggrey Awori. The only spokesman for government on foreign matters is the Minister for Foreign Affairs. In that respect, I would appeal to hon. Aggrey Awori and to the House that the minister will come here and brief Parliament on government’s position on what has been raised by hon. Aggrey Awori –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the Constitution of Uganda, namely the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, is very elaborate on how the Uganda Government should, by policy, behave on matters related to international affairs. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister holding the portfolio of Parliamentary Affairs to come here and tell the representatives of the people that matters related to foreign affairs, especially where Uganda decides to support a country internationally, is only attributed to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs? 

We have the Leader of Government Business here; are you implying that it no longer exists? Where the Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs is not around, is he is order to give us an impression that there is nobody who can speak for government on matters of international policy? (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made your case. I do not think the minister said that. Hon. Aggrey Awori sought for my guidance, but since I do not speak for the Executive, and this is a matter for the Executive, I had to ask him. When the minister stood up he said, yes, the Executive should be ready but there is a person in charge of the portfolio who should be more conversant with the issue. That person is the one to make the clarification on this issue. He is not here, and when he comes, he will do that. 

That is exactly what he has said, and there is nothing wrong with it. He is not contradicting you, but he is saying the Executive has allocated responsibility to ministers, and this is a matter falling under the portfolio of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, who will come and answer the question.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, welcome back from the House of Commons. Last week but one, we passed a motion here regarding the situation of Karamoja cattle rustling. The Government was supposed to respond within one week, which week should have elapsed last Thursday, and the situation is getting worse. Sir, may we find out what has happened? Why is the ministry or the Government not in a position to respond as was required by that resolution?

THE SPEAKER: Actually, I was made aware of that position by the hon. Member for Lira district and others. That was late in the evening, and I promised to look into the matter and do the needful. I did actually, early in the morning, contact the authorities as I thought I should, and when we finish these clarifications, I will seek a response from the minister. Then you will get your answer.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: I am forced to stand up after hearing hon. Aggrey Awori, directly and indirectly, trying to disregard the position of government and its lack of support for Iraq in this war. I would like to inform him that when Uganda is in time of need, Saddam Hussein has never shown up. When we want to supplement our budget, Saddam Hussein never shows up - (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Bukoto East, let us leave these observations until the Minister of Foreign Affairs is here. Then you can say what you want to say. In the meantime, let us leave it at that.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, but still, I just want to pass on the information that we do not want this august House to present a picture that we are not with America when it is in time of need. At least I have passed on the information, and on my part I support America and I support the Government position on that -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, we have a lot to do this afternoon. Let us close that chapter. We shall open it when the Minister of Foreign Affairs comes. But there is something, which I forgot and I should have announced. 

You are aware that there is a symposium being arranged to deal with this subject of NEPAD. It will be on Thursday and Friday, therefore, you are urged to attend in full because it is an important subject, and it is relevant to us.

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just before coming to Parliament, I received a fax from the Ministry of Agriculture that it was postponed. I was supposed to be one of the presenters. Is this not the one on NEPAD? Okay, this was to be in Hotel Africana on Thursday, and I have received a fax that it is postponed. Unless of course –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, this is at the International Conference Centre, and it will be opened by His Excellency, the President.

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Thank you. Then I am mistaken.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can I ask you to report on the position about the statement referred to by hon. Okulo Epak? Is it ready?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I think colleagues are aware that the Karamoja disarmament programme was launched sometime back, on 2 December 2001. It was moving on very well until it was distracted by the Operation Iron Fist. We had to divert our efforts to go and answer the security concerns in Northern Uganda, and that one disrupted our programme. However, it had yielded over 10,000 guns under voluntary disarmament. The voluntary disarmament was extended, and we were still continuing to get the guns.  

When we started Operation Iron Fist, some Karimojong violated the agreement they made with the President. Namely, they did not stop cattle rustling and they still go to the neighbourhood to graze when they are armed. They violated that and they started incursions into the neighbourhood. We could not stop Operation Iron Fist; we had to continue with it but still, we were following though with less effort because we diverted both the human and financial resources. 

It is true that these few cattle rustlers are really terrorising their neighbours. They have now decided to attack the neighbourhoods of Acholi, Lango and then Teso. Recently I went to Lira and I witnessed it myself. I went up to Apara sub-county and I addressed Lira council, about 130 leaders in Lira town. I recorded their concerns. We are doing everything possible to make sure that we go back in full force to continue with the disarmament. 

We have also been responding to some extent that some cattle have already been rescued, but still, we have the notorious Karimojong.

Recently the President addressed the leaders from the districts of Lango and Acholi in Gulu, and they agreed on places in which to deploy more LDUs. The President also met the leaders of Teso and also agreed on the places where to deploy. If we had continued with the disarmament successfully, there would not have been any need to recruit the LDUs and deploy them into the neighbourhood, because the cause of the problem would have been solved. That is, to disarm -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Let her make the statement and then you will bring up your clarification, please.

MS NANKABIRWA: Since the programme was disrupted, moreover in the middle of the financial year, we have to make sure that we train, recruit and deploy. In Teso, we trained 700 LDUs and these are on voluntary basis. We have so far armed only 300 out of those.  

However, we are moving cautiously because command and control over a group of voluntary people is very difficult. Therefore, we have to move very cautiously in as far as accepting volunteers to be trained and to be armed is concerned.

Many people are yearning for that. They say, “if government is not in a position to recruit the LDUs, let it give us the guns and we shall defend ourselves.” But we are moving very slow on that because the command and control of such a group is very difficult.

Yesterday, His Excellency the President, when he was closing the National Movement Conference assured Ugandans that he is going to go back to Karamoja very soon. He said he would go back very soon to make sure that we embark on the disarmament exercise again.  

I am sorry, Mr Speaker, this statement is not written down because I did not have the time. But I promise to put it in writing, and to circulate it to members with more detail in as far as how many LDUs -(Mrs Ogwal rose_)- can you please wait and I finish this statement? 

How many LDUs have we recruited and how many have we deployed? We have deployed in particular - (Interruption) 

MRS OGWAL: I am seeking clarification because I am not following the statement.  

THE SPEAKER: The problem, honourable member, is that she did not write the statement, as she said. Unless you say that she should not make the statement, I think –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: I am seeking clarification, Mr Speaker, because from what the minister is telling us, it appears that she actually is not responding directly to the appeal of Parliament. Parliament appealed for emergency measures from the Government, but what she is telling us are the long-term measures; what the Government has all along been doing to deal with the Karimojong question. 

Parliament was sounding an emergency bell, and as I speak today, Mr Speaker, Lira Municipality is flooded with internally displaced persons from the cattle-rustling front. So, can the minister tell us the emergency measures that are in place arising from the resolution passed in Parliament last week? That is what we are waiting to hear about. 

You have taken too long to come to the emergency measures. The preamble is the usual statement we have always received from the ministry. Now we want the emergency measures, which are in place to deal with the emergency situation on the ground. Mr Speaker, that is what I have been waiting for.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I pray that the minister comes up with an exhaustive presentation. Yesterday when we were in the conference, the members from Sironko reminded His Excellency the President that they had requested for a detach to be established somewhere at a place called Kata. The President reminded the Minister of Defence, and actually he was complaining, that he had already instructed them to do it and they had not taken serious action. 

Do we now take it that the explanation the minister is going to bring will be elaborate and comprehensive enough to give a good and clear picture of what is going to take place in Karamoja?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the problem is that when you all switch on these gadgets simultaneously, you damage them. It is only when you catch my eye that you should switch them on.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the honourable minister whether she is aware of the escalating situation due to the lack of a presence of the army in the eastern part of Lira District.  

I want to give her information that in Iriri two days ago an LDU was shot in the stomach by Karimojong marauders. This man is in Lira Hospital right now. The day before yesterday, a gentleman was shot in Aloi sub-county, he is also in the hospital. About two days ago, an elderly woman was gang-raped by the Karimojong, to death, in Abia village, Apala sub-county.

I really want to sympathise with the honourable minister, and thank her because she visited Lira District. But could she also tell us what the outcome of that visit is? Thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA SENTAMU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal wanted to know the emergency steps we have taken. First, my going there was really an emergency step. I rushed there and directed the 5th Division Commander to punish the commandant of a unit in Agweng.  

Agweng is a sub-county where we have a unit of LDUs under that commander. Those LDUs are so notorious; they are harassing the wanainchi. That was a step, and by this evening I will know whether the 5th Division Commander, Col. Tugume, implemented my directive. 

Secondly, as I talk now, the Second Deputy Premier is finalising the programme of distributing emergency relief. They are going to send me the detailed programme. They are sitting with the World Food Programme representatives and they will send me a programme so that I can direct the 5th Division to make sure that this food is accompanied. Distribution will begin on Thursday this week. 

Thirdly, the President is not going to wait until Operation Iron Fist is completed; he is going to find time, as soon as possible, to go there himself and give advice as the Commander in Chief. When he goes there, I expect some positive outcome. Otherwise, we do not have any emergency programme, apart from making sure that we change deployment. That will be up to the Commander in Chief because this is purely operational. So, I am not better placed to tell what the Commander-in-Chief is going to do when he visits the area of operation, than he is.

Hon. Kasirivu mentioned the point, which the people of Sironko raised. Kata is one of the nine areas, which we had included in our initial plan of disarmament. We wanted to establish permanent barracks right from Karita, Amudat, to all those areas along the border; reaching that junction of Sironko, because it is also a point that suffers. But I told you, honourable members, our master disarmament plan was disrupted by Operation Iron Fist. 

Secondly, when you are recruiting massively and making plans that have got financial implications in the middle or almost the end of the financial year, it is a problem. You should recruit people whom you know you will be able to maintain. Sometimes we find problems of maintaining troops, which we recruit when money is not available. Otherwise, we really try to make sure that the situation is contained.

Hon. Okulo Epak was wondering whether I know what is happening on the ground. I want to assure you that I know what is happening on the ground, and I must be grateful to the Members of Parliament from that area, especially hon. Angiro Charles, who keeps on updating me on a daily basis. Sometimes he updates me three or four times a day on what is happening on the ground -(_Mr Angiro rose_). He wants to update me now. Let me give him a chance.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, for giving way. Mr Speaker, let me take this opportunity to update the honourable minister once more. While she is serious about Operation Iron Fist activities in areas bordering Lira, Pader and Kotido, I regret to inform her that yesterday, a number of rebels abducted 42 people from Orango sub-county and killed one person called Tony Odongo. Nobody has come back since. 

This morning, I have been told, cattle rustlers came through Apala sub-county up to Gulu and took away some animals. The total number has not been specified yet. 

Again, I regret to inform her that following her abrupt visit after informing her about the situation in the neighbouring districts of Pader and Kotido, it seems as if her visit was a bad omen. The situation has become worse! Perhaps she could step up the request that was made by this House: at least they could use that UPDF battalion, as has always been requested by the wanainchi, to be stationed between Otuke and Erute County North, which is at the moment in a worse situation.  Thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you for the update. Actually, my visit was a bad omen to the LRA because that night when I was there, they attacked Apala and abducted 50 children plus foodstuff. But my soldiers fought hard and rescued all the 50 children and the foodstuff. So, my going there was really a bad omen for the LRA. 

Hon. Okulo Epak, I was telling you that I really follow. I always get the information and communicate to the officers on the ground and they always make sure that they rectify situations. You are amongst the Members of Parliament who really continuously update me on what is happening. 

Let me end by emphasizing the point that we are moving on very well with this disarmament, and this government is committed. This is another operation. It is going to be an operation. I do not know what name it will be given, maybe “Operation Disarm”, I do not know but the name will come and we are going to move vigorously.

I would like to caution the notorious cattle rustlers who have been stealing cattle and killing people that their days are numbered. Those are criminals; they are tarnishing the name of the rest of the Karimojong. We have been tolerant enough and once we start “Operation Disarm” they will not like it. So, I am assuring my honourable colleagues that we will continue with this disarmament because we have to rescue Karamoja and begin on the martial plan of the Karamoja Development Programme.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Kapelebyong County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of State for Defence for her vigilance. Occasionally, she has been able to respond in time, but there are a few concerns I want to be clarified on, from the statement she has made. 

One, she said that the President met some of the Teso leaders. I am a Member of Parliament for Kapelebyong and I assume that I am one of the leaders of Teso. However, I did not meet the President. We have the anxiety to meet the President because we think the answer to our problem greatly lies with him. So, I would like to know from the Minister, who are these Teso leaders that the President met? When did they meet? Where did they meet and what was their agenda? Is it possible for her to arrange a meeting of the President with us also, because we were elected by the people, other than those other Teso leaders she is talking about?

Two, she has said that the people who have been trained are volunteers. Before Brig. Kale Kaihura was deployed in Ituri forest, he pitched camp in Katakwi. He mobilised with us to recruit LDUs with the assurance that these people were going to be provided with uniforms, and that they were going to be paid. Now, here the Minister is saying they are doing a voluntary service. As far as I am concerned, it is very difficult to control a person with a gun who is not paid. And I am very aware that the LDUs that were recruited in Katakwi are waiting for their salary. Could we get more clarification from her on this?

I also want to get further clarification from the Minister. From the time I became a Member of Parliament until today, a number of recruitments have been made. We are told that whenever our LDUs are recruited, after some time they are taken away. When there is a problem, there is another recruitment and this is a phenomenon also in Acholi, in Lango and in Sebei. Is this a trick government is using to get soldiers into the UPDF? Because our boys were told that they were going to go to Ituri and yet the problem is escalating.  

Finally, I would like to find out from the Minister, what happens when the soldiers go to recover animals? When they are recovering, they get very big animals. By the time of re-distribution they distribute calves. Where do the rest of the animals go? Thank you very much.

MS NANKABIRWA SENTAMU: Hon. Malinga, the President met the local leaders from Teso, in Gulu. I remember seeing the Chairperson LCV for Katakwi in that meeting. It is possible for the President to also meet Members of Parliament from that region again. If you want we could organise and you meet the President. It is definitely possible. 

We have two groups of LDUs. The first group are LDUs in quotes, because they are on a voluntary basis. In our plan, we were supposed to recruit 9,138 LDUs for Karamoja disarmament. So far we have only recruited 6,928. We have a deficit. As we explained, because of the problem of lack of money, we cannot do massive recruitment. 

Some leaders said, “for us we have our sons and daughters who can volunteer, provided you give us uniforms and guns.” But even uniforms cost money! We tried this in Labwor, hon. Omwony Ojwok’s constituency. What happened is that after some months, they were demanding for pay. Command and control of such a group becomes very difficult. That is why I said we are moving cautiously about that.

About the distribution of animals, I am sorry I have not been keen on the distribution of the recovered animals. This is a delegated service to the commander of that division, which led the mission to rescue the animals. There are problems in the distribution, as there have always been, and as you have been telling us. The soldiers have also been saying sometimes that some animals went to Kenya, others went to – of course, recovering and accounting for the entire group of animals that have been rustled is very, very difficult. 

We have set up some inquiries. There was a problem some time ago of allegations that some of the animals that were recovered found their way outside the areas where they were supposed to be distributed. I will give you an update on this. We instructed the Chief of Staff to carry out an inquiry into that. In case there are soldiers who misbehaved and stole the animals, they will be brought to book; they will be punished. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to request my colleagues, Members of Parliament from the areas of Lango, Karamoja and Teso, that we should move together to mobilize the people. Tell the parents so that they are assured that their children will not be deployed away from home. 

However, when I was in Apala, in Lira, I heard another side to the story: that the sons of the soil are the ones misbehaving. They were telling me to make sure that when we are deploying, we switch sons among sub-counties. But in the rest of the areas, they are saying they want their sons to be deployed in the areas where they are recruited. But we shall sort this out. Mr Speaker, thank you very much.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, it is evident that the minister was not ready to respond to the motion that we moved last week. There are still a number of issues, which were mentioned during the debate on that day, and issues on the motion, which the minister has not addressed.   

Should we not ask the minister to look at the motion, at the issues that were raised, and come back and give a more satisfactory explanation? I request, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, you have heard that. The minister told you that she has not written the statement down but she intends to do that. The honourable Member for Lira Municipality raised the issue that they want to see emergency measures being taken. Hon. Mwandha has suggested that we give the Minister time to go and answer all this in a written form, and come back. Is that the consensus?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: On Thursday and Friday we will not be able to come here because of the NEPAD Symposium. I suggest that next week, when we reconvene on Tuesday, you will be in position to give us a detailed statement about measures being taken to solve this particular problem. We proceed to another item.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to be clarified. On Friday, 22 March 2003, the Constitutional Court pronounced itself on Constitutional Court petition No. 5 of the year 2002. Very prominent in the verdict –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, with due respect, you may have a valid matter to raise but under what item of business are you raising this? We have an Order Paper, which we are following. We have finished one item, which concerned a motion that was passed last week, and we are going to another item. 

Perhaps after we have exhausted all this, we could allocate you time, if you have urgent business to deal with. But we cannot definitely mix business, because we have a programme to follow.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I thought you were still giving a Communication from the Chair.  

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

MR MABIKKE: I accept your verdict, Mr Speaker.  Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week Parliament passed a motion allowing the media to cover the sessions of Parliament live. This afternoon I have seen one young lady moving around with a camera. May I assume, on behalf of the people I represent, that live coverage has started?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, there was a motion that was passed - I think it was by hon. Aggrey Awori - and the person you saw is a member of staff of Parliament. The idea was adopted and now it is a question of putting it into force. Are you worried about it?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I welcome it very strongly.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PETROLEUM SUPPLY BILL, 2003

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AMD MINERAL RESOURCES (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am presenting the Petroleum Supply Bill, 2003 for First Reading. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to deal with and report within two weeks. 

Honourable members, it is high time we committed ourselves and timed our business instead of leaving a number of Bills in committees for months or so. That is why I have said that within two weeks, I repeat, within two weeks, somebody will have to come and give us a report. If he has a problem, he should stand here and tell us why he is not reporting back within two weeks.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gerald Sendaula): Mr Speaker, honourable members, in accordance with section 4 of the Budget Act 2001, I beg to lay on the Table and before this Parliament:

    i) The three-year macro economic framework including the indicative preliminary revenue framework for 2003/2004.
    ii) The preliminary expenditure framework.
    iii) The three-year programme for economic and social development.
 
In accordance with section 5(2) of the Budget Act, 2001, I also beg to lay on the Table, the preliminary estimates of self-accounting bodies, with comments and recommendations. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: These documents should be handled by the appropriate committee as directed by the Budget Act and the time to spend on this is also spelt out in the Budget Act. And the Budget Act commands us to return our comments to the President within a specified time. So, the Budget Committee should handle this and make the necessary recommendations.

DR NABWISO: May I know from the Minister of Finance whether the National Planning Authority has now been established? If not, how soon will this be made?

THE SPEAKER: Although he is going to answer this question, as he seems to be, I do not know how this question is relevant to what has just been done. But let him reply - (Laughter).

MR SENDAULA: Mr Speaker, all that needs to be done has more or less been done, except one last item. It is the appointment of the directors. We have submitted names to Cabinet and it is most probable that tomorrow, Cabinet will consider and finally recommend to the President for appointment, the various directors to the National Planning Authority. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET PERFORMANCE FOR THE FIRST HALF OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2002/03

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I understand this was read, presented and now it is for debate. The Vice Chairperson of the Budget Committee is here. Perhaps you could come forward? There may be questions about this. So now it is open for you to debate. It seems you are not ready. I think that to be fair, and if you are not ready because of what you have been involved in, we could defer business to next week.

MR MWANDHA: I thought there was some debate on it last time and that the debate was going to continue and the minister was going to answer.

THE SPEAKER: So, had the debate ended?

MR MWANDHA: Some comments had been made.

THE SPEAKER: I understand what happened was a presentation of the report by the chairperson. After presentation, either the minister could have come in to make his statement, followed by a debate, or vice-versa. If the minister is ready to make his case, we could adjourn the debate to next week when members can –(Interruption)- is that what you want? Okay, if you want to wind up then you will have to wait. It seems we are not all ready and, therefore, the debate will come next week.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS ON THE BUS PARK WRANGLES.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members as I remember, this chairperson also read the report to us and I thought you had debated it but apparently you have not. We should start a debate now - (interruption). You are not ready? When the report was read, the minister wanted to make a statement before the debate, but that was not made. And it is after the minister has made a statement that we could have a debate. Is the minister ready with a statement?

MR ANDRAULE AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did make the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, you did?

MR ANDRAULE AWUZU: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you. The minister made a statement. It is now for you to debate the report.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we last met, the matter was brought for debate but it seems members were not ready. The Speaker then said that after the debate of the report on the budget, we would debate this. So, I am very certain that all members did not come with that particular item in mind.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us move to the next item.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, without blaming anybody, I think it is important that the Order Paper be circulated very early in the day. I tried to check for the Order Paper in the course of the morning and it was not available. So, without knowing what is going to appear on the Order Paper, it becomes very difficult to bring appropriate documents.

THE SPEAKER: Well, whereas that may be a valid point, I imagine that last week, or at the time when you adjourned, they indicated business to follow. Definitely, one has to know that! In any case we have offices here and these documents should be kept in the offices rather than at home. However, I appreciate the dilemma we have and therefore we move on to the next item.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION ON SCHOOL FEES, ADMISSIONS AND KARIMOJONG EDUCATION

THE SPEAKER: This is in the name of hon. Omara Atubo.  

HON. MEMBERS: He is not around.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I appreciate that since last week you have been engaged in other business, which might have taken you up. I find this a convenient time to adjourn the House, until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.21 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 April 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)

