Thursday 15th April, 1999

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m in the Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr.Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

	QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER


MR. JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of persons with disabilities):   Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I wish to ask the Rt. hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry the following questions: 

(i) Could the Minister inform the House of the circumstances which led Uganda to lose its membership to the World Tourism Organisation whose headquarters are based in Madrid in Spain?  

(ii) Would he further inform the House what Uganda has lost as a result of non membership of this organisation? 

(iii) Would the Minister also inform the House what steps he is taking to ensure that Uganda regains its Membership to the World Tourism  Organisation?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER, MINISTER OF TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY (Brig. Moses Ali):  Mr. Speaker, Uganda, although a member of the World Tourism Organisation based in Madrid, has currently been incapacitated .  Actually, Uganda has not lost its membership except we have lost certain benefits and we have even imposed some restrictions in accordance with paragraph 14 of the Financial Regulations of the organisation which states: "A member which is in arrears in the payment of its financial contribution to the organisations' expenditure shall be deprived of the privileges enjoyed by the members in form of services and a right to vote in the assembly and council if the amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the contribution due from it for the preceding two financial years."  This is exactly what is happening with us now.  Uganda is therefore under suspension for failure to pay annual contribution for a period exceeding two years.  

According to the financial rules and regulations of the organisation, all members are obliged to pay an annual contribution to the organisation's budget by 30th January of each calender year. In view of the fact that Ugandan's financial year begins on 1st July of every year, it was agreed that Uganda makes her annual contribution at the beginning of every financial year. During the 12th General Assembly session of World Tourism in Turkey in October 1997, a grace period of one year was granted to full member-states to pay their dues by October of 1998 at the latest.  To date, Uganda has not been able to remit even a single cent of her indebtedness.  As of 30th December 1998, Uganda owes the World Tourism Organisation arrears to the tune of US dollars 110,378 plus 1,433,000 million Spanish Peseta, equivalent to more than 5 years contribution.

Question 2:  Uganda has lost the right to vote, it is not entitled to services provided by the World Tourism Organisation. The country is not also eligible to be appointed to any of the organisation committees or sub-committees.  This is a diplomatic embarrassment to the country. It should be noted that the World Tourism Organisation has in the past assisted Uganda through supporting some of the country's tourism projects in technical support missions by facilitation of training programme and preparation of the country's integrated tourist master-plan.

Question 3: The problem of Uganda's likely suspension from the World Tourism Organisation comes from the country's failure to honour its obligation of remitting annual membership fees.  We are in dialogue with the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning with a view to reducing Uganda's indebtedness.  As soon as the money is available, it will be remitted to Madrid.  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

MR. MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Since the Rt. hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister is also responsible for our membership of the World Trade Organisation, and since he is also responsible for our membership of the United Nation's Industrial Development Organisation, would the Rt. hon. Prime Minister also indicate the status of Uganda's membership in these organisations.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, we have not completely received the answer as to why Uganda, a well known tourist paradise has failed to pay that obligation.  Number two, Uganda is known all over the world to have very unique flora and fauna species with very outstanding and spectacular water falls, are we becoming reluctant to pay because tourists are no longer coming to Uganda or is it because of the increased rate of insecurity that we feel it is not worth investing in this tourist industry while so many other countries envy Uganda for its tourist attributes?  I want an explanation, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I would like the Second Deputy Prime Minister to inform us, since the  Prime Minister and  Leader of Government Business is here, what other business organisations, international organisations and other agencies which Uganda belongs to that Uganda has also failed to pay its subscription and been suspended or expelled because, in the last budget we put money to pay all our subscriptions to all international organisations where we are affiliated.  So, I do not believe that this is a unique case and I think it may be cutting across the whole spectrum of the organisations where Uganda stands to benefit and I would like to know the list of those organisations which the country has failed to pay and why Uganda is not paying subscriptions to these organisations yet we earn advantages by being members there.  Thank you.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to know from the Minister how the massacres at Bwindi affected our tourism since it occurred and in particular, how much money the country has lost.  Two, Mr. Speaker, I would also like the Minister and Second deputy Prime Minister to update the House on the investigations of the massacres.  Is it true, Mr. Speaker, that FBI and Scotland Yard have been invited to investigate these massacres and what is the progress of their investigations?  Shall this Parliament be availed a report of the investigations?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

BRIG. ALI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The reasons for failing to pay is budgetary constraints - it is lack of money -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER:  Order please!

BRIG. ALI: Budgetary constraints is the reason for non payment.  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, you asked for clarification from the hon. Minister and he is going through those clarifications, why do you not allow him time and then if you want further clarification, they can come later.

BRIG. ALI:  Mr. Speaker, the other question concerning the list of those organisations which should be submitted, I will need time because I was not aware that this question is going to be asked.  So, I beg the questioner to allow me time to compile them and perhaps next time we shall provide the list but, perhaps I will provide the list of those organisations under me, in addition to what I have said: The world Trade Organisation, we are in arrears of  US 450,000; the World Tourism Organisation, I have told you we owe US 110,378; the UNIDO we are in arrears of US 40,640 plus 1,200 for this year; COMESA for 1999 is  US 226,274. In fact for COMESA we are up-to-date. It is only the 1999 subscription which is due which stands at US 226,274. There is a total of US Dollars 786,693 of indebtedness to various organisations in my Ministry.

Hon. Okello Okello's question also needs time because I was not aware that this question was going to come so I beg to have enough time and perhaps I will provide the answer later.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Could the Minister tell the House a little bit more as to when he is going to supply the answer as he has promised to do because, as hon. Karuhanga said just now, this House did pass a budget for all these international obligations and I remember very clearly that the committee responsible recommended to this House and this House approved that all these obligations be paid off and that was a recommendation of this Parliament in this financial year.  So, will the Minister now, when he is replying, tell us how much of that former commitment has been catered for or has been paid and how much balance there is or have we not paid at all, in which case maybe the Minister responsible can be held accountable for contempt of Parliament.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I think it is a well known fact that tourism is a major foreign exchange earner for this country and if I do not get my figures wrong, we might have earned about 10 million dollars in the last financial year.  Now, the hon. Minister responsible for Tourism is telling this House that the reason why we did not pay for our membership or we are not up-to-date with our membership is because there is no money.  Now, we know that in order to get more crops grown in your garden, you just need to save a bit of seeds from whatever you have harvested and a bit of seeds in a calabash for the next season is the one which you use but if you do not know how to plan and you eat everything you have harvested, definitely you will not get the seeds for the next season.  This appears to be the case in this case that we earn so much in foreign exchange and we cannot even just get enough money to pay for that sector or sub-sector.  So, really the answer of the deputy Prime Minister responsible for Tourism that there is no money, Hon. Minister, can you clarify to this House why there is no money yet we know that tourism is earning money to pay for this membership? 

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Following the inquiry which hon. Okello Okello tried to seek from the Rt. Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, I became reluctant to agree with the Right Hon. Deputy Prime Minister that after all of us have recently noted the tragedy which befell Bwindi National Park where a whole seven tourists were slaughtered in cold blood in the presence of a whole leader of Government business and the Prime Minister of this country, I became reluctant to assume that the Government would fail to give us a progressive report in regard to how we would get those people who killed our tourists.  So, I insist very honourably that we require an answer on that.

THE SPEAKER:  I do not know whether I heard the Minister correctly but I think he apologised and said that he needed time to come up here with information.  Did I hear you right, hon. Minister?

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  When Bwindi was mentioned, Mr. Speaker, I needed to seek clarification from the Minister regarding the burial of the chief game warden who fought a heroic fight and consequently died. Why was the Ministry's presence absent at his burial?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  You have taken the words from my mouth.  The supplementary question should be related to the main question.  I am not sure whether the question regarding that burial is related. Anyway, it has passed.

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The reason I classified it as related is because of the probable and future deaths of the tourists we have in this country.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to know from the hon. Minister what plans they have to make sure that Lake Albert and Lake Victoria are safe for tourists in the light of the report we received yesterday from his Colleague who is in charge of water.  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, the questions originally asked by the hon. Mwandha relate to loss of our membership of a certain organisation, if I may refresh your minds. Therefore, any questions supplementary or otherwise should be related to that subject.  

MR. MOSES ALI:  Hon. Ongom has threatened that I have committed contempt of Parliament but I do not think it is true.   I am telling the truth that there is a budgetary constraint. We are all aware that we are operating on a cash budget.  Mr. Speaker, this budget which is passed here is subject to availability of cash. So it depends on how much money is collected and also how much we spend as Ministries.  So, it is not surprising that when I say that there is no money, it is based on this.  The budget passed here, there is no money there, it has to be collected!  Now, if we do not collect enough for the Budget passed here, some sectors must be shelved.  So, that is why I say "budgetary constraints" and it is true, it applies to all Ministries!  So, take it from me that what I am telling you is the truth - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Order, please!  There is too much murmuring.  Are you not interested in the answers?

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Mr. Speaker, the rest of the question - surely, since they are not related to the first question, I am not prepared for them and whether we attended the burial or not, I also need to find out why.  So, the questions, if possible, should be deferred until we meet again, then I will be able to come with the answers.  

The issue of Lake Albert or Lake Victoria, I think, was resolved yesterday.  So, I will meanwhile thank my Colleagues surely for their interest in this sector and also, I want to take this opportunity to thank them for their unanimous approval of the loan to the Ministry and I would like to say that the fruits of that loan will soon be seen.  So, Mr. Speaker, I hope I have answered the first question to the satisfaction of everybody.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you hon. Right Hon. Prime Minister. Hon. Minister, are you ready?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker, I hope to see the chairman of one of the Committees who has not been able to come this afternoon, so I have to consult with him.  So, I am not ready this afternoon.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that brings us to the end of the first part of today's proceedings.  Next item.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday, I brought to your attention that I had put questions to Government and these questions were supposed to be answered and our procedure has reserved Thursdays for answering Members' questions.  I put questions on land and why the Land Act is not being implemented by the Minister responsible for Lands.  I also put a question to the Minister for Public Service on pensioners - why Government is not implementing the relevant regulations that have been passed under the Statute to pay pensioners their adequate pensions.  These questions have taken more than two weeks with the relevant Ministers.  

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, you gave notice to the Prime Minister.  I complimented the Prime Minister with the Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs for being a good team, a winning team which was working together and that it was going to satisfy us.  I am surprised to see that there is "prorogation" as an item on the agenda and these questions of Members, not only mine but of many other Members, have not been addressed. 

We are going to our constituencies where the questions on land are very prime. There are some areas where disputes have not been attended to and we have no answers from Government about this aspect.  There is no land fund; we do not know what to tell our constituents when we spend time in the constituencies.  There is no tribunal set up to implement this aspect; there is no planning authority, there is nothing to tell our constituencies.  What are we going to do in this respect and yet, yesterday, Mr. Speaker, you were very clear. You said that our questions will be answered.  Now, the only question that has turned up is the question of why we are not members of Tourism and that is the only one which is being addressed!  Is this really fair to us?  Can we appeal through you to the Leader of Government Business to take Members of Parliament seriously? 

We hope that this new team will be able to answer what we want to tell our constituents.  We do not ask these questions for the heck of it. We have got pressures from our constituencies and we must answer those pressures!  What do I tell people who are now in dispute, who cannot go to court because Parliament stopped courts from handling land disputes until the tribunals? The question has been put, the question has not been answered and, Mr. Speaker, can you help me to guide me or allow the Leader of Government Business to tell me what I should go and tell my constituents?  

MR. NABUTAALA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to supplement hon. Elly Karuhanga.  I have five questions unanswered, they are published.  One to the Minister for Constitutional Affairs about delivery of justice, one to the Minister of Internal Affairs about our jails and cells, another one to the Minister of Finance about our foreign debts. It has not been answered and two others.  Mr. Speaker, I feel that once you prorogue, I will lose the answers and I was promised the questions would be answered today.  

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, actually mine is related to the last speaker's supplementary question. Mr. Speaker, do I assume that you are going to invoke your powers to suspend Rule No. 10 so that we can sustain our questions to the next Session?  Otherwise, I have a Motion on the Floor. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Awori, I understand your position but you should not be unduly worried about that. 

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I am equally concerned about the fact that the whole system of the Executive answering questions from the Back Bench is really chaotic.  I have questions that I have put which affect the people that I represent in this Parliament, people with disabilities; I have put these questions to Ministers, I have waited for a whole session but these questions have not been answered. Some of the Ministers have been reshuffled and I do not know whether, in fact, I will ever get any answers.  Now, Parliament is going to be prorogued, I do not know what will be the fate of those questions.  I think, Mr. Speaker, we better find a formula which will cause the Executive to answer our questions according to the Rules because the Rules are very clear on how the questions are put, when they must be answered and for heaven's sake, we must really work according to the Rules, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, before I call the Prime Minister to respond, let me also give you our side of the story as Parliament.  When the office of the Clerk receives these questions, they are promptly processed and submitted to the relevant Ministers and in order to afford the Minister's opportunity to research and come up with the answers which may or may not call for too many supplementary questions, we give them a bit of time.  But experience has shown two things:  One is that either we do not get a response as to the readiness or availability of the Minister responsible in good time, or we get involved with lengthy debates which provide very little opportunity for us to attend to questions.  I think those could have been two contributory factors.  But as I said last time, we have now started a system which unfortunately has to be interrupted by this prorogation of Parliament whereby after a certain period, we will just put the question on the Order Paper and demand the Minister to come and answer.  That is now what we have set about to do.   

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. A. Nsibambi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is our intention to meet all the chairmen of the Committees so that we can sort out outstanding systemic problems and find persistent answers to those questions.  So, I want to give notice that it is our plan to do that.  I want to apologise to Members of Parliament for some of the problems which have arisen, but I want also to say that I am in a position to answer some of the questions regarding pensions and regarding land.  So, those concerned may pose those questions.  I can answer them right away.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think what you wanted of the Prime Minister is an explanation as to what is happening, what is going on and in my opinion, he has answered that. I do not think we should read out the questions at this stage for the Prime Minister  to answer because we might run into problems.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I want to congratulate the Prime Minister for his readiness and his agility to take on Members of Parliament and answer their questions orally and I would like to wish him very well because I know that now we are probably going to run a system where the Leader of Government Business answers all the questions about his Government because waiting for Ministers to come in and to have a line of Ministers sitting here who are not there like we have now, I do not know how far we will go.  So, let the Prime Minister take on the questions. And with that, Mr. Speaker, my question was to the Minister of - (interjection) - 

DR. AJEANI: Mr. Speaker, I know the term the Right Hon. Prime Minister started in England.  We have adopted it here.  Is my hon. Brother, Elly Karuhanga whom I respect, in order to just say the Prime Minister without using the expression the Right Hon. Prime Minister?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think it is only fair that just as we refer to one another as hon. Member for such and such constituency or the hon. Member or the hon. Karuhanga, we should similarly refer to our Prime Minister by his full title. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, if there is anybody to apologise for that slip of the tongue, it is my tongue and it is me.  I would have wanted very much to refer to the Right. Hon. Prime Minister with his full titles, only that I was in a hurry and I ask forgiveness.  And by the way, the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs has debated the title of the Prime Minister and has passed it to read "Right Hon. Prime Minister" to distinguish him from other honourables. Therefore, the hon. Member was in order to raise it and to remind me and I really sincerely apologise.   

Having said that, I am pleased that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business is now ready to answer some few oral questions which have been with him and which he is very much aware of but I would not have liked to take him or ambush him in anyway like this, only that we are going for prorogation.  I sincerely would like hon. Members to go to their constituencies with an answer to the question on land.  I would like to know whether the land tribunals are going to be set up or we are going to wait for a long time.  I would like to know when the land fund is going to be set up or we are going to wait for the next Budget  because these questions were put and I would like to know when he is putting up the land Committees and empowering them.  

I would also like to know about pensions because he is very familiar with it. He was in the Ministry, he knows the Law is there, he knows there was a Committee which established these regulations and the Minister signed the regulations. They are part of the Statute and, therefore, the Government should be paying pension on a new scale from the one they are paying.  I would like to know why they are not paying?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga, I think we will be setting a very dangerous precedent if we simply come with questions and demand answers from the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister.  I think these questions were in the first incident directed to sector Ministers and I think they should be given an opportunity to answer those questions in detail.  Now, if there should be any other matters arising from those answers where the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister would like to clarify and amplify, then the chace will be given to him at an appropriate time.  I think we should not really ambush the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister at this stage.  

PROROGATION OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, the Third Session of the Sixth Parliament of Uganda commenced on Monday 1st June, 1998.  In the Session, Parliament has sat for three meetings in which important business of legislation have been handled. We have passed seven Acts of Parliament, debated and adopted 19 Resolutions.  There remains a lot of work still requiring Parliamentary action and I have received a number of requests from Chairpersons of Committees asking to continue working during recess so as to report progress in the next session.  We are however constrained by two factors namely; lack of funds to keep Parliament running up to the next financial year and secondly, the need for us to vacate the premises so that rehabilitation of the building can commence during recess.  It will, therefore, not be possible to transact any work during the period that Parliament will be on recess.  However, in accordance with Rule 10 of our Rules of Procedure, I have decided to save all pending business so that it can be re-introduced and handled expeditiously at the beginning of the next session.  

I wish to thank you all for all that you have accomplished in the Session both in the Plenary and Committee meetings although in some cases work of Parliament and of its Committees has had to be hampered by problems of lack of quorum.  This is a matter which I have no doubt when we return from recess well rejuvenated and re-invigorated, we should be able to address and provide a solution for.  Thanks especially go to those who have been regular attendants of this House and whose example the others should emulate.  

Time has now come for me to close the Third Session of this Parliament and accordingly, I wish to proclaim as follows: 
"WHEREAS Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution provides that  the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation;

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultation with His Excellency the President has been carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued; 
NOW THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from the 15th day of April 1999.  Given under my hand at Parliament House Kampala, this 15th day of April 1999.  Signed F.J. Ayume, Speaker of Parliament."

Finally, I wish you a good time of rest and we look forward to meeting here again on a day to be announced in due course.  Thank you very much.

           (Parliament rose and adjourned sine die)
