Wednesday 11th April, 2001.

Parliament met at 2:30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members there is a very minor change or Amendment on the Order Paper. Following the communication from the Chair, there will be a personal explanation by hon. Karuhanga.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Mr. Elly Karuhanga (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Mr. Speaker I thank you for the opportunity. I have read with utter consternation a statement in The Monitor of today 11th April 2001, that leading Movement Activists with the backing of President Museveni have finalised plans to defeat what they described as 'anti establishment of Members of Parliament' in the forthcoming elections.  That "the politicians and the military officers from Ankole have finished compiling the list of bad politicians and The Monitor has learnt that Museveni has been briefed. The power vetting team includes among others: Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine, Elly Karuhanga, LT. Col. Tumusiime Nyakaitana and Army chief of staff, Brig. Kazini, with the guidance of the Local Government Minister, Jaberi Bidandi Ssali; the vetting Committee has targeted hon. John Kazoora of Kashari County among others".  

Mr. Speaker let met assure the House through you and the whole country that I am not associated with such activities at all. I have never attended any meeting with any of the people mentioned with regard to the subject matter. I believe and I have talked to Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine he was as shocked as I am and I believe that the other soldiers mentioned and hon. Bidandi Ssali could not be part of this story. I have talked with my Colleague and my brother in Law hon. Maj. Kazoora and I have assured him that the story is yet another lie like the other one which said that I was a Lawyer for retired Col. Kizza Besigye in the petition, when I was acting as a Legal Advisor to President Museveni's petition.

This statement is meant to generate and create ill feelings between me and my Friends in the Movement and in this Parliament, with whom I have enjoyed so much comradry in the past 13 years, I have been here serving the people. I ask all of you please to treat the contents of that article in The Monitor Newspaper with contempt it deserves. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker on this day April 11th 1979 I had the occasion to announce that this is Radio Uganda and we had the Late President Lule sworn as new Leader of the Government of Uganda on the steps of this Parliament.  It is a pity that this Country, which has benefited so much from that liberation, has not taken into account the great day of April 11th. And I wish to report through you Mr. Speaker, my consternation in this and that I am praying Government will take this into effect that liberation of Uganda was definitive.  April 11th is a date our children need to remember and April 11 1979 should go in the annals of our history as a great day. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR. NYAI: The procedure Mr. Speaker, is that I hope through you Government will announce April 11th as a great national day.

THE SPEAKER: I am not a Member of the Executive.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker I did not say you announce it as a great national day. I said Government will ,through you.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway hon. Dick Nyai, you have made your point. We shall proceed.  

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members you very well know that in order for us to proceed to Committee stage we need to have a quorum; because we are going to take decisions, we are going to vote and that being the case I am entirely in your hands and I will do what I normally do at this stage or not because I want to encourage this practice, it is a bad one, not coming to Parliament in order to form a quorum for us to transact Parliamentary Business. I am constrained to advice that we proceed to the next Business, which will not require immediate decision making process but will allow us to spend a bit of this time debating the next Item on the Agenda. I see no objection and we will proceed.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 1999

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister responsible is around, is available and I will call him or her to proceed.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr. Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Members of this House have for sometime been with the draft Bill on the Health Service Commission; and we have gone through the procedure, we have met with the relevant Committee a number of times, and my Colleague the hon. chairman of the Committee has the report. I thought Mr. Speaker, it is our usual procedure that the chairman presents the report of the Committee so that we can proceed.

THE SPEAKER:  No, hon. Minister the procedure is this.  We are going to the Second Reading of the Bill the procedure is that the Minister who is in charge of the Bill moves a motion that the Bill be read a second time, and if he wishes he can address the House. Otherwise that would be good enough and then I will call upon the chairman to present his report after which debate will ensue. As soon as you are ready, hon. Minister, you can proceed.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr. Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, "The Health Service Commission Bill 2000" be read the Second Time. The Bill has been with the hon. Members of the House for sometime and also we have had adequate opportunity to discuss the Bill with the Committee on social services and I believe that my Colleague will be giving the details on that Bill. So I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE IN SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Mutesasira): Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health moved the First Reading of the Health Service Commission Bill, 1999 on the 14th of June, 2000. The Bill was then referred to the Sessional Committee on social services for scrutiny in accordance with rule 99.5 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament.  Accordingly, the Committee begun consideration of the Bill and held a number of consultative meetings with the Minister of health and officials of the Ministry. 

Several meetings were held with the following stakeholders. The health service commission, the Uganda Medical Association, Uganda Medical workers Union and the Committee received a written submission from the Allied Health Professions Council. The Committee would like to register its appreciation to the ministry of health for its co-operation during the discussions on this Bill in the Committee and we are grateful to the stakeholders for their valuable contributions. Their views have been catered for in these Amendments and in the report.

The scope of the Bill.  Mr. Speaker, the Bill seeks to give a legal framework to the Health Service Commission, which the 1995 constitution envisage to be provided for by Parliament under article 169 and 170 of the constitution. The Committee believes that if this Bill is passed and enacted into law, it will assist in promoting the health standards in this country and will further enforce discipline in the health profession.  

The Committee also discussed at length the performance of health workers under the influence of drugs and in particular smoking while on duty. Members wanted these to be provided for in this Bill, especially, under Clause 33.6, but the Ministry assured us that a Bill was under way to address smoking in public places. We urge Government and the Ministry of health in particular to expedite this Bill.  

The Committee also noted that the Health Service Commission is already in place but some of its operations are constrained due to lack of an enabling law. This Bill is therefore, to give legal effect to the commission and will enable it to fully undertake its mandate. The Committee recommends that this Bill subject to other Amendments that may arise from this House be passed and enacted into law. Mr. Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: The matter is now open for debate.  If there are no contributors I will ask the Minister to wind up.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr. Crispus Kiyonga):  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Members of this august House for the obvious unanimity that the Bill has received. But for the avoidance of doubt, I would like to stress for sake of emphasis some points that appear in this Bill so that when we move to Committee stage we can have the unanimity that we have started with continuing. In the practice of health care delivery, we are guided centrally by what we call ethics.  This is traditional all over the whole world and whoever comes to practice medicine has to abide by these ethics.  

Now, in this Bill we have considered it very important that some of these matters that are otherwise honorary traditional and are regarded as matters of ethics, we thought part of them should be lifted into the body of the law to form what we have called the code of conduct that is going to govern health workers; and as the chairman of the Committee has already stated, we think this provision will further strengthen the practice of health care delivery in this country.   

We have tried to include people who may not be traditionally health workers, they may not be doctors, they may not be nurses but ordinarily work in health care delivery. They may be drivers and they may be people who access records in the hospitals and health units. It is important that these too observe this code of conduct because part of the ethics for example says, if person X comes to you as a doctor and he has a certain aliment you have to keep confidential that information between you and your client. But for example, the people who handle the files also open the files and see. So these people in that process also get access to this privileged information; and if they are not bound by the same discipline, then we are going to have a breakdown of our tradition that keep confidence between the clients and the practitioner.  

A driver in a hospital is more than an ordinary driver in a taxi or in a bus because he is driving an ambulance and at some stage, that driver may be required to carry out some simple operations, some simple acts that could sustain the life of the client as he is being conveyed from one point to another. That driver should be conscious that the person he is driving to convey to the next point of health has to be driven in a certain way although conveyed as quickly as possible. So for these and other reasons, we considered it necessary that people who will ordinarily work in the health sector even if they are not professionally doctors or nurses or clinical officers, they will also be bound by this code of conduct. 

Lastly, let me stress the point about smoking.  As hon. Members are aware, smoking is a culprit in the causation of lung cancer and indeed in the developed countries; cancer attributed to smoking is one of the major causes of death and ill health and we do not have to wait, until we are at the stage of development like these other countries.  We need to start now to make sure that we do not expose our people to unnecessary levels of smoking.  But we find ourselves in a difficult situation when you look on the other side of income of the Economy. In this country, we have a good fraction of our population depending on growing and selling tobacco and therefore, as we move on tobacco on smoking, we will have to take that into account. 

We plan before we bring the law to have a thorough discussion, with hon. Members of Parliament who come from the tobacco growing areas. The purpose will be to persuade these hon. Members that while tobacco brings money, it also brings death and that we need to start moving to change from that economic activity for the sake of the health of our people.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you Mr. Speaker and I would like to thank Dr. Kiyonga for giving way. The hon. Minister is talking about tobacco smoking and tobacco smoking has a lot of relevancy to the environment. Mr. Speaker, noting that Uganda does not live in isolation, much as we are making a lot of money from tobacco, we also make a lot of money from tourism. A number of tourists because of the existing international accords of laxity in terms of freedom, they feel it is not a crime to smoke in public places. What is Uganda intending to do to avert that kind of situation, where we could embrace international tourists while we are also protecting our environment?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, when did you come into the House?  Were you here when the chairman was reading his report?  

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Yes Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Did you hear him say that there is a Bill in the offing to take care of that situation?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Yes, I seem to have heard.

MR. DICK NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister did say that he intends to hold discussions with Members of Parliament from tobacco growing areas so that they can realise that whereas tobacco brings money, it also brings death. I would like to ask the hon. Minister of Health whether he has held similar discussions with persons from areas where there is water. For I know that whereas water is life, water also kills.

DR. KIYONGA: Mr. Speaker, just briefly to respond to what hon. Lukyamuzi raised, I did state that in the developed world, this awareness of the dangers of smoking are more clearly felt than in our environment. So I have no doubt that tourists coming from those areas would not be surprised indeed. They will be supportive of procedures that isolate people who are smoking in the public. And as to what my O.B has raised, I must say that I am surprised a question like this would come from a Budonian because really that does not beg the question.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the question is from a Member of Parliament and for Ayivu County for that matter -(Laughter).

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and my colleague, thank you very much. I just wanted to inform my colleague here that he should really not be surprised. He should have been surprised if a person came from Nyakasura-  (Laughter).

DR. KIYONGA:  As Mr. Speaker I was addressing hon. Dick Nyai a Member of Parliament from Ayivu, but who also happens to be an O.B of Kings College Budo. I also note the point which my elder Brother hon. Minister of Local Government has clarified that the situation perhaps would have been different if hon. Dick Nyai was from Nyakasura.  Fortunately for me, Mr. Speaker, I happen to be from both schools. So I think I have no problem with both positions.

MR. DICK NYAI:  Mr. Speaker is the hon. Minister for Health in order to be beating around the bush rather than answering the question, which was put? Because Mr. Speaker, I did not put the question because I was at Budo or elsewhere. When others failed to go to Budo and went to small schools like Nyakasura, that is not my fault. Is he in order therefore, to evade the question?

THE SPEAKER: I suppose you are talking about the question I put to the Minister. Oh, it was not a question. I merely said the Minister was addressing you as a Member of Parliament for Ayivu, not as a Budonian and the Minister stood up to say yes, he was actually – that is what he meant, that is the person he was addressing and I did not see anything wrong with that. Hon. Minister, can  you wind up?

DR. KIYONGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. So in conclusion I thought I should make those clarifications and I do expect as we have started that Members will throughout support this Bill as we move to the next stage.  Therefore Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, again for reasons which I gave in relation to the previous item, we cannot move to the next stage for the consideration of this item, why, because we have not managed to get the necessary quorum, and that being the case I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes.

(The Proceedings were  suspended for 15 minutes at 3.00p.m )

(On resumption at 3.31p.m, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: There are some hon. Members in the lobby or in the building; may I request them to come in, we would like to take a head count. 

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali):  Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence to take advantage of the period when Members – those who are still in lobby are coming in, to make small reference to a statement by hon. Karuhanga.  

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, we are not debating anything; we are trying to take a head count to enable us go to the next item. Maybe, once we are there then you can – okay, let me hear you first. Sorry to interrupt you but let me hear you, I hope you are giving us the way forward out of this problem. 

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Yes, but just utilizing that time when they are coming from tea to here, I want to make a small point that hon. Members might have seen this morning in a paper that I am involved in a certain Committee and so on.  Hon. Members, I am too small for such a thing, if you want to make it so. I cannot be involved in anything of that sort involving my colleagues I have worked with for five years. So, please treat it with the contempt it deserves, and I think, be careful also because it could be a sin that is trying to bring problems amongst a team that has just recently delivered.  Now, instead of moving to the next exercise with that spirit now this is starting. But as far as Bidandi is concerned any of you, every one of you is a friend; I wish you well, I am not participating but I will be with you in spirit.  Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: We cannot make a quorum; I shall adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 3.36 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12th April, 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)
