Wednesday, 10 April 2002

Parliament met at 2:30 p.m.in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms. Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the disability caucus of this Parliament will have a legislative dialogue at Hotel Africana on the 16th of April at 5.00 p.m. 

I would like to request members of the House, including those who are not part of the disability caucus, to go and attend this meeting. It has been organised in conjunction with the Office of Parliamentary Professional Development. It will improve on the capacity of our colleagues to perform their work. Do not forget, it is on Tuesday, 16 April 2002 at 5.00p.m. at Hotel Africana.  

I understand the Minister of Works would like to brief the House on what caused our abrupt adjournment yesterday. Can I ask the Minister of State, Capt. Babu, to brief the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and hon. Members. First and foremost, I want to apologise because my senior colleague is attending the meeting in Conference Centre, and he is one of the presenters.  

We are preparing a statement on the accident that took place at Mukwano level crossing of the railway. But there are some hon. Members who have been concerned and have asked us to present an initial report on what happened yesterday.  

We have collected most of the information, and a full statement will be delivered to this House tomorrow by my senior colleague.

However, yesterday we had a very big tragedy when a Port Bell bound train, a V54, hauling maize and coffee exports of 32 units was involved in an accident with a road fuel tanker at Mukwano level crossing at about 6.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 9th, and caused fire.  

Police and Mukwano industry fire brigade arrived in the nick of time and engaged the fire, which damaged the train and the fuel tanker. Six members of the train crew sustained serious injuries and are admitted in various hospitals in Kampala, Mulago, Nsambya and Rubaga.

The fire was put out at 9.00 p.m. by the Police, the Mukwano Industries fire brigade and the Civil Aviation Authority chemical fire brigade. They came and helped to put out the fire. 

The locomotive, number 73U10, and wagon number 5607 were pulled to Port Bell at about 10.00 p.m. The remaining 30 units have been pulled back to Kampala yard today at 9.30 a.m., and most of the contents in the wagons were burnt. The wreckage of the road fuel tanker was removed today by the Uganda Railways Corporation crane. The road was opened to normal traffic by 10.00 a.m. today.  

The Minister of Works and Housing has been briefed and has taken immediate steps and directed the Uganda Railways Corporation to put up 24-hour manned barriers at certain areas where accidents have occurred more often.  They are to put up a barrier at the same location where the accident took place, that is Nsambya railway crossing, and Bugolobi within the next few days.  

The Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications regrets this accident, and in the statement which will be issued tomorrow, details will be given on the legal framework that governs railway crossings and traffic at the railway crossings. They will give the details of the people who were injured, what the immediate concern of the Uganda Railways Corporation is and how much they have already contributed towards the treatment of the officers who were burnt.  

Luckily for us, it only burnt the people who were in the train and most of the cars were not affected. That reduced the incidence of accidents.  Nobody has died yet. They are still in hospital, and the details of the people who are sick will be given in the statement that will be issued by my senior colleague tomorrow.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That is the initial information we can give you. If there are any questions that pertain to this, I might be able to give you more information. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, although the fire was not in this building, I was nevertheless alarmed by the manner in which the news arrived in this Chamber, causing members to flee. Actually, if our records were properly kept, they would read, “Members flee, Speaker abandoned in the Chamber.” (Laughter).  

I would like to urge you to refresh your memory from the handbook we gave you with the fire drill in case this happens in this House. But in future, if that kind of alarm comes, let us wait for official information, especially if the fire is not in this building.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Thank you very much. Obviously, in cases of fire, regardless of the various rules, I think the rule of nature will immediately tell the person concerned that one has got to flee to the safest place possible. Obviously those are very important rules so that people can be orderly.  

My worry is that we are closing the gates when the horses have bolted. These railway crossings all over the country are not manned at all. We have heard about this one because it involved a tanker in Kampala, but possibly many Ugandans on bicycles or people walking are dying at railway crossings without attracting the attention of Parliament or anybody important like a minister.  

In the old days, there used to be a man with two flags, one would be red and another one would be green, and he would make sure that he would wave to people not to cross until the train has fully crossed. In fact, in some cases there were bars; a bar would be put across so that people can be stopped from crossing. What has happened to these standards? What has gone wrong? It is unimaginable. All over the world, railway crossings are guarded to protect the lives of people, yet here we wait for this tragedy to occur and then say, “oh yes, Uganda Railways Corporation is going to put people to guard the railway crossing twenty four hours a day; and this will be done in the next few days.” Within the next few days something else can happen! Why could it not be done immediately, yesterday?

So, Madam Speaker, I think there is total negligence and this negligence is causing death. This negligence is causing people to suffer. Many of these will perhaps be disabled because of these unnecessary accidents which could have been stopped if people were doing their work. I am really very sorry. Thank you.

MRS SSEBAGEREKA KAKOKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the quick report. But I want to say that this is an eye opener. In all countries I have traveled to, railways have big signposts showing that this is a railway crossing. Whether the train is passing or not, you must stop for a few minutes before you cross. Actually so many might have died but God has been on our side so far. 

Since this thing has happened now, I seriously request and recommend that on every railway crossing, there should be those signs showing that there is a railway crossing. It should also be a must for drivers to observe railway crossings. They should reduce speed and then proceed when everything is clear. 

On the lights, I would like to add my voice to hon. Mwandha’s, the railway crossing should have a gate to restrict the cars crossing. It should also have red lights.  

That aside, I also take note of the high speeds of those tankers that carry dangerous, inflammable liquid like petrol and paraffin. We were lucky that this time it was diesel and not petrol. If it had been petrol, so many lives would have been lost. 

In the history of Uganda these two infernos have caused a lot of questions; the Iganga inferno and this one. So the oil companies should, must and ought to see that the drivers of these vehicles are really cautioned about speed. Many people compete with these huge trucks. My colleague, hon. Kefa Sempangi, nearly lost his life last Friday because a huge vehicle was driven at a very high speed and there was no control.  

I would like all of us Ugandans who use roads to use them carefully. Those big companies with big trucks and trailers must also take into account other peoples’ lives.  Thank you.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the accident of yesterday was a blessing in disguise to the Minister, otherwise his statement should be clear tomorrow. The first thing the Minister should address is the use of the Kampala highway. Having these fuel tankers cross the city, going all the way to Kigali and Zaire, is one of the problems. I hope the Minister will address it.  

Two; very many Ugandans have died at that Mukwano junction, they have died at the Bugolobi junction. At times when there were railway bases at the Bugolobi junction, Uganda Railways Corporation puts their people to man that junction. But they stay there for two days and are removed because there are no accidents during those two days. I hope the Minister is not going to do the same by putting there people to man that junction now and then remove them next week. 

We were lucky that there were no deaths yesterday, but hon. Minister, very many people have died at that junction. The luck we had yesterday is that it involved a train and fuel tankers, no people. The fire was alerting you and I would like to alert you too. Many Ugandans have died and if you did not know, yesterday’s accident was a blessing in disguise. Please man your junctions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, since there is going to be another statement, let hon. Ndeezi be the last contributor. The rest of you wait for the substantive statement.

MR ALEX NDEEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. One statement made by the Minister has deeply disturbed me. The Minister has indicated that the fire started at 6.00 p.m. and certain agencies charged with the responsibility of fighting fire took up to 9.00 p.m. doing so. This is roughly four hours. Fours hours in a city in the heart of our country! If this could happen within Kampala city, what could have been happened if it was in the village?

I think that readiness, our preparedness to fight disaster, is itself a disaster. I am deeply worried. What measures will the Government put in place to ensure that we do not perish like dogs? Thank you.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I take your concerns very seriously and I will pass them over to the different bodies concerned. 

As we however come tomorrow to give a statement, we will also quote the law. The law is very clear on crossing railway lines throughout the country. The Traffic rules and Road Safety Act are also very clear on this issue. For those who might want to delve deeper into this, for your interest, section 42(5) of the Uganda Railway Corporation Statute is very clear on it too. The Traffic and Road Safety Act Section 125(1) is also clear on this one and if you do read it, it will show you clearly how the traffic is managed around those areas where we have railway crossings. 

I have taken most of the concerns very seriously, including the one of hon. Ndeezi, which is to do with fire fighting in our city and probably throughout the country. We will pass it on to our colleagues in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and I am quite sure the Leader of Government Business has heard this. We will discuss it with the other members of government to see what quick measures should be taken to protect people across the whole country.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I believe hon. Wacha was on the Floor before we fled.  

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Ben Wacha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We were still discussing Rule 61.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Before the fire disturbed us, Madam Speaker, I had risen to say that I wanted to make a compromise proposal because as Members would recall, there was a proposal to the effect that how decent or dignified a Member is dressed should be left to the Speaker.  That was one school of thought.  Then there were people who were saying that it is okay, provided we at least mention some examples so that the Speaker is actually guided by the rules. 

I looked at the proposal by the Committee, and I just wanted to cure the complaint by Members that instead of saying “All Members shall dress in a dignified manner, that is to say…”, and then mention the manner which is restrictive, which does not provide for other dignified attires, we could say, “All Members shall dress in a decent and dignified manner, such as…”. Instead of “that is to say” we put “such as” in order to give examples of dignified manner and then we can detail (a), (b) and (c) so that when there is a complaint on the Floor and somebody is dressed in another manner other than what is mentioned in the rules, the Speaker can then use his/her discretion and rule whether the dress is dignified and decent.  

Some Members wanted us to mention traditional dress and I think that is one of the manners we can leave to the Speaker to determine. I went to a conference and a delegate from Swaziland came in a traditional dress; he was hardly dressed because one side of him was bare and yet he had bangles.  He had all sorts of things, chains and skins and so on and so forth. When he entered, notwithstanding that we were all Africans and had different ways of dress, everybody was surprised by the nature of the traditional dress.

If a situation like that one occurred, then the Speaker would decide whether that traditional dress is decent and dignified in the spirit of the rules. I also know that one of our colleagues from Karamoja, he is no longer in this House, at the opening of Parliament one day, he put on a very well elaborate Karimojong dress, like one other colleague who came from Budadiri also did on that occasion.  But there were question marks whether some of these could be described as decent.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am proposing that indeed we should give the Speaker the right eventually to decide whether the dress is dignified and decent.  But I think we need to give some examples and the examples given by the Committee appear to be quite satisfactory.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are two positions.  One is to leave the present rule as it is, and I think the present rule provides that all Members shall dress in a dignified and decent manner. I think that is the present rule and that was the proposal that we leave it to the Speaker to determine what is decent and dignified as has been happening. The second position is that there should be some indication of what we should wear.  So, I think we need to take a vote on both these positions.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I have a problem with whether to put in a word “comfortable”. I am not only referring to Members but also the Speaker.  I am concerned about the welfare of the Speaker, whether it is comfortable really to put on, however professional - however the past people have presented it, whether it is fair to the Speaker in such heat to be forced to dress in a manner that I feel is uncomfortable? So, I was wondering, for purposes of taking care of freedom and comfort, whether we would not add “comfortable?”

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you took some opportunity to complain to hon. Lt Gen. Tumwine about your comfort! But maybe I should take this opportunity to announce that with some hope, and hoping that we get whatever we have applied for from my colleague the Minister of Finance, this Chamber will be air-conditioned after the next Financial Year.  We have put some request, so maybe that will take care of the comfort of the Speaker.  

But, Madam, I had stood up to say that I quite agree with hon. Mwandha on the improvement, and I also wanted to improve on (a) by putting “traditional wear” instead of “kanzu,” and “kawunda;” instead of “safari suit”. 

And in (b) I was persuaded by hon. Matembe to put “trousers”; so I have included a suit, a jacket, trousers, blouse, dress or traditional attire for lady Members. I think that improvement should cater for everybody now.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, supposing hon. Musumba came here dressed in a kanzu and a turban and said that that is traditional in his religion, how would the Speaker rule?  With a huge turban and a flowing kanzu and say that is traditional in his religion.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, we go back to Rule 8, which says that any matter not specified herein will be determined by the Speaker. So, it is the Speaker who will determine whether hon. Musumba is decently and dignifiedly dressed.

LT COL. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I propose that on this rule, we say that the dignified or comfortable dressing the Members are talking about shall include all those which have been listed and any others the Speaker may approve from time to time. So that if a Member is in doubt and thinks that he may not meet the standards, he could see the Speaker and say, ‘Madam Speaker, how is this?(Laughter) I am saying this because we cannot exhaust all the fashions. 

I have seen someone wearing a Nigerian style and it looked beautiful. I have seen somebody with a Sari, which I think, is worn by Indians, and it looked great. I have seen somebody wearing a Kawunda, which resembles Mao’s Kawunda, the Chinese style. There is also the Mwalimu’s style; there are all sorts of fashions which are good. 

I think we should take what the Committee has described to include all those good things and we let that Member who is in doubt to crosscheck with the greatest authority in this House. If the Speaker is convinced that that is very good, he or she will accordingly rule that such and such a dress is still fitting within our intended decent and comfortable way of dressing. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEBAGALA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I believe that fashions of dress are many. But I have stood up as the parliamentary Imam as regards the Sharia dress. The chairperson of the Rules Committee talked about the Turbans, the Sharia, and Hijabu. So, as the parliamentary Imam, I cannot keep silent when they have talked about it. 

It is my humble request that as we describe the kind of decent dress that dignifies a Member of Parliament, I think it could suffice to say, that even hijabu is inclusive.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are two positions. One; Members should dress in a decent manner and if there is any doubt the Speaker will resolve it. Two, the school of thought that let us describe. Those are the two positions. My difficulty is that you cannot exhaust the descriptions. They are so many. These are the practical difficulties the Speaker would find himself or herself in.  But it is up to you really.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, when it comes to whether somebody is decently or “dignifiably” dressed, it will be a subject of assessment by the Speaker. Therefore, we cannot run away from the final decision of the Speaker about whether I am decently dressed or not. Whether we list a shirt, a blouse - examples were given here. A blouse without sleeves - but with also things –(Laughter)- it is still a blouse. But the duty will still lie with the Speaker to say, ‘yes, it is true that you are dressed in a blouse as indicated in the rules, but you are neither decently nor dignifiably dressed’. 

 In the final analysis, I propose that it is good to guide all our Members about the minimum standards expected. But at the same time, the responsibility will lie with the Speaker to determine who is properly dressed. On motion, somebody will rise and say, “Madam Speaker, is this hon. Member in order to dress like this?” and you will have to rule. 

So Madam Speaker, I see no reason why the House cannot accept the amended version of the Committee. If we accepted the amended version of the Committee –(Interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As proposed by hon. Mwandha?

MR MUSUMBA: As proposed by hon. Mwandha, the version plus hon. Mwandha’s addition, this House can accept it and we enjoy two things: this broad description which is indicative, and also the Speaker’s ruling as to whether somebody is dignifiedly dressed or not. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, I would now like to put the question. The question is that rule 61 be amended as proposed by hon. Mwandha.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 61, as amended, agreed to.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, what I heard was that you had two issues. But there was one position of maintaining the old law or having the new law. While we were still on that, hon. Mwandha made a proposal that on this we add what he was proposing –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Such as?

LT GEN. TUMWINE: You see, I do not even know the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was some addition of two words “such as”, instead of “that is to say”, “such as” was indicative.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Yes, but that – “such as” is not –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the hon. Lt Gen. Elly Tumwine in order to raise a matter which this House has already pronounced itself on?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not. Actually, hon. Tumwine, the amendment of hon. Mwandha was different from this. It having been passed, I could not now go to vote on the others.

Rule 62:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, the Committee proposes that we have sub-rule (2) in 62 to bring in the code of conduct, which appears as Appendix C - (Interruption). Can I finish? My amendment is coming to sub-rule 1?

DR OKULO EPAK: Sorry, Madam Speaker. I propose an amendment under sub-rule (1) that we delete sub-rule 1(c). Whereas –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what are you reading? Can you read what you want to delete.

DR OKULO EPAK: I am proposing that we delete paragraph (c) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 62, which reads, “while a Member is speaking, all other members shall be silent and shall not make unseemly interruptions.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can speak to the motion.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, I have noticed very serious objections to the formulation, but my worry is that if it is left as it is now, it might include heckling. My view is that this formulation could include the fact that we are not allowed even to heckle.  

Secondly, this formulation makes Parliament such a disciplined “churchish” arena. We had very lively situations here yesterday, where members were able to heckle here and there. A bit of noise, a bit of heckling keeps the House lively.  Not only that, it keeps members awake. But if we all sat here like we are listening to a priest, Madam Speaker, you will not be surprised to find how many people fall asleep.  

My view is that heckling is essentially part of the debate. Heckling is an expression of disapproval. In Houses like the House of Commons, people actually heckle very loudly; they even throw shoes, and it is the duty of the member speaking to raise his or her voice above the noise. That is what is allowed there. And it is again the duty of the Speaker to keep saying, “order, order”.  Otherwise, the Speaker would sit there and fall asleep if she is not occasionally called upon to talk about order.  

The formulation is very decent, but I also think that it is dangerously decent, that is why I am proposing that it should be deleted. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okulo Epak, have you ever tried to preside over a meeting where heckling is taking place and you are trying to listen to the person contributing?

DR OKULO EPAK: Yes, I have. But where I have presided in meetings where there is heckling, it is a crowd; it is not a disciplined assembly of members of Parliament. I do not imagine that this kind of heckling in a crowd would be similar to the one which would occur in the House. I think there is a basic difference. 

Even without this provision, we have not had that situation here yet. I think this provision is unnecessary. We are capable of knowing when to heckle sensibly and decently and when not to turn this House into a beer party. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I support the deletion for slightly different reasons.  Even in the Hansard, you will find occasions when members have applauded a member on the Floor and this has been recorded in the Hansard. I think applause is generally mentioned in the Hansard. 

If this particular provision will not outlaw the possibility of members expressing approval or disapproval when a member is debating, I would have no objection to it. If it is going to exclude the possibility of people applauding somebody who has made a statement, which is a good statement, which is a correct statement, I think then –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, the way this rule is drafted, it says very clearly that members will not just make noises, but they can only make those that are seemly interruptions. In the Parliamentary way of doing things, applauding is a seemly interruption, but not heckling. 

What hon. Mwandha is worried about, and which I think he is legitimately concerned about, has been addressed. What the honourable mover of the motion is worried about is not a legitimate concern, so it is not addressed. You can make a seemly interruption; it is provided for. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: I take it that seemly or unseemly, the Speaker will decide.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I want to re-assure hon. Epak that nothing new has been introduced. What we are trying to transplant is what was already in Rule 64 of the old rules. If interruptions were accepted in the former House, I do not see why they cannot be accepted when this rule comes into operation.

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU: Madam Speaker, if you look at Rule 62(f), they mention items that we should not bring in Parliament. I agree with most of them except the last one, which talks about electronic device. 

In the modern world where we are going, we are getting equipment that you can use to have notes, diaries, and palm computers. You can actually dictate to them information which you can come and use as reference. They do away with most of the big books that we carry around. 

Whilst the others are okay, the word “electronic device” does limit us. Where we are going in this modern world, all members are becoming computer literate and they are going to come with devices that can be used for reference. I know this was in our old rules, but I want to request that the word “electronic device” be deleted and we remain with “others”. The reason is modernisation of our deliberations, especially concerning the equipment that we use. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that “electronic device” be deleted.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, that sub rule actually takes care of modernization because the onus is on the member to inform the Speaker why he needs that electronic device. I am sure if it is necessary, the Speaker will give his or her consent. It is not that it is outlawed; it is only that you do not come with it without giving the Speaker information as to why you need it in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Any further amendments?

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, we have introduced sub rule (2) to be entitled “general behaviour”, and it reads as follows: “In all other matters, the behaviour of members of the House shall be guided by the code of conduct prescribed in Appendix (c).” 

I ask that we stand over this sub rule until we look at Appendix (c) and then we come back to it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is Appendix (c)?

MR WACHA: The appendix is at the end. Obviously we cannot jump there before we have finalised. We will deal with sub rule (2) after we have dealt with Appendix (c).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In that case should we stand over the whole of 62?

MR WACHA: We cannot pronounce ourselves on it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rules 61 and 62 are stood over until we reach the appendixes.

Rule 63, agreed to.
Rule 64: 

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I need some guidance on Rule 64, where it says, “The Speaker or the chairperson of a committee shall be responsible for observance of the Rules or Order in the House… his or her decision upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House…” 

One time in the House I was giving a contribution about matters of the Army, and one member raised on a point of order. He said, “This is a serving officer, he has the right forum in the Army council, why is he raising it on the Floor of the House, is he in order?” I was ruled out of order.  

That was a decision by the Speaker, but in my mind, I thought, “I am a Member of Parliament, I should raise these things on the Floor of the House. The right forum is the Floor of the House.” In the circumstance, what could I have done?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kazoora, if you had felt sufficiently grieved, you should have moved a substantive motion, after giving notice to the Speaker, to review that decision.

Rule 64, agreed to

Rule 65, agreed to

Rule 66:

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, Rule 66 talks about suspension of members. My concern is in regard to sub rule (4), which reads: “If a Member is suspended, his or her suspension on the first occasion in a Session shall be for the next three sittings excluding the sitting in which he or she was suspended; on the second occasion in a Session, for the next seven sittings” - and here I would like to say the seven sittings is about two weeks plus one sitting day – “this excluding the sitting in which he or she was suspended, and on the third and any subsequent occasion during the same Session, for the next twenty eight sittings of the House excluding the sitting in which the Member was suspended.” When we talk about twenty-eight sittings, we are talking about seven weeks plus one sitting day.

I am seeking clarification from the Chairperson whether or not these offences are itemized in the appendix or somewhere. If they are not, then you cannot explain what is referred to under Rule 66 (1), which reads: “If the Speaker, or the chairperson of any committee considers that the conduct of a Member cannot be adequately dealt with under sub rule (2) of Rule 65, he or she may name the Member.”  

Sub rule (2) is what we have just stood over. My concern is, if we have stood over sub rule (2) and we do not have adequate explanation for Rule 66, can we also stand over sub rule (4) so that those items may be itemized. If they are itemized, I have no objection. That is the clarification I am seeking.  Thank you.

MR WACHA: Madam, it is not necessary to itemize them. You cannot read Rule 66 in isolation. You have to start with Rule 65 (2), which is talking about conduct of a member in the House. 

If the conduct of the member in the House cannot be adequately dealt with a request that he withdraws, then the Speaker will apply Rule 66. If the member is named for the first time during that session, he will be suspended for three days. If he is named the third time, that is when he suffers the punishment of a 28 sittings’ suspension. 

You cannot itemize the conduct of a member which could possibly bring the wrath of the Speaker on you. You cannot! If you become irrelevant, if you keep on insisting on talking when you should not be speaking, if you continue gossiping with your neighbour when you should not and you are told not to – there are various rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu, these are new provisions.  If you look at the present Rules 69 and 70, they provide for the circumstances under which a member can be suspended. They are not arbitrary.

Rule 66 agreed to.

Rule 67 agreed to.

Rule 68 agreed to.

Rule 69 agreed to.

Rule 70 agreed to.

Rule 71:

MR WACHA: Madam, we have improved on the declaration of personal interest on any matter in the House, and I ask members to look at the other document, the white document –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, read it. Mine is incomplete; there is no 71 here. It is from 65 to –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: This other document, this one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have it there? So, can you lead us to the page, Chairperson?

MR WACHA: Yes, can you give me sometime? It seems I made improvements on my own document and it was not copied here. This one was part of it. So Madam Speaker, in the blue document, we have introduced another sub-rule between sub-rules (2) and (3) to read:  “Any Member who makes a declaration of personal interest under sub-rule (2) above, shall leave the House immediately after the declaration of such interest and at any rate before voting takes place.”  The idea here is that after you have declared your interest -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sergeant, can you assist us to tell the Members in the Lobby to either lessen their noise or come back to the Chamber?

MR WACHA: The idea here, Madam Speaker, is that after you have declared your interest in any matter which is being discussed on the Floor of the House or in the Committee, you should not take part again in the proceedings.
 
MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, why do people declare interest?  People declare interest if they legally belong to a body or organisation that is considering a matter in which they have interest. When interest is declared, it means I have informed everybody that I have an interest in this matter and therefore, ordinarily any contribution I make on that subject matter will be considered in light of the fact that I have the interest, which I have declared. To say that I declare interest and then I go away, -(Interruptions)- just a minute.  

Madam Speaker, I seek protection from hecklers, that is unseemly. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Our rule still says that Members shall be heard in silence.

MR MUSUMBA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Thank you. For those people who have attended board meetings, if you are a board member and there is a matter that has come before that board and you have an interest in that matter, you declare your interest. After declaring interest, you still stay in the meeting knowing very well that the whole -(Interruptions) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him complete his presentation and you can speak against it.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I think if somebody is required to get out, this House will be de-franchising that person. My view is, declare your interest, let us know your interest, we will debate the matter in your presence but knowing very well that you have an interest. You will not vote but you stay around so that if there is any matter that is incidental thereto, we can ask you to clarify. That is my view, Madam Speaker.

MR MWESIGYE ADOLF: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to hon. Musumba’s submission. I thought the rationale behind the law of conflict of interest is to avoid using one’s position to influence the outcome of a transaction in which you have interest. What hon. Musumba is saying is that if a Member has already declared his interest and continues to participate in the discussions, that would amount to conflict of interest which is prohibited by many laws, including the Leadership Code. I do not know whether we are about to make these rules conflict with the Leadership Code.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 71 be amended by the insertion of a new clause as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 71:

MR WACHA: There is a small improvement on - I do not know whether to call it 3 or 4, but what appears here is 3.  The improvement should read as follows: “If a Member fails to declare his or her interest under sub-rule (1) or (2) above, any Member may raise the matter in the House and the Speaker may order that the first mentioned Member shall not vote on the contract or matter before the House and may refer the conduct of that Member to the rules –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the improvement?

MR WACHA: The improvement I want is, after sub-rule (1) or (2). Put “any”, to read “Any Member may raise”; and then on the third line, it should read “the first mentioned Member shall leave the House and not vote on the contract or matter before the House.” I am improving on (3).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 71 as amended form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 71, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 72, agreed to.

Rule 73:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have a problem with 73, hon. Mwandha?

MR MWANDHA: Madam speaker, without imputing anything, how do you make sure that the people described under rule 72 will not conduct themselves in the manner described here under rule 73? How can we be sure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can give you information. We have many ex-officio Members here and whenever we are taking a vote, my main work is to watch their mouths to see that they are not doing anything. So far they have conducted themselves in an exemplary way because short of sending them away from here, I do not know how else we can do it.

Rule 73, agreed to.

Rule 74:

MR WACHA: 74, Madam Speaker, we have an amendment which deals with the matter we have not yet handled. I do not know whether we should stand it over and come back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it related to rule 8?

MR WACHA: It is related to rule 143, which we have not handled yet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we stand over this one as well because it is also related to rule 8, which we stood over the other day.  

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam.

Rule 75:

MR WACHA: There is no amendment to 75.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that rule 75 –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to make a proposal under rule 75. Let me just explain it. Often people will challenge the Speaker and if they are not 40 of them, the challenge will collapse. They could be 39, they could be 35, they could be 30, they could be 20. I want to make a proposal that if the challenge for a division is not realised - that is to say you do not have the 40 people - and you have say 30 people challenging the Speaker, the Speaker should call for a second voting. And this time the ayes should say “aye” separately from the “no”. This is because by the fact that so many people have stood up, it shows that the Speaker is human too. She probably did not get the “noes” and “ayes” and distinguish them accurately in the process of voice voting.  

I just want to introduce that element because division takes a lot of time. If however there was a second voting, then those 30 people would be satisfied that actually the Speaker was right. If it happens that actually the Speaker decides after the second call then obviously they will be exonerated. That is the proposal that I wish to make. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, if there are more than 30 people who are dissatisfied, why do they not stand up? If they are satisfied that the Speaker has made a mistake, why do they sit down and not stand up?

MR MWANDHA: No, Madam, I am citing a case where 30 people stand up. I am not referring to when they have not stood up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Mwandha, what I am asking is, if the Speaker has made a mistake and the majority of the people in the House feel so, they will stand up and they will certainly be more than 40. But if only 30 people have stood up, why not ask yourself why the others who are dissatisfied have not stood up?  

MR WAMBUZI: I feel that the issue of voting in this style is a temporary matter.  I would like to be clarified on when we shall get the system of electronic voting in place. It will clean all this up. Is it being budgeted for? In electronic voting, the Speaker will be able to get the result in front of her immediately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the Minister of Finance could assure me of the Financial Year in which he will give us that money, I would also give that assurance. But what I can say is that we have requested for money for that.  

MR OBBO: Madam Speaker, hon. Mwandha’s argument has caused some excitement in me and I would like to express my ignorance here. I would like to find out where the magical number 40 was derived from. Why is it not 20, or 30, why not 50? What is the magic behind the number 40? This is what I would like to find out.

MR ISANGA MUSUMBA:  You see, Madam Speaker, in the previous Parliament, the number of members was 281. The voting quorum was a third of that number. That one gave us less than 100 people, it came to about 93 people. So if you have 90 people voting using the voice system, for someone to be able to form the critical mass that contradicts the ears of the Speaker, it must be a number that would have substantially affected the result of that vote. That should be about half of the members present. That is how 40 was roughly arrived at.  

Today if we are to strictly go by that analysis, the number 40 would have to increase because the Members of Parliament voting are more than 283. Therefore, in my view, it is in the interest of this House to keep 40. If we go back to the scientific basis, we may end up having it increased. So let us maintain the 40 as a basis upon which we can contradict the ears of the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, are you still pursuing that proposal?  

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the basis of the figure 30 that I mentioned was that it is roughly one-third of the quorum. Sometimes it may be that you realise just the required quorum and if 30 people out of that have challenged the Speaker, I thought there would be ground for what I am proposing. But if members believe that we should keep 40, like my colleague is saying, I do not have any hard feelings about it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that rule 75 do form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 76 agreed to.

Rule 77 agreed to.

Rule 78 agreed to.

Rule 79 agreed to.

Rule 80:  

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, this is an introductory rule to the process of censure and removal from office. It is really a new rule. It gives this House the power to remove the President from office; to pass a vote of no confidence in the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker; to pass a vote of censure against a minister as prescribed by the Constitution; to pass a resolution for censure of the Vice President, or pass a resolution for the removal of a Parliamentary Commissioner.  That is an introductory rule to a series of other rules which are now going to follow.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, from rule 80, first of all, I want to agree with the Chairperson of the Committee that we need rules for implementing, as a House, our constitutional right to censure people we feel must be censured.  However, we have to proceed very, very slowly.  By way of procedure, I wanted to propose that given the weight of this matter, the Chair, allows a general debate on the issue of censuring the Vice President, censuring the President and rules of censure for ministers thereto. We can go into the specifics because under rule 80 for example, I have a whole submission to make about the Vice President; so, I would want to remove the Vice President from Rule 80.  I also have a submission to make on censure of the President.  

Therefore, even before we go into 80, we should debate in its totality the issue of censure of these bearers, and even you, Madam Speaker, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, those I also have some submission about what we should do if we want to remove those office bearers from office; I want to propose that as a way forward. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have no objection to that procedure.

MR KATUNTU:  I guess hon. Musumba wants to debate.  I do not know whether he knows that we also want to debate or we have any reply to his submission.  No body has stopped him to debate this; he can go ahead and just debate. Madam Speaker, who has stopped him?  He should go ahead and debate if he so wishes.  Why does he imagine other Members have nothing to say?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, at the beginning of the sittin, when we started the rules, we said that there are some areas which we are going to debate rule by rule, and other areas which may not require debate.  So, there is an indication that it is one of those areas that do require debate.  So, who will fire the first shot or do you want to stand it over for now?

MR WACHA: No, Madam Speaker, I do not say we should stand it over; there are small issues that they are complaining about– we should handle it and get it out of the way.

Madam Speaker, by way of introduction, the impeachment of a President is provided for under Article 107 of the Constitution; the President of Uganda may be removed from office because of abuse of office or willful violation of allegiance and the Presidential oath or because of misconduct or misbehaviour or because of physical or mental capacity.  

Members will realize that while the Constitution gives Parliament the right to impeach the President, the Constitution does not spell the method by which Parliament acts in order to remove the President.  The rules which have been brought before you here today, is to try to spell out the manner in which this action can be taken.  

Fortunately for this House, most of the things that should be done by Parliament are already prescribed by the Constitution.    The only thing which is not prescribed in the Constitution is the method by which the motion is introduced and the manner of gathering signatures for the impeachment of the President. What the Committee did, therefore, is to try to think aloud and find out a way in which the House will be informed of a motion for the impeachment of the President; and secondly, how that motion will be sent to the Speaker; and thirdly, how the one-third signature of all Members of Parliament will be gathered.

Madam Speaker, the Constitution is quiet about what happens if the holder of the office of Vice President misbehaves.  The Constitution is quiet about the removal of the holder of the office of Vice President. The Committee was in a dilemma; do we leave it that the holder of the office of Vice President should never be removed from office because there is a Constitution lacuna or do we make provision for her or his removal?  

The Committee was convinced by arguments that look at the method by which the holder of the office of Vice President attains that office; how does he or she attain the office?  According to the Constitution the President nominates a name for that office and it is brought here before Parliament – it is Parliament which votes on the name to make that person a Vice President, and we were convinced that the person or a body which appoints has the power to disappoint, hence the proposal that a Vice President should be censured.  

Why can’t we impeach the Vice President? The Committee was convinced that impeachment is a very serious procedure, and it was put in the Constitution because the holder of the office of the President has been voted into that office by the totality of all the voters of Uganda, and therefore the method of removing that person must of necessity be more complicated; more serious than the method of removing a person whose only constituency is a Parliament made up of 300 people and so forth.

Censure of Ministers:

Ministers are supposed to be censured under Article 118 of the Constitution.  The Constitution does not provide the rules for censure, but this Parliament has a right to censure.  

The Rules Committee, therefore, came out with some form of rules under which the censure process should be conducted.  We thought this was a very important matter, because looking back at the history in the 6th Parliament, two ministers were censured but after every censure, there was a problem.  The Minister or the people who were supporting the Minister said, “Parliament should not have acted because they did not have rules”.  Parliament is therefore now filling in the gap so that should there be any other possible censure, it should be done according to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, the Constitution provides for the removal of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker but without again spelling out the method by which it can be done. The Rules Committee also provided for rules for the removal of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker.  The Rules Committee also provided for rules for removing Parliamentary Commissioners. I do not think that is a controversial matter, because it is not.  

So, I think the problem arises on how do we provide for rules for removal of a Vice-President while the Constitution is silent about it?  I want to inform the House that I have held a number of meetings even after the Committee had already decided.  I held a number of meetings with the hon. Attorney- General on this matter. He will support me and if I am wrong he will correct me.

Our agreement was that in the absence of any specific constitutional provision, we should make the rules but taking into account that if a constitutional amendment is made which goes counter to the rules that we have made, then the rules will fall by the wayside. I thought that was our agreement, Mr Attorney-General.

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  First of all, I would like to commend the Chairman and his Committee for what I thought was a job well done in the sense that the Committee was able to properly re-arrange the sequence of our Rules of Procedure, and edit where there was need to do so to make reference much more easier than the rules used to provide.  

Secondly, the Committee also tried its very level best to fill in the gaps where for example, the constitutional provisions did not go far enough to try and provide how, for example, the process of censuring a minister or any other official or the removal of the President can be initiated. 

Now, the Committee in my opinion did a good job in detailing how the procedure of removing the President or of censuring ministers is to be undertaken.

Having said that, there were issues which presented some problems. As the Chairman has rightly put it, in the case of the Vice-President, there is no provision in the Constitution, which either provides for the removal of the Vice- President or the censure of the Vice-President.  Even if you read this Constitution 101 times, you will not find that provision.  

It is true, in the course of our consultation, we discussed or I discussed with various people, consulted various people and in particular the Chairperson of the Committee, and I am saying this in relation to the removal or censure of the Vice­- President. When I had a meeting with the Chairperson, I was almost persuaded that even if there was no provision in the Constitution, indeed the Vice-President was appointed by the appointing authority, and that one way obviously of removing the Vice-President is for the appointing authority to do so or to withdraw his/her confidence in the Vice-President. 

We all know the manner in which the Vice-President is appointed; the Vice-President is appointed by the appointing authority with the approval of Parliament.  So, in those circumstances, if we were to say that because there is no specific constitutional provision in the Constitution for removing the Vice-President, those responsible or the appointing authority could recommend or decide to remove the Vice-President, what happens to the other participant in the appointing process?  Because we have the President and we have the Parliament.  

So, after further examination of the situation, I regrettably took a position that it would not be constitutional for Parliament to provide in its Rules of Procedure for the removal of the Vice- President.  In fact, my position now is that unless the Constitution is amended specifically to provide for the removal of the Vice-President, we cannot do so by providing for it in our Rules of Procedure. And with regards to what the chairman has rightly pointed out, in the process, what happens to this lacuna?  My view is that the lacuna can be handled; it can be plugged off by us proceeding to amend the Constitution to provide for the removal of the Vice- President! Thank you, Madam Speaker.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to commend the Committee for having pointed out this lacuna in the law, and at the same time thank them because I do not think there is any Member of Parliament here who would not want any of these great people to be removed from office if they are not behaving well.  I think they can be impeached like in any other country and I think I agree with them without any doubt.  Except I have got a problem. 

If you look at our Constitution very carefully, Article 98, it gives you the fountain of honour, and the President, the Vice-President, the Speaker and the Chief Justice are put in descending order.  In fact, the Vice-President is number two in the country. The argument that we approve the appointment of the Vice-President can also be equated to the appointment of a judge.  The judges are recommended by the Judicial Service Commission and the President appoints them. You cannot censure a judge. Therefore the debate on this issue is a long debate, it is not a small issue. 

Once you have put a Vice-President as number two in the country, we must be very careful how we remove the Vice-President. We must sit down and look at the concept and reveal it, and if possible re-cast it in the Constitution. To me, it does not matter how the Vice-President is appointed, I do not think that should be the basis of this. The basis should be the position the Vice-President holds in the country. Our Constitution has made it very clear that the Vice-President is number two in the hierarchy. 

To subject the Vice-President to a different method from that subjected to the Speaker and the judges, will be extremely unfair. I would therefore like to propose that this being a constitutional matter and a rather lengthy one, we should debate it a little more. 

If possible, we should look at the concept all over again. Do we want the Vice-President of this country to be treated differently; the way we are proposing now? Should we include the Vice-President on the list of impeachment? This is also another debate. You have already heard some people say that while impeachment is a little bit longer and more complicated, I think the number two position in the hierarchy should be given the opportunity and respect it deserves. To me, this is what hierarchy means, Madam Speaker.  

I propose, and I support the Attorney General, that this being a complex matter, and a constitutional one too, we should reconsider. And we have a Constitutional Review Commission. I would request the Members to look at this and review it again and if possible we should amend the Constitution.  To me, that would be a better way of solving this problem we are having now. 

In fact when it comes to the constitutional amendment, I want the Vice-President to be a running mate of a President, that is my view. That means they will have equal status. You can remove them using impeachment if need be. That will come during the constitutional review process as a conceptual matter. Madam Speaker, thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, in substance I do not differ from what hon. Babu has just told this House. The key thing is that we have the office of the Vice-President in the Constitution. But the Constitution is silent about how a Vice-President can be removed in case he or she does not perform.  But who is a Vice-President under our Constitution?

A Vice-President, under our Constitution, is different from a minister. A Vice-President is part of the Presidency - look at the Constitution. Article 108(1) says, “There shall be a Vice- President of Uganda.” 
108(2) “The President shall, with the approval of Parliament by simple majority, appoint a Vice- President.”

108(3) “The Vice-President shall-

(a) deputise the President as and when the need arises.

108 (4) “The qualifications prescribed for the office of the President by article 102 of this Constitution shall apply to the office of the Vice-President.” This is our Constitution, it has isolated the officers from the men, very clearly.  It has sought out and picked one person and added that one person to the office of the President.  

In principle, I have no problem with the rules filling this lacuna, I have no problem with that. The rules can legitimately fill this lacuna. But my quarrel with the proposed rules, as they are, is that they are putting the Vice-President at the same level as a minister, me! They are giving both the same burden of proof, the same procedure, they have not elevated the holder of an office of the President. They have not put it where the Constitution put it.  

So when the time comes, I will propose that the actions or otherwise of the Vice-President touch on the office of the Presidency directly. The President is one we have elected, we should also give him the freedom to appoint somebody who is his deputy. He or she should have no other schedule of duty except to deputize the President and perform other functions as assigned by the President.  Wherever the President is not, the Vice-President is the President.  

Since they are not running mates in the Constitution, the next best thing we can do is treat a dissatisfaction with the performance of this person who deputizes the President, as follows. If we are not satisfied we must find a way of notifying the Presidency that, “You, Mr. President, the deputy you chose to deputize you has behaved in a such manner.” So when the time comes we will be making amendments to ensure that we lift the Vice-President from the general treatment of ministers. That is the gist of my argument.

MS KIRASO: Given the Minister’s submission, I want to know, what would then be the fate of rule 80?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are still debating that particular one. We have not moved to the specifics.

MS KIRASO: You said we would discuss it when time comes, I thought that now we are going to leave this one as it is.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I tend to agree with hon. Musumba that this apparent lacuna would be filled by the rules of Parliament. The basic question I want to ask myself and others, and perhaps those who were in the Constituent Assembly is; “Why did this omission occur?” If I could venture to respond, it would be apparent that this omission was taken for granted that the same procedure in requirement for removal of President would apply to the Vice President because the Vice President is essentially a President.  

The Vice President, as hon. Musumba read, is a President except by the method by which that person becomes a Vice President. The problem is on the method, whether by direct election or by appointment by the President. That is why I think that this apparent omission appears to be in the Constitution. The assumption was that the Vice President is part of the Office of the President. It is part of the paraphernalia of the Office of the President except in the method by which that office is assumed. 

In any case, the Vice President is pretending to the position of the President whenever necessary. When the President is out, the Vice President is the President. When other things happen, the Vice President becomes President.  Therefore, my only problem now is, which method of removal should we adopt? Should we adopt a method similar to that of censuring Ministers or should we adopt the method of impeachment? 

If you adopt the method applicable to the Ministers’ censure, you are actually relegating that position to a lesser degree than it is assumed in the Constitution. The only possibility would appear to me to be that the removal of the Vice President be subject to the same procedure for the removal of the President - impeachment. If we are to fill the lacuna, then the procedure for the removal must be similar to that of the Office of the President. That would be my submission at this stage.  

Secondly, we still have a problem. Even if one were to choose the option by hon. Musumba that the President should be notified that your Vice, whom you have appointed and we Parliament have also appointed, has done this and that and therefore, - he has not come with the full formulation - recommend that the President takes the initiative to remove that person. We have two situations. We have an existing situation such that whereas on appointment, the President consults Parliament on this appointment, there is no requirement for the President to consult Parliament. That in itself is a bit of a problem. But apparently it has not been of concern to us what the President does with Ministers after we have jointly taken part in the appointment.  But I think that is another matter altogether for the situation in which we are involved.  

Definitely, I would support the idea that we can fill this lacuna unless we are sure that we can bring about a constitutional amendment as soon as possible to include the procedure for removal of the Vice President. If not, and we feel that there is need, we can do it now; now is the time to move that the procedure should be similar to that of removing the President. That is my position, Madam Speaker. I thank you.  

MR WACHA: Maybe the position of the Committee is not being understood. The Committee is not saying that the Vice President cannot be removed because there is no provision here. The Vice President can be removed as of now. If you look at rule 108(5) it says, “The Office of the Vice President shall become vacant if:

(a)	the appointment is revoked by the President.”  

What the Committee is saying is, what happens if a Vice-President persistently is incompetent, misbehaves and does all sorts of things and the President does not want to remove him or her? 

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appeal to my colleagues that as we debate these rules, our minds are not influenced by the particular persons seated in these chairs today. That when we are making a rule to remove a Parliamentary Commissioner, you look at Kazoora or a Speaker, you look at hon. Kadaga but we should look at these offices.  

I would like some clarification from the hon. Musumba and hon. Babu. If Parliament does not at all approve the President, he is elected and becomes a President. But the Constitution says that the President will appoint a Vice President with the approval of Parliament. What does that entail, “approval”? After approval, if half of the Members or two thirds withdraw this approval and the President does not remove this person, what happens? It can happen, Madam Speaker. The House pronounces itself that we have withdrawn our approval and the President says “no” and the Vice President comes in the House and Members walk out, what kind of situation will that be? 

I entirely agree with hon. Babu that if we want the same procedure, then let us have a running mate and he or she is voted. There will not even be need for the approval of Parliament, and as I said, the Vice President does not go through the same procedure as a President.  

Hon. Babu talked of the need to amend the Constitution to answer this lacuna. We can do it. We have got a precedent. In one or two hours, we can do that and get on with our rules. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It would be very dangerous for us to cure a lacuna in the Constitution using the rules. My position is that a lacuna in the Constitution can be cured by a constitutional amendment. 

The rules, in all cases, only stretch the meaning of either the Constitution or an act of Parliament. But for us to say that since the Constituent Assembly omitted to provide for how Parliament can remove the Vice President, therefore we should fill the gap by including it in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament would be extremely unconstitutional and very unfortunate. 

I do agree with hon. Babu that this lacuna can be filled or cured by a constitutional amendment. And I do appreciate the concerns of members that if Parliament participates in the approval of the Vice President, then why not participate in the removal of the Vice President. 

I think our hands are tied now. Much as we would want to participate in the removal of the Vice President, there is no way we can do it as per the Constitution we have. Article 108(5), which hon. Ben Wacha has read, is very restrictive. It gives only two instances when a Vice President can vacate her office - when his or her appointment is revoked by the President or when he or she resigns or dies.  The Constitution does not go ahead to say when Parliament can come in to remove her. Where the Constituent Assembly intended to do so, like in the removal of the President under Article 107, the Constitution says so. For Ministers, in Article 107 –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: One of those two instances is when the President, on his own, decides to revoke the appointment. If Parliament was not happy with the performance of the Vice President, what stops Parliament from expressing themselves so that the President is aware that Parliament is not happy with the Vice President?  

It seems that the way some of our colleagues are reasoning is as if Parliament is totally unable to do anything that would remove a Vice President.  Since the President is the only one who has powers to revoke his position, can’t Parliament move the President to consider that course of action? Are you saying that if Parliament moved under the rules of censure, for example, the President will ignore it because it is not constitutional? I want some clarification.

MR MWESIGE: Well, Madam Speaker, my submission is that the right of Parliament to censure is provided for in the Constitution. Where the Constituent Assembly wanted Parliament to censure, it did so in the Constitution. You cannot create it in the rules. That is my position; that is the way I understand the Constitution. 

If Parliament wants to express its disappointment with the behaviour of the Vice President, there is no harm in bringing a motion and a resolution is passed expressing dissatisfaction. Depending on whether the President wants to take action or not, he can take the resolution into consideration.  

I know hon. Mwandha knows that resolutions of Parliament have no force of law. So, I do not see how we can create a right of censure in the rules, which was not envisaged by the Constitution. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: Hon. Members, can we now have some concrete proposals so that we move.

MR KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, the Constituent Assembly did not give, or they forgot to give this House power in respect of the Vice President. We cannot get those powers through the rules. We cannot make rules to amend the Uganda Constitution. But we have the power to amend the Constitution. 

Now that we have discovered that there is a lacuna of that magnitude, and if we think it is important, we can move to amend the Constitution and make provisions for the removal of the Vice President.  We have that power, but we should not make the mistake of trying to do things that we are not authorized to do under the Constitution.  

We have power to make rules for the procedure of this House, but we do not have power to make rules to amend the Constitution. If we feel strongly about this matter, since we have discovered it, let us move to amend the Constitution and make provisions for the removal of the Vice President, which I think is necessary. 

It is an unfortunate lacuna. We have to take the necessary steps to amend the Constitution in that regard. If we do not think it is urgent, then we can wait for the review of the Constitution. But if we think it is urgent, we can do it anytime now.

MR WACHA: I am slightly disappointed. Maybe this subject came under the wrong heading, “removal from office.” I have said that under 108(5), the President has the powers to remove the Vice President. But I am saying it is not earthily possible that the Constitution was so insensitive that it did even envisage a situation where Parliament would want to express its disapproval of the manner in which the activities of the office are taking place. That is why the committee came up with the concept of censure.  

Censure is not constitutional language per se. Censure indicates disapproval, annoyance; it is not restricted to one provision of the Constitution and therefore cannot be used elsewhere. 

We are saying the President has the powers to remove, but does it mean Parliament cannot express itself with the activities or the order of the office of the Vice President?  If it can, then why don’t we have it somewhere?  After all, censure in respect to ministers is only an indication of disapproval of the activities of the office of a Minister. It does not even mean he is going to be removed. The President decides on what action to take after the censure of a minister.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want clarification from the chairperson of the committee. We can get a situation where Parliament disapproves of the Vice President and yet the Constitution is silent about the procedure for the removal of the Vice President. 

Supposing as a House we come up with procedure on how to remove a Vice President in cases where we have lost confidence in that office, what is unconstitutional with coming up with procedure for which the Constitution is silent about?  

I would assume that it would be unconstitutional for us to do something which is against the Constitution. But there are cases where the Constitution is silent and we have realized that actually there is a gap. 

If we look at the spirit of the Constitution in terms of removal of the President and other offices and somehow we think that it was just an omission, and as a House we proceed to provide for that situation, what is unconstitutional with that? That is the clarification I want, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe the Attorney General could respond to what hon. Lyomoki has submitted.  He is asking; is it unconstitutional to create rules where there is silence under the Constitution?

MR AYUME:  Madam Speaker, that was my position right from the beginning, and I still maintain that we cannot provide for the removal of the Vice President in the Rules of Procedure.  

I quite agree that there is a problem, and I think we all know there is a problem. Just like in this very Constitution, there are areas where the Constituent Assembly should not have been enacted in the way they did; we do not know whether that was deliberate or whether that was inadvertent, but the fact of the matter is that there is a lacuna here. 

And constitutionally, to answer the hon. Lyomoki’s question, we cannot fill that lacuna; we cannot change that position by making a provision in our Rules of Procedure.  

Now, it may be of great concern, as indeed it is, that because of this lacuna where a situation arises when the Vice President is incompetent, how does Parliament handle the situation?  Well, I have no problem in agreeing to the fact that if censuring really means expression of dissatisfaction, Parliament can by resolution do that, but as far as the Constitution is concerned, this will not mean that they have set in a process of removing the Vice President.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, hon. Members, we have debated this matter for half an hour, and I really think that we should move on.  Can we have the motion either for deletion of the Vice President or some one has to move a motion? 

MR WACHA:  Madam Speaker, we were dealing with Rule 80 which was introductory.  Now, we have two options; one, either to remove the concept of censure of the Vice President from Rule 80 and then we introduce it elsewhere to deal with only removal from office; or two, we leave censure there, but then when it comes to the Office of the Vice President we explain what we mean by censure - those are the only two alternatives.

MR MUSUMBA:  Madam Speaker, for me I want to present an option.  This one is -(Interruption)- no, the one and only from me.  We have for 30 minutes discussed the issue of whether the Vice President is censured or not.  We have read the Constitution. As I sat there, I continued looking at the Constitution for every office and the Constitution provides, it may be Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Minister, President, even the District Commissioners, the District Chairpersons, the Districts Speakers, even the Members of parliament, removal grounds including incompetence and so on.  

The only office - this is very interesting - where there are only two grounds and they are substantial grounds, is the Office of the Vice President. They are only two grounds; either is removed by the President or dies or resigns; so, for me I want to be persuaded that you have heard that. 

My motion is we leave the Vice President alone, because the Constitution by default or otherwise chose to treat that person as if he or she is beyond our reach as Parliament; that is the effect of Article 108 of the Constitution, which is very clear.  This person, either the appointment is revoked by the President or the incumbent resigns or dies.  They do not add any other ground, but all the other grounds have all kinds of reasons, including the Ministers, it is a whole array of things and so is the President.  

So, in the interest of going forward, the Attorney General has advised, and for me I am prepared to abandon my earlier position and present that we leave the Office of the Vice President out of this censure arena.

CAPT GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, you know, you people who read law have words like ‘lacuna’, I do not know whether that is English or French or Latin; is it in the dictionary, I do not know?  So, you are just playing around with your ‘lacunas’.  A Vice President has to get the approval of this House when the President has made the proposition, this is very, very clear, just like a Prime Minister, like Attorney General, like any other Minister.  The only difference is that she deputises a President who was brought in office not by this Parliament.  

I want hon. Musumba really to clarify to me the difficulties in applying the procedures of expressing a disappointment in a Minister, because somewhere we have our small approval, - no, he has read the provision within the Constitution, and I have been listening attentively, if someone behaves in a manner that is unbecoming, we say, “Sir or Madam, we have withdrawn our approval”; this is as simple as that.  But you talk of lacuna, you want to magnify the whole thing and -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Guma. Unfortunately, the matters you want clarified have really been addressed extensively in the last 30 minutes, and I will not want to ask Members to re-instate them, but a lacuna means a gap -(Interruption)- yes, yes, a lacuna means a gap. (Laughter).

THE PRIME MINISTER (PROF Apolo NSIBAMBI):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have deliberately been listening very carefully.  It is clear that most Members have fully and rightly grasped the fact that whereas you have the right of approving the Vice President, you cannot infer that you have the right to censure her.  

It is very clear -(Interruption)- him or her; I must be gender sensitive. So, it is very clear under Article 33 of the Constitution, but what is the way forward; how do we resolve the current problem?  Because some people were saying that, what do we do in the short run before we have cured the lacuna?  

We can use political pressure on the President; the President responds to political pressure and especially if that pressure is persistent.  Because, if you are persistently disapproved by Parliament, what can you do?  It will be an imprudent politician who would continue shunning the way of Parliament.  That will be an interim measure of using political pressure on the Appointing Authority under Article 108.  But as we have been told, we have the Constitutional Review Commission; the matter will be addressed. If we think it is such an urgent matter, we can actually amend the Constitution.  

I suggest that we leave out the question of censuring the Vice President as prescribed by the Committee; we simply abandon it.  If it is still unacceptable, we can stand over this provision because this matter is so weighty; I do not want us to rush it.  

I believe hon. Ben Wacha, you have grasped what most Members are saying, and also fairly learned and they have come out clearly. I want to appeal to you to accept that you leave out the question of the Vice President being censured, because it is not expressly provided for under the Constitution.  I thank you.

MR WACHA:  I will concede, but I do not like the tone which was used by the hon. Prime Minister towards the end.  I am conceding not so much as because it is not provided for in the Constitution; I am conceding because it seems I am not being understood even by the Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I cannot move this motion.  Can somebody move for the deletion of Rule 80, because I cannot rule until we delete it?

MR WACHA:  Madam, the Committee agrees that we remove the censure of the Vice President from the proposed Rule 80.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that Rule 80 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 80, as amended ,agreed to.

Rule 80:

MR WACHA:  Madam Speaker, Rule 81 deals with the impeachment of the President from sub-rule 9 up to sub-rule 25; these are the statements from the Constitution.  

I have been approached by some Members who are not happy about the manner in which the Committee proposes that signatures be accessed, and how the motion should be brought to this House, and maybe we should hear from them before we go on to other sectors.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rule 81 is open for debate. 

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The essential parts which are not constitutional start from the present rule in the proposal by the Committee, sub-rule (3), I think up to sub-rule 9.  And in consultation with a number of Members, we are of the view that the procedures now prescribed by the Committee will need to be amended. 

I am proposing that you give me the chance to read through all the proposed amendments first rather than proceed sub-rule by sub-rule; then we can see what we have as alternative to the sub-rules now proposed by the Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You are suggesting that you need time to formulate.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  No, no, I will read the proposals, Madam Speaker. I am proposing that sub-rule (3) be amended to read as follows: “ A Member who is desirous of moving a motion for the removal of the President shall obtain signatures of at least one third of the Members signifying support for the proposed motion.”  This is a new formulation for sub-rule (3).  

I am also proposing, Madam Speaker, that a new sub-rule (4) following that one be included to read as follows: “The Member shall notify the Speaker in writing his or her intention to move the motion citing the grounds for the proposed motion and giving supporting particulars.”  

The notification shall be accompanied by the signatures of at least one third of all the Members; that is the new sub-rule (4).  The present sub-rule (7) becomes new sub-rule (5).  The present sub-rule (7) is proposed to be retained and become sub-rule (5).  

The present sub-rule (7), as proposed by the Committee, reads as follows: - 

“ Any signature appended to the Notice shall not be withdrawn.”  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, hon. Member, maybe we are not reading the same document, sub-rule (7) begins after one third of the Members have appended.

DR OKULO EPAK:  Is that all right, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I have found it.  Thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: So, I am not amending that, except shifting it to sub-rule (5).  Then I am proposing a new sub-rule (6), which reads as follows:  “On receipt of the notice under sub-rule (4), the Speaker shall- 

(a) within 3 days inform the House about the intention, the grounds and the supporting particulars of the proposed motion.

(b) for the purpose of the notice for a resolution based on grounds under paragraphs (a) and (b) of sub-rule (2), the Speaker shall, within 24 hours of receipt of the notice and accompanying particulars, forward the same to the President and forward a copy to the Chief Justice.  

Accordingly, therefore, the present sub-rules (4) (5) (6) and (8) proposed by the Committee should be deleted. So, those are the substitutions to the sub-rules proposed by the Committee under rule 81. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have not given the justification for the proposal. Has it been seconded?

MR MUSUMBA: Seconded.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, the justifications are based on the provisions of the Constitution. The Constitution makes no reference to the Clerk of Parliament in these procedures. All submissions are supposed to be made to the Speaker and then the Speaker proceeds as provided for in the Constitution. But the Committee’s submission now makes the initiation of the procedures to pass through, not only to the Clerk of Parliament, but even the collection of signatures the duty of the Sergeant-At-Arms. 

I think the initiation for this procedure is so important that it would be unwise to include a 3rd party who is not responsible to Parliament in the collection of signatures. If anything happens to the signatures, then that person would suffer the consequences for which it is not of his making.  

It is the view that the primary petitioner should bear the full responsibility of collecting the signatures, submitting them to the Speaker, moving the motion in the House and keeping custody of the signatures secure, particularly since there is now a new provision that anybody who appends his signature to the proposed motion shall not be allowed to withdraw that signature. We have precedence in this House during the censure of Ministers when the issue of the list of Members to sign the petition became a very contentious matter. 

The proposal to pin the invitation, to sign on the notice board is even worse, Madam Speaker. The chances that the pin up will disappear from the notice board are extremely high. We would prefer that the chief petitioner peddles the requisition for the signatures himself or herself until he or she is sure that he has got more than one-third of Members appending their signatures and then proceed to notify the Speaker. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Basaliza, is there something burning?

MR BASALIZA: Thank you Madam Speaker. I have been a bit perturbed by the hon. Member. He has moved a series of amendments and has started debating. I am just –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I asked him to speak to the proposed amendments. 

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification. Sub-rule (2) talks about signatures of one-third of all Members of Parliament. Sub-rule (7) also talks of one-third of the Members. In this case, would these signatures we are seeking not be subjected to the method of voting in the House? Suppose an ex-officio Member of Parliament without any right to vote on a motion appends a signature, will that be valid? If not, could we not be more specific with regard to the signatures you are talking about so that we qualify them? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it will be in interest of whoever is peddling the papers to ensure that the people who do not vote do not append their signatures. If they do, their signatures are invalid because that one-third constitutes a vote.  

MR WAMBUZI: The Constitution talks of one third of all Members of Parliament (Interjection). No, it does not talk of not voting. The Constitution talks of Members of Parliament, full stop. So, I do not think ex-officios are barred from signing. But, of course, they would be barred from voting, and the two things are different.

MR WACHA: Of course, it is in his interest if he is collecting signatures for purpose of finding an indicative number of how many people will support him to go for those who vote. But even those who do not vote may sign.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, if I were him I would just concentrate on the voters.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First of all, I thank the Committee for the effort they have put in to make the process of censure or impeachment as transparent as possible. I also thank hon. Okulo Epak even more for his improvement. It is as if he picked my notes because I had similar proposals to make. (Laughter). It is as if he read my notes.

In principle, those amendments are the ones I support. The reason I support them, in addition to what he has said, is that the process of impeaching the Presidency touches on the security and stability of the whole country. We do not want a situation where one errant Member of Parliament, under the proposed rule 81(3), is desirous of moving a motion, so he writes to the Clerk. There will be people who will just write to the Clerk of their intentions, citing grounds for doing so. 

According to 81(4), the Clerk can on the basis of that one person’s signature and the grounds that he has cited, without any further support from anywhere else, give notice to Parliament upon the receipt of this notice that a motion has been proposed. And it will be pinned up on the notice board. Then the whole country, all the FM radio stations will say, “President X is going to be impeached”, simply because of this errant MP who may have his own motives. So we do not want to be party to this kind of instability and insecurity.

Then after putting it up on the notice board, 81(5) also goes ahead to talk about this one-man motion. “The Clerk shall on the date and time of pinning the Notice of Motion on the members’ notice board also cause to be prepared and deposited with the Sergeant At-Arms...” So this errant fellow writes and says, “I want to impeach the President, signed hon. X, MP for wherever.” And that alone is enough to trigger major steps in impeaching the President! 

Then the Clerk must also bring a book for display, daily. From what I know, if we pass these rules as they are, the Clerk will be putting the book out for display everyday at the Sergeant-At-Arms’ office. For everyday, there might a complainant from within the House. So really I support that we enact rules which are mindful of the sensitivity of this office.  

Having said that, neither my colleague the mover, nor I the seconder, have the well-prepared text circulating to fellow members. My thinking is that in a situation like this, we probably should have a proper text seeking to amend or replace these rules, for everybody to read, understand and follow. Madam Speaker, I want to give this one to you to decide whether we can pronounce ourselves on it now or we are tasked to produce a written amendment.

The written amendment will be circulated to all members, and after they have been satisfied about the process that will secure our interests as Members of Parliament, then we can pass those rules. It is my prayer, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am not sure that I have, in my head, the text of what hon. Epak has in mind. So it would be unfair to subject the House to taking a vote on the basis of oral presentations. I suggest that hon. Epak, and your seconder, prepare a text which we can vote on tomorrow. Is that okay? So we now stand over this rule until tomorrow. Can you present us with the text by 2.30 p.m.?

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, I just want to move that we stand over this. I will prepare the final text and circulate it widely. As a matter of fact, I had forgotten that even the present 81(9) would be deleted. So it gives us more time. I want to thank hon. Musumba for sharing notes and agreeing with me. Thank you very much.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I agree with your ruling over this matter. I have an issue that I would like hon. Musumba and hon. Okulo Epak to take care of while they do the draft copy of the text.  

When you look at the proposed 81(7), I have an issue with the part that says that, “any signature appended to the Notice shall not be withdrawn.” While I appreciate the rationale that the Committee used to come up with this rule, I would like to know from the Attorney General whether this provision does not conflict with some provisions of the Constitution. 

Article 29(1)(b) of the Constitution guarantees the right of the freedom of expression and belief. Article 23 of the same Constitution guarantees the right to freedom of liberty. If today I think that I should support a motion to censure or impeach a President, and then tomorrow, after very serious consideration, I feel I should not be party to that motion, why should I be stopped by the rules? The Constitution guarantees my right to freely express myself and also gives me the right to personal liberty after all. I would like to know from the Attorney General whether this rule is consistent with the provisions of the Constitution. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, even before I disturb the Attorney General, matters of impeaching a President are very weighty matters. Before you actually append your signature to that paper, you must have had very serious thought – (Applause) So you cannot say that today, I think I should impeach him; then tomorrow you say, “oh no, I think today let me withdraw.”

Impeaching the President is a weighty matter. If you are not sure about your decision, do not even attempt to put your signature there. Yes! (Applause). You cannot handle matters of state in that manner. No, not at all. But if you want further consultations with hon. Musumba and hon. Epak in formulating the text for tomorrow, please see them. That matter of rule 81 is stood over until we get the text, tomorrow.

Rule 82:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that rule 82 do form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAWANGA: I am asking whether you said rule 82, because the text I have of rule 82 concerns the censure of the Vice-President. I want to be sure we are talking about the same text.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is not the text I have.

Rule 83:

MR WACHA: Rule 83, Madam Speaker, has the same problem as rule 81. Since the formulation will be the same, I propose that we stand over it too. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members we do have a problem. Chairperson, which text are we dealing with? 

MR WACHA: Perhaps you will have to tell hon. Musumba to leave me alone for a while. I was proposing that we stand over rule 83 – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us go back to rule 81. We have said rule 81 is stood over, pending the production of text from hon. Musumba, hon. Okulo Epak and hon. Wandera, in case he is still interested. 

MR WACHA: We have passed rule 82.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rule 83?

MR WACHA: I am proposing that we stand over rule 83 because the formulation will be the same as that being proposed by hon. Okulo Epak.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the responsibility of rule 83 was also given to the Clerk, as transpired in rule 81. So, we stand that over. Can we ask the same Committee to formulate the new text?

 Rule 84, agreed to.

Rule 85.

MR WACHA: Rule 85, Madam Speaker, I am withdrawing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule 85 has been withdrawn.

Rule 86, agreed to.

Rule 87:

MR WACHA: Rule 87, Madam Speaker, is on recall. I have an amendment as contained in Part 5 of the smaller document. This is a restatement of Section 7 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001, which deals with recall of Members of Parliament.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which page, Chairperson?

MR WACHA: Part 14.  I do not know whether I should read it because it is just a restatement of Section 7 of the Act.  

87(1) “A Member may be recalled from office as prescribed by Article 84 of the Constitution and on grounds set out in Section 7 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001”. 

(2) The recall of a Member of Parliament shall be initiated by a petition in writing, setting out the grounds relied on and signed by at least two-thirds of the registered voters of the constituency or of the relevant interest group and shall be delivered to the Speaker.

(3) On receipt of the petition, the Speaker shall within seven days, require the Electoral Commission to conduct a public inquiry into the matters alleged in the petition and the Electoral Commission shall expeditiously conduct the necessary inquiry and report its findings to the Speaker.

(4) The Speaker shall –

(a)	declare the seat vacant, if the Electoral Commissioner reports that it is satisfied from the inquiry with the genuineness of the petition, or 

(b)	declare immediately that the petition was unjustified, if the Commission reports that it is not satisfied with the genuineness of the petition.

(5) If the medical board upon it under Section 7 of the Parliamentary Elections Act reports to the Electoral Commission that a Member required to submit himself or herself for examination has failed or refused to do so, and the Commission after that ascertaining the circumstances, reports such failure or refusal to the Speaker –

(a) the Speaker may suspend the Member under the provisions of Section 7 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001.” Please, make that correction. Not under rule 66, but under the provisions of Section 7 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001.

(b) “the House may, by resolution supported by the majority of all Members of Parliament, resolve that the Member ceases to be a Member of Parliament.

(6) A Member, in respect of whom a resolution is passed under paragraph (b) of sub-rule (5), shall cease to be a Member and shall be taken to have been recalled by his or her electorate.”  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is importing the law we have already passed; it is already part of the law of this country and we passed it.  So, I do not know whether it really requires any debate.

MR OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know whether rule 87, sub-rule (1) to (5) is more-or-less a transplant from the Constitution and the Parliamentary Elections Act, Section 7. It is also realised from Section 7 to Section 5. These are constitutional matters.

I would like to seek clarification from the Chairperson, knowing very well that these other provisions from the Constitution are vital, nothing can either alter them or we cannot amend it. Is there a way in which this could be separated? We have Section 2 of the other part of this very rule which is again referring to recall of Members which could again be looked at so that it is seen in that light.

My concern is that the provisions in the rule and the provisions in the Constitution are vital. The provision in the Constitution is what refers to the signatures. If you could allow me to read sub-section 2:

“The recall of a Member of Parliament should be initiated by a petition in writing, setting out the grounds relied on and signed by at least two-thirds of the registered voters of the constituency or of the relevant interest group and shall be delivered to the Speaker”. 

In the Constitution, we cannot amend it by qualifying the need to have signatures verified, but within the rule maybe we could – I do not know if it is provided somewhere where signatures will be verified by the Electoral Commission, because this is essential. It should be a requirement so that no fraudulent person comes up to create confusion. Thank you.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To serve purpose of sub-rule (3) is to do exactly what hon. Okumu Ringa is disturbed about. It is the Electoral Commission that does the inquiry. It has to find out whether the signatures are genuine or not, whether those people stay in the constituency or not, and whether they are voters or not. All those parameters have to be taken into consideration.  I did not put it there because it is for the Electoral Commission. We deal with matters that concern this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 87 form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 87, agreed to.

Rule 88, agreed to.

Rule 89:

MR WACHA: Rule 89 is a continuation of 88, only that it deals with leave of absence in Committees.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that rule 89 form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 89, agreed to.

Rule 90:

MR WACHA: Rule 90, there is a small amendment in (a) which says “For any ministry, the Minister or at least the Minister of State shall attend to sittings of the House; and where none of them is able to attend, the Minister shall request another Minister to represent that Ministry’s interests in the House and notify the Speaker accordingly”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that Rule 90 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: 90(2), we have re-drafted it to say: “The Leader of Government Business shall ensure that sub- rule (1) is compiled with.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question that Rule 90(2) be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 90, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 91 agreed to.

Rule 92:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that Rule 92, do form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 93:

MR WACHA: In Rule 93 we have a small amendment.  For (2) substitute with the following: “In addition to the explanatory memorandum, the bill shall be accompanied by a certificate setting out its financial implications (Budget Act 2001) including: (a) the specific outputs and outcomes of the bill; (b), how those outputs and outcomes fit within the overall policies and programmes of Government; 
(c) the costs involved and their impact on the budget; 
(d) the proposed or existing methods of financing the costs related to the bill and its feasibility.”

And then the previous (2) becomes (3), which states, “the explanatory memorandum and the certificate shall be signed by a minister or by the Member introducing the bill.”  I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate what the Committee is proposing that should be looked for here.  But I am worried that if we adopt 93(2) in its entirety, there will be no bill which will come to this House in a timely fashion. First of all, the Budget Act – I think Section 10 - does obligate on the introduction of the bill before this House that there must be a certificate stating the financial implications for the next successive two years.  But this proposal has even gone beyond what the Budget Act sought, because now it is saying that you must state specific outputs and outcomes.  It is saying, how do these outputs and outcomes fit within the overall policy and programmes of Government?  So first – (Interruption) – Madam Speaker, can I be protected from this unseemly –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, a Member shall be heard in silence.

MR MUSUMBA: And then it says the proposed or existing method of financing the costs related to the bill. I want to propose that 93 (2)(a) and (b) to go to the committee. When I lay the bill here please, let me lay the bill under section (10).  The first reading of the bill is what is envisaged under that section (10) of the Budget Act. 

Now, these other specific outputs and outcomes should be required of ministers in the committee and it should be a requirement on both the Members of Parliament and the ministers to ensure that these specific outputs are examined.  More often than not, you have even committees, not paying attention to the specific outputs in a particular law. So they bring here a report, which does not take care of these concerns.  So I want this to obligate both the Members of the front bench and the Members of committees.  

Therefore, I would want this to be taken to the committee.  The committee shall consider a, b, c, d; we will say for every bill that the committee considers we want these outputs to be considered in the committee.  But when a bill is introduced under section (10), let us limit it to the financial certificate as indeed the law provides.  That is my amendment.  

My amendment is that we can keep (c) and (d) because that is part of the statement required under section (10) of the Budget Act.  But (a) and (b) will be put before the committee and then there you can discuss with the chairperson of the committee in detail on what the overall Government policy and programmes are and so on. We can do this here on the introduction of the bill. My prayer is, this is good but we should re-locate it.  We should only retain under the introduction of the bill as envisaged under section (10) of the Budget Act, we should keep the financial implications.  

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, I rise to support hon. Musumba with that proposal.  In fact, I would like to add that we leave (2) as it is and we introduce another in terms of numbering so that items a, b, c, and d are referred to the committee.  This is really to be specific so that one is only for purposes of introducing the bill in the House and another one should take care of the work at the committee. This would make our work easy as the Executive because this is really going to be for further scrutiny.  I beg to support.

MS KIRASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am really impressed with the Committee that this Parliament is now getting very serious with its responsibilities of overseeing the Executive in as far as the budgeting making process is concerned. I also feel challenged that this Committee has gone even further to prescribe the details of what should accompany the bills that are presented to this Parliament.  

Rule 93(2) where hon. Musumba is arguing that this is asking for too much at this stage, and that this should go to the committees of Parliament, if I understand them well, do they perform their duties on behalf of Parliament?  A bill is tabled here the first time and then committed to the committee. Any information that goes to the committee is not barred by any law to come to all of us.  So I do not see any conflict whatsoever that these outputs and outcomes should only be given to the committee and not to the rest of Parliament.  I know, also they tell us in the Ministry of Finance that they have now adopted output oriented budgeting (OOB).  Why should it not be carried along with you, so that we also appreciate the output oriented budgeting which the Ministry of Finance has adopted and is implementing?  

Madam Speaker, if we look at outputs and outcomes in isolation of the whole overall policy and programmes of Government, we may miss the point.  So, I do not see any conflict whatsoever if bills are required to come along with these details so that all of us are on board.  I have heard, I do not know because I do not sit there, that at Cabinet level, they do go into the details of all this.  Why don’t we share the information; what is the harm of us getting all this, especially the cost to the economy?  In brief, why don’t we share the cost benefit analysis of introducing a bill or bringing into place a policy?  I wish to support the Committee, Madam Speaker. 

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I wanted to raise similar points to my colleague honourable Kiraso, because I recall in the President’s Manifesto the catchword is modernization.  So, I am expecting that we are going to modernize the way we do business; the way we run Government, our structures and our methods. I want to support the innovation because that is going to help individual ministries to actually clarify their thinking and help them to even simplify the way Government runs.  

I recall some of the reports presented to this House in the 6th Parliament, where chairmen used to come and read, the committee was informed, the committee was told, and they were non committal, and so we would share the blame that we agreed in certain areas, so if a programme goes wrong we share the blame.  I do not want us to be bundled together and we remove the cheques and balances of the Executive, because that is what appears like hon. Musumba wants us to do, that we go to the committee and then we share the blame and do this.  No, if you are Minister, you are Minister and so you run business properly. 

I would like to see ministers coming up to present to this House the outcomes, the outputs and the budgetary allocations, because I have been watching that in the recent passed three bills, they did not comply with the budgetary requirement. I have been wondering how did they come to the floor of Parliament without the provision of the budget. If we do not tighten the rule, we will be flouting the very laws that we made here.  I do recall how troublesome the Budget Act was tight, and not tightening it for me is a lost struggle.  I would like to support the Committee. Thank you.

CAPT GUMA GUMISIRIZA:  Madam Speaker, I want to support the position of the Committee with the following brief remarks.  But, perhaps, before I do that, I want to say that, of course, hon. Isaac Musumba, the Minister of State for Finance, is right to support a status quo; but the status hitherto has been a disastrous one.  

This rule 93(2) enjoins the Minister who brings a bill to really highlight the aspect of planning relating to the finances.  It is very, very important that we should note that most of the problems we have been having are pieces of legislations the cost of which are not envisaged; we legislate in isolation.  

The input concerning the financial aspect that a bill must be accompanied by specific expected outputs and outcomes, up to today is really a matter that serious Members of Parliament or serious legislators should support; of course, it means that it calls for a big homework on the part of ministers.  That is why hon. Musumba says, may be you will never see a bill here, we shall see bills but it means you must burn mid night candles to do a lot of homework, and bring here proposed bills from Cabinet that are really pinched and patched up, especially, in respect to their financial implications.  So, I appeal to colleagues here to support this rule.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put a question that rule 93 do form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)
   
Rule 94:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put a question that Rule 94 do form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 95: 

MR OKUMU RINGA:  Madam Speaker, Rule 95(3) reads: “Where a Bill seeks to amend an existing Act, the text of the relevant part of the law to be amended shall be copied and supplied together with the Amending Bill, unless in the opinion of the Speaker the amendment is of a minor nature or self explanatory”.  

Madam Speaker, I am proposing an amendment to this particular sub-rule, to make it mandatory that all relevant parts of the Parent Act which is going to be amended be supplied to the Members, because that is the only way Members can competently and effectively discuss such amendments.  

It is true that Members have their library, but at times you find that they may not be able to access their own Act.  So, for that matter, if the chairman does accept, I would like to propose that we stop at the “amending bill” and we delete “unless in the opinion of the Speaker, the amendment is of a minor nature or self explanatory.” I think this is a position Members should be able to support, because it is in their interest to ensure competence in our delivery of debate.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu Ringa, the Local Government Act, 1997 has been amended about six times here in the last Parliament and I think even this Parliament.  Sometimes it is only one section.  Are you proposing that each of those six times the Speaker ought to have provided the full text of the law?  

MR OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Really for relevance, if it is one page, why not photocopy and supply because really this is for the purpose of ensuring that there is proper participation of all Members, and if you make it mandatory, it will be much better.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you are proposing that notwithstanding the cost, even for very minor amendments to one section in an Act, we produce the whole text and give it to you.  After one month if there is another amendment, we produce the text and give it you again?

MR OKUMU RINGA: As a matter of fact, Madam Speaker, it is bad legislation to have a law and keep amending it every other month.  But since that has been our practice, well I leave this matter.  Maybe the chairperson can tell us.  Thank you.

MR BEN WACHA: Madam Speaker, besides the cost of doing what hon. Okumu Ringa wants us to do, we assume that Members have access to the library.  We will make sure that all copies of these bills are retained in the library for ease of reference for those who have lost their copies. After the library, we are trying to put it on the Internet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, I put the question that Rule 95, do form part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 96 agreed to.

Rule 97 agreed to.

Rule 98 agreed to.

Rule 99 agreed to.

Rule 100  agreed to.

Rule 101 agreed to.

Rule 102 agreed to.

Rule 103  agreed to.

Rule 104:

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, Rule 104, there will be a slight amendment in (5) but this is subject to what we will do in respect to the proposed Rule 115(2).  So, maybe we could stand over Rule 104 and then come back after we have dealt with Rule 115.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay! Let us stand over Rule 104.  

MR WACHA: Maybe this is a good time to –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I explained to you on Tuesday, we really would want to finish these rules this week so that we can handle matters which have been hanging over our heads for a long time.  We have tried our best!

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, we did hear you say that on the first day we discussed these rules. I think today we have covered a lot.  We have tried our best to do so most expeditiously.  We pray that –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That I liberate you from my company?

MR MUSUMBA: Absolutely, Madam!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay!  Hon. Members, we shall begin tomorrow with Rule 105. The House is adjourned to 2.30 p.m. tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 5.44 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 April 2002 at 2.30 p.m.)

