Tuesday, 15 April 2008

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:
1.	Mr Iddi Lubyayi

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. In a special way, I want to welcome the new Member, hon. Lubyayi representing Bukomansimbi. Congratulations! As you were coming in, the team that escorted you included Members from both sides. Therefore, you are expected to work harmoniously with all Members of this House, this being a multi-party Parliament. The elections have ended, take charge of the entire constituency. Be a representative of all people; those who voted for you and those who did not vote for you. Unite the people of your area. I am glad that in the gallery are some members of your electorate. You are welcome, people of Bukomansimbi. 

Honourable members, it is a sad day because as you might have heard; we lost hon. Manuel Pinto yesterday at his home. He was involved in an accident and was hit by his own vehicle! I have been there and I have seen where this accident happened. Strangely he died on a day - after he left service here he has been working with a European group of six who have a project to run for five years entitled, “Deepening democracy in Uganda”. Mr Pinto was supposed to administer it with Mr Osborn. It was supposed to have been launched yesterday when he died but we had shifted the date from 14th to 29th because we had expected a ceremony in Juba which a number of stakeholders of this project were expected to attend. That is the only reason we shifted it, otherwise, yesterday is the day that he would have been here arranging to start that project. 

Hon. Pinto was in Parliament, and he represented his area during the NRC, CA and in the Sixth Parliament. After the Sixth Parliament, he is the one who started the Parliamentary Professional Department, which tries to build the capacity of Members and a number of groups here. 

There is a vigil at his home in Muyenga along Kironde road and the tentative burial programme is as follows:

There will be a requiem mass at Lubaga Cathedral on Friday 18 April 2008 beginning at 11.00 a.m. Thereafter, the body will be transported to his burial grounds in Kakuuto, Rakai. The burial will take place on Saturday the 19th, beginning at 2.00 p.m. We shall get more details. 

Another incident, which I think I should mention, is what happened at Buddo Junior School. I have just been there and the sight is heartbreaking; you become emotional because what you see - I believe the Minister of Education will deal with this but since I have also been there, 19 children, including two strangers, died. Other details will be given by the minister. I think that it is appropriate for us to observe a minute of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: You can see hon. Rugunda, the Minister of Internal Affairs has just returned from Juba and he has requested that he be given space to make a statement. I think that it is an important thing to allow the minister to make the statement. We shall, therefore, adjust the Order Paper to that effect. Also, because of what has happened at Buddo, the Minister of Education may want to make a brief statement. These are the adjustments I intend to make on the Order Paper.

2.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to express the government’s heartfelt condolences to the families that have lost their beloved ones. I would also like to request that tomorrow you avail us space on the Order Paper for Members to move a motion to pay tribute to hon. Manuel Pinto, if it is okay.

THE SPEAKER: It is okay.

MRS MASIKO KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.53
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Wadri Kassiano): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is very sad that yesterday and last night were very unfortunate for the entire country. I am happy that at least you have agreed that tomorrow there is a slot so that we can express our condolences to the bereaved families, particularly that of hon. Pinto, with whom some of us have been closely associated since 1986 in various fields of work in the NGO sector. 

Secondly, on behalf of the Opposition, I would like to welcome our colleague, hon. Lubyayi for the third time in this Parliament. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, our colleagues who have just come to this Eighth Parliament may not understand the history. I was here with hon. Lubyayi in the Seventh Parliament where he also took oath but unfortunately, he did not finish the term of office. I was again very happy that he was able to join us in the Eighth Parliament but another mishap happened so he had to go back to the drawing board and prove his worth. I am happy that you are here. 

As a Parliament, this is a challenge because the reasons for which hon. Lubyayi has been in and out of Parliament call for serious legislation. I don’t think that he is the only person affected and yet to be affected. Many people out there who would wish to be in this House have that problem and when the appropriate time comes, I hope that Parliament will be very straight forward because a law should not be vague. When you are talking about equivalencies, what are those equivalent qualifications? I think it is a challenge to us and to Electoral Commission and I pray that when the appropriate time comes, we will come up with a straight forward law so that we save ourselves the encumbrances of going out to solicit for support. 

It is a very tedious thing, we have all gone through the experience of campaigning, we know how costly it is, how you lose weight, the sleepless nights and the psychological torture. We have all gone through this, even Ndugu has that experience. That is all I will say. Hon. Lubyayi, feel at home and be at ease with us. These are your colleagues; we may be sitting on different sides but we will continue to talk to each other to see if we can win you over to our side, and I believe that we will. Thank you. (Laughter)

2.56
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of this side, I would like to add my voice to that of my brother holding the Office of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament now to welcome our brother and comrade, hon. Lubyayi, back to this House. In doing so, I would like to congratulate him upon going through the hard campaigns because I know that the campaigns were tough. The Opposition tried and the level of victory that hon. Lubyayi registered is a sign of the good organisation on the ground. (Applause) I would like to congratulate his main opponent who was the DP candidate. I didn’t know him and I don’t remember his name -

THE SPEAKER: He is Mr Kiyingi.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Kiyingi, for a good fight. He tried and the ground was absolutely level and that is why he was able to perform as well as he did. I was particularly pleased by his comments upon conceding defeat, as this is a new trend in our politics where after a hard fight at the end of a democratic process, one concedes that, “Yes, I have been defeated and I congratulate the victor.” 

And I would like to encourage all of us, the Opposition and the government [Hon. Members: “Zimbabwe”] No, this is Uganda - to emulate the example of Mr Kiyingi. Concede defeat and we move on.  That is what politics is about. Really, we are not enemies. When I look at hon. Ronald Reagan Okumu, I really do not think he is an enemy; he is just an opponent who has a different view and that is what it is. So, hon. Lubyayi, once again we welcome you. We are happy that you have sorted out the problems that you had that had been a limitation to your being with us –(Applause)- and the people have demonstrated the confidence they have in you and of course, which they have in the Movement. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Nathan Byanyima. Hon. Tumwebaze I saw your note, and hon. Reagan Okumu, I just saw your note. Maybe tomorrow I will accommodate you. 

3.00
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For some time, this House has been appreciating that we should stop the road carnage and I think this honourable House pronounced itself about the accidents, and the Ministers of Internal Affairs and the one of transport must be credited for having come in with the Police to have a crack down on the minibuses and the buses. (Applause)

I think for the first time, our voices were heard. Unfortunately, there was a strike on Friday whereby the minibuses, the commuter taxis and the boda bodas went on strike. I would like to appeal that let us all politicians support the Police. It should not be a crack down but it should be the routine business so that all our public service vehicles should be driven by the right people so that we can actually be in the forefront of fighting accidents on the road.

Secondly, we should think of supporting the Police by giving them an extra shilling so that these people can be facilitated and do a good job. In this, I want to commend the Minister of Internal Affairs on the many good works he has done and the Minister of Works and Transport. You keep it up so that we can save the lives of our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

3.01
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday in my constituency, Kasese, a truck carrying timber from Congo broke down upon reaching Rubiriha Bridge, and the bridge collapsed [Mr Okumu: “Say that again!”] The bridge collapsed and the truck had to fall into the waters of River Rubiriha. I am saying this as I call upon the Ministry of Works and Transport to come to our rescue and possibly see that something is urgently done.

The absence of this bridge, Mr Speaker, causes a lot of problems for my people, and to all the Ugandans here. The bridge is the one that links Uganda to Congo, and its absence means the transit goods will have nowhere to pass, which means that Uganda is going to lose in terms of revenue because no clearances will be done at the border as we do not have a warehouse on our side. It means that most people will dodge this tax as they will look for alternative routes, which may not necessarily be captured by the revenue authorities at the border.

Another problem caused by this is that most of my people depend on commodities from Congo. Now it is not possible for them to cross using water since it is the rainy season and sometimes during the rainy season, the river overflows. I am worried that if they are to use the river, then some of them may be taken away by the waters in case it overflows when they are on the other side of the country.  

As a security matter, I would request that the repair of this bridge be handled or be given the urgency it deserves in terms of construction because you may no longer be sure of who is entering the country, since people will use so many ways, which we are not able to track. So, I call upon the relevant ministry to ensure that at least sufficient means are put in place for our people to access to Congo. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My ministry, as you may have read in the newspapers, is aware of this accident. An overloaded truck with timber from the DRC challenged an old bridge that has been there since 1933 -(Laughter)- and as you know on the other side, there are actually no road checks. So, it had not yet reached the Uganda side. I want to thank hon. Bihande, who was one of the first persons to send me an SMS about this collapse of the bridge. Our ministry immediately went into action. We sent our team from Kasese yesterday. The bridge team has also left and I said we shall try to put there a temporary bridge as we construct a new one. So, we are already on site and we are working to ensure that the road is open again. (Ms Nakawuki rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Nakawuki. Oh, sorry! 

MR NASASIRA: I also want to add that that bridge is in no-man’s land really but because of the interest Uganda has in that route, we have decided to handle it on our own and we are informing the DRC authorities.

3.08
MS SUZAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. As a Member of Parliament for Busiro East constituency, where Buddo Junior School is situated, I cannot help but talk about the fire incident. You know that very many people have been to the school this morning and it is really a big catastrophe that you cannot easily overcome.  

There are so many problems in different schools, especially UPE schools. First of all, this is a UPE school with so many pupils and –(Interruption)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Mr Speaker, you did indicate at the beginning that the minister is going to give a statement about the incident that happened at Buddo Junior School. I thought it would be procedurally right for the honourable member to wait and comment and give her views after the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Well, she had approached me independently but maybe if we would get an indication - because we did not get an indication as to when the minister intends to make a statement. Hon. Minister, can you do so now so that we combine them since the Member for Busiro had also indicated the same? If we get the statement of the minister, then you can make a joint contribution.  

3.08
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament. I rise on a very sad note because I have to report to this House that during the early hours of last night, a very tragic incident happened at Buddo Junior School. Fire caught a dormitory where children were been sleeping, and it really wrecked havoc. 

The report I have so far is that 18 pupils and two adults, who have not yet been identified, died. Last night at about 11.00 p.m., I got telephone calls from parents and concerned stakeholders. I contacted the Police who also organised themselves immediately after having been contacted by many people already, and they went in to save the situation. 

Early in the morning before 8.00 a.m., my minister of state, hon. Peter Lokeris who is also here, led a big delegation of officials from the Ministry of Education to the site. By the time they got there, quite a large number of the community members around the school and indeed the parents had also assembled. Mr Speaker, my colleague and I have been to Mulago together with the Inspector-General of Police, and the doctors at Mulago mortuary, together with relatives of the deceased, are trying to identify the dead bodies.

Many people, including the mass media, have been calling in to find out what the cause was. What I have just learnt, or what I established from the head teacher, is that it could not have been electricity. There was no power in that dormitory and, therefore, the idea of a short circuit is out. But then I understand that some efforts were made by the managers of the school to use the fire extinguishers. The fire brigade matched in very quickly and indeed the Police gathered in large numbers to try and save life and property. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Peter Lokeris who led the delegation early this morning had several meetings with the stakeholders on site, while I kept on coordinating other related issues until I ended up in the mortuary at Mulago. I would like at this point to say that we have been very busy, going up and down, so much that we have not been able to make a written statement, but at the same time, our senior officials and the local government officials from Wakiso are gathering information. The Police have started their investigation process and we hope to get more details coming in, so that we can give you full details of what exactly have so far come up as causes; and other related issues. 

May I at this point, ask hon. Lokeris who has been at Buddo since morning, probably to supplement this oral statement? But before he comes, I would like to convey condolences to the parents, the school community; the village community and of course all Ugandans who have lost those children, whose lives would have made a lot of difference in the development of this country. I have been to the mortuary; the parents are there yelling – understandably so – and I believe it is an occasion for all of us to feel the loss of such children. May I call upon hon. Lokeris – you might add a point or two – but I want to say, Mr Speaker, that we shall have a written statement soon, as more information comes up. I thank you. 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Speaker, dear colleagues of the august House, the 14th of this month came with tragic events. First, we heard the news of the passing of hon. Pinto and as we were still worrying about it, news broke last night that one of our oldest primary schools, Buddo Junior School, had caught fire. So, we have been responding since last night and this morning my minister requested me to go to the site with a team of commissioners from the ministry. 

We went and while there, I met the Inspector-General of Police arriving. He had earlier on at night sent all his officers, including the regional police commanders, to the site. Well, the place was full of commotion. I moved through the dormitories trying to ask what could have been the immediate cause of the fire, but of course I was told that there was no electricity connected at that time to that dormitory. There were no smokers in the dormitories, and so many other things. So I wonder what might have happened; but the Police are investigating. 

When I reached there, I asked the headmaster about what really happened and he said that during the day, the school had convened a meeting of the school management committee and the parents and teachers’ association meeting in the school, to chart ways forward for the next term because they have already finished their examinations and they were due to close on Friday. He said they had a long meeting but in the evening at 8.00 p.m., the headmaster told his deputy that he was feeling unwell. So, he drove out for medication but before he could receive the medication, the deputy rang him that Nassolo House was on fire. The deputy said that he just heard an alarm from the dormitory and he ran in there but found that the dormitory was already engulfed by the fire. 

Many residents ran in, Police was being called by various institutions, including my minister, the IGP himself, and the Fire Brigade arrived to find the residents and neighbours around had come in and were already there breaking windows and pulling children out. Even the small children themselves from other dormitories came in to fetch and pour water onto the fire. Nine fire extinguishers – those in the school - were all exploded there. Kings College Buddo ran in with theirs as well, so everybody was working hard to try and save our children. 

The children of one part of the dormitory were the ones affected but when fire moved to the next compartment, the children there had already been moved out. So when I was there, we established that 18 children had died, and two dead bodies of adults were also found. The teachers were called and a roll call was taken to find out whether some of them had died, but those were all accounted for. The matron who is responsible for the dormitory had gone to her cubicle attached to the end of the long dormitory where she stays because there were mattresses there and other things. 

But I want to say that I would like to thank all those organisations and individuals who rushed in there to help. The neighbours came and everybody was working around the clock. The Police Fire Brigade arrived and they did their best and put out the fire even after some children had died. 

We had a meeting to find the immediate thing to be done because everybody was panicking. I contacted the relevant authorities and we proposed that the school be closed and that the parents who were there could take their children and the parents who were far away would be notified. The Red Cross is there so we decided to immediately look for blankets. The Prime Minister’s Office for Disaster Preparedness was also there. I have left them in a meeting. 

People were wondering what to do since some parents may not be able to provide coffins and we informed them that after here, we are going to the ministry to sit together with the minister and the LC V chairperson of the district, who was there even at night, to find out what could be the government’s contribution and what would be the parents contribution so that we forge a way forward. All the children’s property, which was in the dormitories, was burnt. There was no way even to move anything out. So this is the tragedy, which has befallen our children. It is a great loss.  

We went to the mortuary but none of us can stand the sight of a human being burnt as if it is an animal. So we have been moving the whole morning and we came here, hon. Members, to inform you of this tragedy as we go to prepare our written statement, which the minister will deliver tomorrow. Thank you for listening. May God rest their souls in eternal peace! 

THE SPEAKER: I think it would be fair to allow the Member representing the area, and the one representing the district, to say something.

3.19
MS SUSAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am giving further information. Adding to what the minister said, I want to first of all thank the Minister for Primary Education because he has really been active that side.

In this dormitory of Nassolo, there are 96 beds implying that 96 pupils were sleeping there. However, only 46 pupils have been seen. So, much as 18 bodies have been found, other pupils are still missing and this is a dormitory that was occupied by primary four and primary five pupils who are really helpless and very innocent.  

Mr Speaker, we still have a lot of problems in our schools. When I was at the school this morning, I learnt that those pupils had been locked inside that dormitory. This is a dormitory whereby the matron sleeps somewhere else in a different room. Had the matron been inside this dormitory, perhaps all these kids would not have died. But since she was away - and it might not have been fire but something else; another kind of hazard but there was no one. But simply because this is the policy in most of the schools that pupils are locked up in those dormitories, we have found ourselves facing such an absurd moment.

Also, when the school caught fire they called the Fire Brigade from Kampala and those people could not easily get to the site because there is a lot of traffic jam at Namirembe near Mengo Hospital and Natete. I think if we had a fire fighting department at our local governments, that is, at Wakiso District, I think something could have been done much faster. Because if the trucks were coming from Wakiso they would have been in position to get to the scene faster than it was when these guys were stuck in the traffic jam. We realise that so many schools, especially primary schools, lack fire fighting equipment. It is only the first world schools that have the fire extinguishers and other minor equipment, which is used to fight the fire. I believe it ought to be a policy for all schools to have fire fighting equipment.

There is also another problem in these schools. Now that we have the Universal Primary Education, these schools are really congested. I think when you got into that dormitory you saw how the beds were; just very close to each other. These schools lack infrastructure. I believe if the ministry came up and ensured that there is at least some bit of decongestion in these schools, it would also help. 

I also convey my condolences to all the bereaved families, the parents of Buddo Junior School, the staff and the people who stay around the school in Buddo. We pray that God takes them through all this. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.23
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to express my sincere condolences to the bereaved families and the nation at large because the children that have died would have been the leaders of tomorrow.  

I want to add a few things to what my colleague and the honourable minister have just pointed out. I was also at Buddo, but my dear colleagues if you saw what was there, you would just become empathetic. It was a terrible sight. I want to strongly condemn the issue of matrons locking up children in dormitories. I remember when I was a pupil in a certain primary school in Mukono District, in Nagalama Boarding Primary School, this used to happen. Now when I see it happening today and we face such a tragedy, I strongly condemn it.  I think the Ministry of Education and the school administration should look into this issue because the dormitory that got burnt had various rooms. 

As you saw, Mr Speaker, the children in that dormitories were young but without a matron. If the matron sleeps outside these rooms, even if something else, not necessarily fire happened, are these the schools where we really take our children? It is terrible!  

Another thing I want the Ministry of Education to look into is the fact that schools and education have actually become commercialised; that one is obvious. But even in government schools, boarding sections are highly commercialised. You realise that a room that should accommodate only 20 children accommodates over 60 children. They sleep on double and triple deckers - moreover they are so compacted in a room that when a problem arises, these children cannot even escape. When you look at what was in that dormitory, you just cannot imagine that we pay so much money. Education is too expensive! We pay so much money to take our children to boarding schools but to pay in such an environment! 

And on top of that, much as fire may happen or any other problem, we should not rule out the fact that our children contract so many diseases because of this congestion in schools. I think it is high time we as government rose up to look into the standards of schools very seriously. 

I also want to make a humble appeal: I know that the Ministry of Education has often inspected schools, but they usually inspect only academic standards. I think this is the time for the Ministry of Education to make periodic inspection of buildings. This goes not only to the Ministry of Education but also the Ministry of Energy. I think UMEME should do that because much as the cause of fire in Budo Junior School is not yet identified –(Interjection)– please wait. But the minister says that it is not electricity and the actual truth is that it was not electricity because there was no power. But what about the other schools that have had problems of fire because of electricity? That is why I say, it is time Umeme begins inspecting buildings, especially schools, which have a lot of children.

Mr Speaker, I want to end but before I end, allow me to thank the Inspector-General of Police because he did a great job. He intervened very quickly and he has put up mechanisms to ensure that the cause of fire is found out.

Mr Speaker, I still wonder and it is puzzling us so much because as I was talking to the head teacher this morning, he told me, “But you see the problem we have, sometimes these dormitories are locked because of security reasons,” and these were girls but to my surprise, there were two males found in that dormitory and they also died with those children. Now you wonder how those two got into the dormitory because in the first place the dormitory was locked. How did they get in? Were they locked in the dormitory? I got to discover that the windows are not burglar proofed. Now, should we suspect that they went through the window; should we suspect that the security on the compound was not enough? What should we suspect? This brings a lot of questions but I believe the IGP and police will do all it can to ensure that they discover the problem.

Mr Speaker, I want to wind up by requesting the minister of education to give a hand to Budo Junior School. The buildings in Budo Junior School were built as far as 1950 or 1930 and most of –(Interjection) – Mr Speaker, I wish colleagues could -(Interjection)- the buildings have asbestos roofs. Now I want to humbly request and beg the government to re-roof these buildings and at least put iron roofs.

And finally, Mr Speaker, I want the ministry also to ensure that we have periodic fire drills in schools. Because one of the things that I have realised is that we do not take fire as a serious problem –

THE SPEAKER: I think the Committee on Social Services, because this is a wide policy matter, should study this matter and take into account this. 

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I think I have said much. I thank you so much indeed but I would like to once again thank all the people around the school in my district, who have done all they could to ensure that they save at least some lives. I would also like to thank the ministry for at least intervening but I think they would do much more than that. 

I once again move my condolences, on behalf of the district, to the nation and to all the parents. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. [Members rose]

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you have heard from the Minister of Education, he is making a statement tomorrow on the same subject. I have recognised you and I will give you the first opportunity to make your contribution on this.

MR KABUUSU: Mr Speaker, this is a matter of procedure. It is my thinking that tomorrow is too short a time. Much as we need a report from the ministry, it is too short a time for the minister to prepare a thorough and detailed report about this matter.

THE SPEAKER: You are underrating the –(Laughter)

MR KABUUSU: I would believe that it would be procedurally right -

THE SPEAKER: First of all, I met the minister; I went there; I visited the scene. The minister was seriously working. The other minister was at Mulago; they have the facts, they have the officials and they have said that tomorrow they are giving us the report. Why don’t you respect this undertaking? We shall test them tomorrow.

3.32
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wanted to seek your guidance in my capacity as Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs, in this very particular respect and I thought it would be in the best interest of this House that before the substantive minister gives a statement –

THE SPEAKER: Make a brief as the Shadow Minister.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Laughter)- I would also beg to be excused, out of your discretion, to congratulate and welcome my brother, Lubyayi Kisiki, from Bukomansimbi with whom we competed in the constituency, and he left no doubt that actually he defeated all the candidates. I congratulate him and wish him the very best since he presides over a constituency where I was born and where my parents live.

Mr Speaker, this matter of fire is a matter that is not for students. It is a matter about human lives and therefore when we handle it, let us not so much peg on to the students but the lives of all Ugandans. 

My worries hinge on the following: That for the last two years, Mr Speaker, we in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs have been clamouring for a clear policy of fire. And the minister is here; he will inform this House that this policy has not been cleaned up to now. The problem requires a rapid response. But because there is no fire policy, private companies that deal with fire, which have got extreme competence, are incapable of involving themselves into such cases because there is no legal framework and this is a fact. So, they sit back and wait for the fire to cause havoc.

Just last year there was a proposal by the Ministry of Internal Affairs to repair the police helicopter. We pushed and I got a view from the Opposition and thank God, the entire committee embraced this view that we purchase a new helicopter for the police so that they can be able to rapidly respond to such cases. 

I am appealing to this House that we are approaching the Budget process; please help the police acquire this helicopter so that we can be able to rapidly respond to such cases. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that a commission of inquiry be instituted to find out what exactly happened and why. 

And lastly, I would beg for the support from this House that the bereaved families be fully compensated so that we stop this idea of governing a country where we only offer condolences. It is not enough. Government is there to keep law and order, to keep safety, properties and lives of individuals. So, if a calamity befell, those in power should be held responsible so that we go the whole length of compensating these families. It is very sad and I thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Thank you. Minister of Internal Affairs, are you ready?

3.36
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I am making a short statement on the failed signing of the peace agreement by the LRA leadership. 

Mr Speaker, on 2 April 2008, I did inform hon. Colleagues in Parliament that Joseph Kony, Leader of the LRA, was expected to append his signature to the final peace agreement on Thursday, 10 April, 2008 in Ri-kwang-Ba. The formal signing ceremony was scheduled for Monday, 14 April 2008 in Juba Southern Sudan. 

On 10 April 2008, the Government of Uganda delegation travelled to Ri-kwang-Ba to witness Joseph Kony sign the agreement. Present in Ri-kwang-Ba were: His Excellence, Riek Machar, Vice President of the Government of Southern Sudan and mediator in the peace talks; religious leaders from Uganda led by Archbishop Odama, a number of traditional leaders from Uganda, basically from Bunyoro, Acholi, Lango, West Nile and Teso and that team was led by Rwot Ochan II, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo; the Leader of UPC in Parliament and the Chairman of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, hon. Okello-Okello; some Members of Parliament from LRA affected areas led by hon. Betty Amongi; African Ambassadors observing the peace talks from DRC, Kenya, Mozambique, Tanzania and south Africa; and a number of foreign diplomats from Europe, United States and Canada; and local, national and international representatives of the civil society. 

Mr Speaker, Kony did not show-up contrary to our earlier understanding. He was reported to have said the following - these are the reports we received. They may be false, they may be accurate, but this I thought we should share what we received- He said:

1.	He was not expecting to sign an agreement; he was under the impression that he was going to meet traditional and religious leaders to discuss the peace process.

2.	He first wanted to know the procedures of the envisaged special division of the High Court and traditional justice mechanism (Mato oput)

3.	That other reports suggested that there was in- fighting and power struggle among the LRA delegation, hence undermining each other and also sometimes filing conflicting reports to Kony. 

Amidst all this, news came suggesting that Kony had removed David Matsanga from the leadership and membership of his delegation that is the LRA delegation; however, Matsanga says he resigned but was not sacked.  

On 11 April 2008, when it became clear that it would not be possible for Kony to append his signature to the agreement because he was not anywhere near the venue, we got information that he was actually about 100 kilometers away, the Government of Uganda delegation held a meeting in Ri-Kwangba with His Excellency Riek Machar. The purpose of the meeting was to chat the way forward. 

At the meeting with Riek Machar, it was decided that the Government of Uganda delegation comes back to Kampala while the mediator tries to establish contact with Kony with a view to convincing him to sign the agreement. Some traditional, religious and political leaders also remained behind for the same purpose.  And I believe that is why hon. Ogenga Latigo and hon. Okello-Okello and a number of others are not with us this afternoon.

Mr Speaker, meanwhile His Excellence President Yoweri Museveni visited Juba yesterday and held discussions with His Excellence Salva Kiir, President of the Government of Southern Sudan and first Vice President of Sudan. They did review the peace process and did brief the media about their meeting. 

In light of these developments, Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda awaits a report from His Excellence Riek Machar who is currently in Ri-Kwangba Nabanga area trying to establish contact with Joseph Kony. Government also awaits a report from His Excellence Chissano, the UN Secretary General’s Special Envoy to the LRA affected areas. His Excellence Chissano was this week in Ri-Kwang-Ba and he is scheduled to brief the UN Security Council about the peace process at the end of this month.

On the basis of these reports, Government will take a decision on the way forward with regard to the peace process and cessation of hostilities agreement which expires today. Meanwhile the status quo remains until Government has reviewed the reports of both President Chissano and Riak Machar and taken an appropriate position on the way forward. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, on behalf of these reports, I want to thank you and your team for the work you have been able to do up to date. Thank you very much. (Applause)  

Now honourable members, it is true this is a ministerial statement but remember last time we said it is better maybe for the time being to keep quiet otherwise we may pre-empt the peace process.  I think that was a decision we made and in view of the content of the report, it is for information. We just keep quiet until other things turn-up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I come from the mountains of the sun and there is this gentleman called David Matsanga Nyekorach-(Interjection)- yes, I am his area MP. I want to know because there are conflicting stories that the man is arrested, that the man is killed; we in the mountains are not sleeping. Despite the fact that he could be with the rebels, he is ours. Mr minister, can you help us? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we have heard of those reports and fears expressed by my brother, Mafabi. The information we have is that David Nyekorach Matsanga is safe; he is not arrested and in fact hon. Mafabi had an occasion to speak to hon. Nyekorach Matsanga only last week when -(Laughter)- him and I were discussing issues of the peace process and indeed there were again fears that Matsanga was either dead or arrested. So, we did agree that in order to resolve the rumor, we should actually call David Matsanga and so I called him from the lobby of Parliament and a number of us including hon. Nandala-Mafabi spoke to him. So, Matsanga is safe.

3.46
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, I just have- not in terms of the content of this whole process but a concern, Mr Speaker. We have been talking about traditional justice mechanisms for such a long time and I am beginning to ask myself, is there need for the minister to come to this House at one point to bring in something that makes these provisions an acceptable part of our Judicial System. Otherwise, we keep talking about it and think that it is going to be a process that will bring a heeling at some point. 

So, if that is the position, is the minister going to come to this House with these proposals? And what is being done to prepare the cultural institutions that are supposed - I am still very optimistic - I am hoping that the agreement will be signed and therefore the traditional institutions will have a duty to play?

I am conversant with the Teso cultural institution and I know that they have not been helped to update the mechanisms that they have to bring it to a level where they can easily dispense justice. So, is something being done to build the capacity of the traditional institutions to help them when this time arrives?

Then, Mr Speaker, I am very happy with what the minister has said. He says, “The Cessation of Hostilities Agreement expires tonight,” but that “Government will hold fire until we have an explanation.” How I pray that the dividends that have arisen out of this cessation of hostilities will continue to be available to the people in that part of the country! And where possible, Mr Speaker, I am hoping that Government will do everything to ensure that we are secure now that the rebels are away from the community. I hope that this is possible. 

Maybe before I get to that, Mr Speaker I want to be educated by the hon. minister, was there a special provision in this agreement that Kony signs first and then President Museveni signs later? Because I am hoping that President Museveni might as well illustrate his commitment to this process by signing first and then we will have only Kony to look at. 

Lastly, the pain that remains un-answered up to today; we are looking for 2,000 abducted children from Teso; does the minister have an answer for the people of Teso? Because we have not seen the children and the process seems to hang in balance; we are really worried. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to make one clarification. Ndugu Rugunda who is the Minister of Internal Affairs and my OB mentioned here that I talked to Nekorach Matsanga on phone and I saw the minister who is in charge of the Bill to intercept information –(Laughter) - doing this to me –(Laughter)– I want to make it clear that the time we talked on phone it was on Ndugu’s phone and not on my phone -(Laughter)- and we were many, hon. Wadri, we were many members who talked. So, Mr minister do not point that finger; I never used my phone, I used Ndugu’s phone and Ndugu was the one talking to him. (Laughter) So, do not intercept my phone. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I am inclined to stop the debate on this statement. Let us get the response.

DR RUGUNDA: To respond to the few points raised by hon. Also, it is true that the traditional leaders on their own and also with encouragement by Government have been working on consolidating, developing and harmonising the cultural approaches of resolving this matter.

Secondly, the Rt hon. Prime Minister has already asked the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to develop that area and will be coming to Parliament at an appropriate stage so that Parliament can make its own contribution and we harmonise our approach on traditional ways of dealing with this problem of LRA. 

Thirdly, are the people of Uganda secure? The answer is yes, they are secure and we do not expect that Joseph Kony or anybody will come back to disturb the peace of the people of Uganda. And of course in case anybody attempts, it is true that the UPDF and the people of Uganda themselves are ready to work closely together to make sure that they defend themselves and their property. 

Joseph Kony signing first and whether President Yoweri Museveni should not sign, really why did we have two separate days of signing? The first option was that let the signing ceremony be in Juba. There was agreement on that but then later on although Joseph Kony had promised to come to Juba, he said, “No,” he understands there is a group of people waiting for him, arrest him and take him to the Hague. Attempts to reassure him were un-successful. Then it was agreed as a compromise that Joseph Kony signs first and President Museveni finally concludes by signing as well. 

This was done because whereas we were absolutely certain about the commitment and availability of President Yoweri Museveni with regard to this kind of peace agreement and its signing. There were very many question marks about Joseph Kony being available and being able to sign the final peace agreement. In fact what has happened in practice has vindicated that earlier position. So, President Museveni -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for accepting to enlighten us more especially when it comes to the issue of the two leaders in this negotiation signing at different points. I think to the international community and to us, when two people reconcile, it is usually by the two parties appearing together, signing and shaking hands so that the whole world gets to know that these people have reconciled. When you draw the example from the first peace talks Uganda had between Yoweri Kaguta Museveni then in the bush and the late Tito Okello Lutwa signed in Nairobi, the two parties were there. They shook hands and signed and then we all believed and knew that the things had been cemented and there would be peace and we could see the way forward. In this case, how would you as the leader of this negotiation team –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Is the honourable member in order to appear to be oblivious of the behaviour of Joseph Kony. Is he in order to appear to be so ignorant of what has been happening following the behaviour of Kony? 

THE SPEAKER: The position is that Juba was accepted as the place where the negotiation was supposed to take place and where this signing had to be done. But in order to accommodate Kony’s fears, they accepted to go beyond the territory and facilitate him to sign. That ends the debate. 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clear guidance on the matter. I better make this point clear; my brother Wadri said there has to be shaking of hands. I do not believe that there is one rigid dogmatic method that must always be followed in search for peace. This is a rather unique situation and the uniqueness and concrete realities surrounding this process must be taken into account. That is why this arrangement has been put in place. 

Finally, the 2000 abducted children from the Teso region, as you know from the beginning of the talks, the Government of Uganda delegation has always demanded the release of the abducted children and women. LRA has always resisted this position but the reports we have show that they have children and they have women and we expect that as soon as we sign this agreement, one of the first things that will be done will be to free and release these children in captivity.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS
PROPOSAL TO BORROW FROM THE EPORT-IMPORT BANK OF CHINA FOR THE KAMPALA CITY COUNCIL (KCC) ROAD EQUIPMENT AND SANITARY EQUIPMENT

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the proposal to borrow $10,151,613 from China Export-Import Bank for procuring KCC road unit and sanitary equipment. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: The papers should be taken by the appropriate committee to study and subsequently promptly report.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 29/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

3.59
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): i)”Is the Minister aware that the Kampala-Gulu highway has gradually deteriorated over time and has lately become a death-trap for motorists? 

ii)”If so, what concrete steps has the minister taken to ensure that the road is repaired and made more user friendly?” 

4.00
THE MINISTER OF WORKS (Mr John Nasasira): Mr Speaker, this question was actually asked last year. The Kampala-Gulu highway can broadly be divided in three sections which we upgraded from murram to tarmac as follows: Kampala-Bombo – 31 kilometres in 1960; Bombo-Wobulenzi – 15 kilometres in 1963 and Wobulenzi-Luwero-Kafu-Karuma-Gulu – 300 kilometres in 1969/1970. During Uganda’s political turmoil prior to 1986, this highway lacked timely maintenance and reconstruction and by 1986 it had deteriorated at different levels depending on the age of those sections that I have just mentioned. 

However, the section of Kampala-Wobulenzi received emergency repairs in 1987/1988; the section between Wobulenzi to Kafu also received emergency repairs in the 1990s and the section between Kafu and Karuma was fully reconstructed in 1996, while sections between Karuma and Gulu had several emergency repairs at different times. 

But apart from the Kafu-Karuma road section, which is 96 kilometres, as I mentioned, which was fully reconstructed, the other road sections of the Kampala-Gulu highway have just had maintenance interventions, which means repairing the failed sections and giving a seal on top because of budgetary constraints. And no full reconstruction would have been desired has been done. 

By last year, the road section between Kawempe and Kafu had badly deteriorated and in dire need of repair. It was mainly because of this section that hon. Benson Obua-Ogwal asked the above two questions which I would now wish to answer briefly.

My ministry is obviously aware about the condition of this road and was definitely concerned as well. But the deterioration of the road had reached such a critical stage that we could not handle it using our maintenance budget. The section between Kawempe and Kafu was beyond the normal maintenance. However, we could not find money in the budget for some time like in some sections of the roads also in this country, which we are still yet to address. 

But when we made a saving of $20 million from the Pakwach-Nebbi-Arua and Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima road projects - under normal circumstances, this money would have gone back to the World Bank because those two projects had made a saving - we convinced the World Bank because of the situation that road was in to utilise these savings on the Kawempe-Luwero-Kafu road section.

Two emergency repair contracts one for Kawempe-Luweero and the other for Luweero-Kafu were singed between the Government of Uganda and MASA Enago Project to carry out emergency repairs; but these ones are fairly substantial. We were forced to carry out these emergency repairs since the funds available were not enough for full reconstruction. Carrying out full reconstruction like we are doing on Jinja-Bugiri would require an average cost of about $0.8millions per kilometre – that is what we are spending on Jinja-Bugiri. This would mean the 166 kilometres of the Kawempe-Kafu road would require almost $133 millions, which we do not have at the moment. We are therefore carrying out these emergency repairs as a temporary relief to road users as we negotiate for funding required to finance the desired full reconstruction in the near future. 

In fact even the $20 million now available from the savings that I have mentioned above will only be able to cover about 100 kilometres out of the 166 kilometres. But we hope to get the balance when our negotiations with World Bank are complete this year.

Mr Speaker, I personally inspected this project on the 3rd April and I can report to this House that the work is progressing on well. So far, 30 kilometres or 50 percent of the Kawempe-Luweero section have been done and 45 kilometre or 45 percent of the Luweero-Kafu road section has also been done. 

We are on truck to deliver the 66 kilometres of the Kawempe-Luweero section by 30 August this year and the 50 kilometres of the Luweero-Nakasongola by 30 June this year. We hope the last section of the Nakasongola-Kafu, part of which is in reasonable condition, not so bad - but part of it needs some repairs - to be completed some time next year.

The other poor road section on the Kampala-Gulu Highway is from what they call Milo-biiri that is at the round about to Kawempe and to Gayaza up to Kawempe. Mr Speaker, I can report to this House that this road section has already been tendered out and work will commence by June 2008.

The remaining sections on the Kawempe-Gulu high that is after Kafu will continue to get the necessary maintenance interventions as appropriate under our maintenance program.

Mr Speaker, I want to assure hon. Benson Obua-Ogwal that the condition of Kampala-Gulu Highway is improving and that my ministry is doing all it can, as I have explained above to ensure that this road is user friendly. I am certain that the honourable member has noticed that continuous improvement in the condition of this highway especially in the Kafu-Kawempe section since he posted this question last year. Thank you.

4.07
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for answering this question. I would like the House to know that I posed this question on the 9th of March last year and for sure you can expect that it has been over taken by events; nevertheless, admittedly good events because it is indeed true that work on the road is progressing.

However, I would like to ask one or two supplementary questions. The minister said that they are looking for funding to do a more durable work on this road. May I inquire from him the lifespan of this current emergency intervention which he is undertaking?

Secondly, may I ask the minister concerned why it is apparent for us who ply the road every now and then that some sections – in fact the stretch from Luweero coming backward to Kampala is much wider than the stretch from Luweero going towards Lira; this is very evident. Does it mean that there are two different contractors or the same contractor having  different scopes of work?

Finally, would the minister consider urging the contractor to skip and go forth to a section beyond Migera, which section is so badly dilapidated and potholed? Would the minister consider scraping off what is remaining of the tarmac so that at least we could do with murrum for the time being until the road works continues and reach that place? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.10
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his answer to the question. But I have a supplementary question. The works on Luweero-Nakasongola have started and as well as that on Luweero-Kampala. But is the minister aware – in your statement you said that you have been inspecting personally. Are you aware that some of the parts are developing potholes already before the road is even completed; and the layer is so thin that it cannot last for long?

So, what are you planning to do as a ministry to ensure that there is improvement on the works which are been done?

Secondly, the contractor who is moving to Kafu has now reached the section between Katoogo to Sasila and the traffic has now been diverted to Nakasongola town. But the Nakasongola loop is in a bad shape and it cannot handle the traffic which has been diverted there. What is the plan of the ministry to ensure that this loop is also repaired; right now the situation is very bad. I would be very grateful if the ministry can give us an assurance on that.

4.11
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I also what to thank the minister for his response. I actually travel on this road every week and I do not want to elaborate on the state of the road. But I can see some improvements since the work began. But I have two supplementary questions.

One, when I look at what the minister called emergency repairs between here and Kafu I see some good work being done. Even the thickness of what is being put in place, I can equate it to the Northern bypass in Kampala because I also travel on the Northern bypass when I am coming to Parliament. I actually do not see a difference between what I see in the work there and what is on the Northern bypass.

My question is, the minister talked about the emergency repairs between Karuma and Gulu – I do not understand this because the kind of work that has been done repeatedly between Karuma and Gulu has even narrowed the road further because it is given to, I think, substandard contractors who do not complete the work and most of these substandard contactors are local contractors. And the minister knows very well the state of the road between Karuma to Kamudini, and then to Gulu. The road continues to narrow as you offer your attendance for emergency repairs. So I want an explanation – because when I see this way what are called emergency repairs, I actually get convinced that the road will last because it is thicker - good work is being done. But these emergency repairs from Karuma to Gulu, which are given to local contractors, I do not understand!

Secondly, my other question is: I do not know whether the minister is aware that traffic on the Gulu highway continues to increase and this is the reason the road continues to get damaged? First of all, from heavy fighting equipment, tanks, Mambas, and all that going to the North; they also damage the road because that is heavy traffic on the road. From there, it has now shifted to commercial vehicles going to Juba. I, therefore, would like to ask: what criteria do you use to prioritise roads - because that road is earning this country a lot of money now? The road to Gulu, to Juba is earning this country a lot of money. So what criteria do you use to prioritise rehabilitation of roads in this country? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am about to close these supplementary questions.

4.15
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. However, I am perturbed by a part of his statement, where he says, “We hope to get the balance when our negotiations with the World Bank are completed.” My understanding is that he hopes to get funding for the other 60 kilometres.

Supposing these negotiations do not work out, what plans does the minister have for this road especially for the stretch between Migera and Kafu, which is now becoming impassable?

Two; could the minister assure us that the stretch between Karuma to Gulu is not being used for somebody’s pocket money since it is repaired at least twice a year, and the conditions do not improve?

4.16
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You cannot talk about improving the condition of the road between Kampala and Gulu without talking about the bridge at Karuma. Therefore, I want to ask the Minister of Transport, what plans has government to construct the bridge at Karuma the way the bridge at Pakwach is built? This is simply because when a vehicle gets an accident on that bridge at Karuma, it simply goes into the river, unlike the Pakwach one where whatever size of the vehicle is involved in an accident, near that bridge or the bridge itself, it will never find itself on the bed of the river. Thank you.

4.18
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the height of the flood crisis in the Teso region, some time late last year the honourable minister visited specific road sections all over the area. During his interactions with the population, he made specific promises regarding the interventions he would make. Since we are talking about roads -

THE SPEAKER: I think, hon. Oduman, I would request you to form your question about roads in that area. A supplementary can only be relevant to the question asked; the question is about Kampala–Gulu road. You are now taking us to flooded areas in Teso. This cannot be a supplementary question. But you can ask your own question. Bring it to me tomorrow, I will send it to the minister to answer. (Laughter)

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, this is about roads in the minister’s sector.

THE SPEAKER: No. It is not a general question. It is a specific question. But table yours and we shall see how to deal with it.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: NO, not here. Draft it, bring it to me tomorrow. I will send it to him - that is Kampala to Soroti. (Laughter)

4.20
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question to the honourable minister: normally I see when these constructions are being done - whether it is an emergency, which is called a diversion – there are normally provisions for temporary paths that are created alongside the road. But in this case we only see humps mounted after every about 5 meters. In fact, moving from Kampala to Gulu used to take about four hours but currently it takes seven to eight hours; Kampala to Lira more or less the same. 

Hon. Minister, in the contract agreement, were there provisions for constructing the temporary paths? Thank you.

4.21
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Obua wanted to know the lifespan of the sections that we are now reconstructing and hon. Reagan Okumu thought that the layer we are doing there is quite thick and good and is almost as good as the Kampala bypass, but you heard hon. Tubwita saying that she thought the layer was very thin. So you can see I have many supervisors on this work. (Laughter)

I have said this before and I am going to repeat it, that for us, roads are our patients. When they get sick and we are trying to carry out operations, we are not as fortunate as doctors. We operate in public. When you go for an operation as a human being, the doctors take you to a theatre and not even your next of kin is allowed in there until they have fixed you and they get you out of the theatre. You might even pass through an intensive care unit where you are not seen until you look like a human being.

But you can imagine if people were passing in front of the theatre when the stomach is cut, and the intestines are out. There would be different reports. Somebody who passes when they have cut the stomach will say, “I have left your relative dead.” And the next one who finds another stage of the operation – so when we are doing our work, people of course observe and they make their conclusions and it is difficult for us to explain.

With respect to the lifespan, I call this an emergency - and that is why in my statement I started with the years when the roads were constructed and you have heard that some roads were constructed in 1960; others in 1969 and 1970 – because the normal life of a road, depending on the design life, should be about 15 years. So, the whole of Gulu highway, like other highways in Uganda, missed out on timely and full reconstruction. Full reconstruction is not just one layer. 

A road is made up of about three to four layers, depending on the road you want to make and I do not want to go into those technical details now. I just call them layers but because of lack of money and as I said, during our turmoil days the interventions were not done at the right time. You can imagine a road that was constructed in 1970, whenever it develops potholes we cut them out, repair and seal. However, that does not mean you have addressed those layers, which are already damaged and broken down. That is why I will explain for the Gulu-Karuma road, which was fully reconstructed in 1996 and is also due for reconstruction. The other sections should also be under reconstruction; not in one layer; not in a thin layer but many layers to accommodate the traffic that honourable members have been referring to.

So what we are doing, initially because of the financial constraints, we wanted to use this US $20 million to cut out the bad sections and leave those, which are still okay although old, and seal them so that we may perhaps be able to go on for another 3 to 4 years. But by the time we started, the road had deteriorated so much that there was nothing to cut out and nothing to leave in most of its sections. We are reconstructing the top 200 mm layer; that is the 8-inch layer. We are reconstructing, adding materials, and compacting.

However, let me also tell you that even that 200 mm is not good because an ideal road should have three layers of that thickness in the form of 200 mm or 8 inches and another 8 inches, but we do not have the money.

We think that the reprocessed layer that we are doing now should last us for at least five years and that by then we shall have found some money to reconstruct it. And definitely it will make travel, as I said, more friendly and quicker. Although that is not what we would want to do, we think that in the current financial situation that is the best we can do. 

That is not the only road we are repairing like that. There are a number of roads we repairing in that format. That is why I considered it and I think I told you of the Jinja-Bugiri road, which is being fully reconstructed although taking a lot of money – US $68 million for 82 kilometers. We want to spend maybe US $30 million for 160 kilometres for the time being. So, the lifespan is partly an estimate. 

I think the Luweero-Kafu and Luweero-Kawempe roads will have the same width, but it is because they have not put the shoulders that the section you are seeing on the other side seems to be narrow. When they finally put the shoulders, it will not look like that. The other sections are wider because they have both the road and the shoulders as well. That is why it looks wider. Otherwise, the width is the same from Kawempe to Kafu.

On the section between Mijera and Kafu, I would like to say that I am aware of the problems there and I want to add that we will try to do something. It is one of the bad sections that we are going to address.

Hon. Tubwita, I am not aware of the sections that we have finished, which have already developed potholes. I personally was there on the 3rd of April and did not see anything of that sort. However, I am ready to talk to you after here and if you know of any specific areas, we can go and find out. Otherwise, you might have seen a section, which we have not finished and mistook it for another. There was a small path; I think it is near a camp, which I think has the potholes you saw. In one part there was an accident of a lorry, which damaged one side, while the other one was a trial area, which the constructors were using to do tests. Maybe those are the ones you are talking about. Anyway, we can discuss it.

On the Nakasongola route, which combines hon. Obua’s concern about diversions, I would like to say that if you want to have diversions, you must have the money because they are also constructed.

When you have a small budget, rather than spend money on diversions, we opt to use it on the road. We do that because those diversions are used and after the road has been constructed they are abandoned. So rather than spend the money on diversions, it is better, when you even do not have enough money to finish what you want to do, to slow motorists down for a short period while reconstruction is going on and at the end of the day save that money to finish the work.

Hon. Okumu, I would like to assure you that what has been done on the bypass is far more superior, about five times more superior in terms of pavement strength, than what you are seeing there. Even the layer on top of the bypass we are going to put small stones in two layers with bitumen as a seal. So, it is far, far different.
 
On the Karuma-Gulu road –(Interruption)

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very, hon. Minister for giving way. As you explained about diversions you talked about Nakasongola road, but you did not give a conclusive remark. How is the status? Is the loop going to be worked upon or not? I am asking this because that is something we need to know. As I speak the traffic has destroyed it completely though it was already in a bad shape. If take you there, you will see for yourself that it is in a bad shape. So, the people of Nakasongola want to know, because I was coming to your, whether the loop is going to be worked upon or not.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, it is the responsibility of our ministry to work on all roads. If we had enough money we would not have any bad road. So, definitely the loop is as our responsibility as the highway and as soon as we finish the highway, we shall start to address the damages on that loop. Otherwise, for the time being, the loop is helping to divert traffic so that we can finish the highway.

On the Karuma-Gulu road, I would like to say that what you have been seeing there, again I want to explain, is just maintenance work; it is not even emergence repair work; it is about repairing the potholes here and there and to repair the sections that have failed. That road has had its plan and we are looking for money to fully reconstruct it. So, what you see there, and I am ready to give you the costs that have been spent and I think that also answers hon. Wacha’s question. I am ready to bring to this Parliament the intervention costs per kilometer and the ideal need for the cost per kilometer. We just keep maintaining until time the funds are available to enable us do a proper job.

Traffic on the Gulu highway has definitely increased because as soon as there was a comprehensive peace agreement in Southern Sudan, we had increased traffic. But there are two solutions to that:

1.	We have started tarmacking the road from Soroti to Lira.  Half of the traffic will not bother to come through Kampala via Wobulenzi to Gulu, part of the traffic to Southern Sudan will now divert.  
2.	We are studying the necessary repairs for the railway line from Tororo to Pakwach and at a future time, a lot of traffic will then go by railway. So, you will have the Gulu-Soroti-Lira road, which is now being tarmacked, fully reconstruction; not this emergency one. And then it will also reduce the traffic there but definitely there is a lot of traffic.

In terms of prioritising roads, the quality of the road and the standard depends on traffic and the Gulu highway with its current traffic deserves a quality as high as the Kampala-Tororo road. There is no doubt about that.

Me Speaker, I think I have answered one of the questions of hon. Ben Wacha; but he is also concerned about eh possibility of the negotiations with the bank failing. If the negotiations with the bank fail, we will have to finish that work, there is no choice, by using our own budget. The negotiations have not yet failed and we are still moving on; we have not yet finished what we are doing with this money to get stuck. But we will not get stuck; we will continue.  

I take the proposal by hon. Onzima about the guard rails on Karuma Bridge. We might not do it as the one on Pakwach. If you want to know, those parts on the Pakwach Bridge are from the old London Bridge. It was built like that because it is both a road and a railway. That is why you have these high barriers because the railway passes on the same bridge and most of it is on the street. But what has been the problem with the Karuma Bridge is that it is on the curve and the guard rails have been weak. So when the vehicle comes and hits the guard rails, it straight away goes down. We have tried first of all to reduce the speed by the bumps, which we put before the bridge, and definitely we are going to improve the guard rails on that bridge. I do not have any more spare guard rails from the London Bridge to be put on Karuma.  

I will wait for hon. Oduman’s question about the work in Teso. When it comes we shall answer it. I think in the process I have answered hon. Obua’s question on diversions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

4.36
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Local Government (Amendments) Bill, 2007 be read for a second time.  

THE SPEAKER: Seconded.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, Article 176 (2)(d) of the Constitution stipulates that: “There shall be established for each local government unit a sound financial base with reliable sources of revenue.”  Article 191 also provides Parliament with the powers to enact laws that shall enable local governments to levy a charge, collect appropriate fees and taxes in order to fulfil their constitutional mandate. 

These provisions are further entrenched in the Local Governments Act, under Section 80(1), which states that: “Local governments may levy, charge and collect fees and taxes, including rates, rents, loyalties, stamp duties’ registration and licensing fees.” These fees and taxes are specified in the First Schedule of this Act.  

While introducing the decentralisation system of governance in Uganda, political and legal administrative decentralisation moved faster than the physical decentralisation. This means that the decentralisation services were not matched with adequate financial resources for local governments to deliver their services. As a consequence the local governments depended heavily on funds from the central government in form of grants - conditional and unconditional - and equalisation rather than the local sources of funds.  

The objective of this Bill, therefore, is to amend the Local Governments Act, Chapter 2 or 3 in order to introduce new taxes to fill the gaps created following the suspension of the Graduated Tax. This Bill seeks to introduce the following taxes for local governments:

(a)	Local Government Hotel Tax: this tax will be levied on lodge room occupants per room per night and is to be collected by hotel owners and paid to the local governments.

(b)	Local Service Tax: this tax will be levied on income and wealth of persons in gainful employment who are practising professionals, business persons and commercial farmers producing on large scale.

Graduated Tax was suspended due to its being repressive, unconstitutional and a burden to the poor and to the unemployed. However, Graduated Tax contributed more than 80 percent of the local revenue in local governments. 

This combined effect of the suspension of Graduated Tax and the inability to avail adequate funds to compensate local governments for loss of revenue has adversely affected the capacity and ability of local councils to finance their decentralised mandates and services such as repair and maintenance of local government facilities and infrastructure, supervision and monitoring of local governments projects, investments and other priority activities and operational office expenses.

The administrative and political activities of local councils are gradually grinding to a halt. This is because local councils are unable to hold meetings to discuss government business and take decisions on important issues as they cannot afford to pay sitting and transport allowances to councillors.  

Local governments are unable to meet their pension obligations for the retired employees and pension arrears are accumulating every year. This has caused untold hardship to pensioners many of whom are dying before they earn their pensions.  

Over the last seven years, local councillors, through the LGDP, PMA and other sectoral conditional of grants have invested heavily in service delivery. Rural roads have been constructed, new classrooms have been built, water points have been installed and health centres have been put up. All these investments must be co-funded, maintained and sustained by local governments using their local revenue.

The development partners have made a substantial contribution towards these investments and are equally concerned and are now reluctant to continue finding new investments in service delivery unless local governments themselves have got reliable and predicable sources of revenue to sustain them. 

Mr Speaker, the decentralisation policy has been undermined as the local governments are dependent on releases from the central government grants, which are often insufficient to fully meet the salaries of their staff, leading to accumulated salary arrears. The approved structures of the local governments are not fully filled, leaving out critical skill and expertise at local governments.

The viable and sustainable solution to the problem of financing local governments lies in the Bill. I would like to remind everybody that one of the civic duties of a citizen under Article 17 of the Constitution is to pay taxes both national and local. 

The proceeds from local service tax shall be spent on basic services such as sanitation, education, health, construction and maintenance of roads in the areas of the jurisdiction of local governments. 

The proceeds from local government hotel tax shall be spent on garbage collection improvement and general cleanliness of the urban areas.

In a nutshell, local governments are in severe financial problems and this matter has to be addressed decisively in order to avert a looming crises. The proposed taxes are therefore a timely and necessary intervention in the enhancement of local government revenue collection.

I am, therefore, appealing to you to join government and support the local government’s amendment Bill that is intended to amend the Local Government Act to introduce new taxes and this is the only sustainable solution to the financing of local governments. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, chairman, but if I may ask, how are you going to present this? Are you going to read it or summarise it?

4.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE & LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr William Wopuwa): Mr Speaker, I will try to summarise it. 

First of all, I want to make a correction of the copies that we have given out. On page 3, in the paragraph of “conclusion”, it should be shifted to page 23. There was a mistake made in typing.

This Bill has been with the committee since September and we have held a lot of consultations with various stakeholders and from the discussions we have had with them, we were able to form a position that it was very important that this new taxes are brought on board in order to allow local governments to operate.

As the minister has explained, we have had physical decentralisation but it has not been backed by adequate financial bases. 

Looking at the implications following the suspension of Graduated Tax, many of the councils, particularly lower local governments, have not been able to function including conducting simple operations like having council meetings. 

The people we interacted with raised a number of concerns ranging from double taxation, how we are going to market this tax so that it is different from Graduated Tax, which was suspended. Some even asked whether it may be possible to increase VAT in order to accommodate it without introducing a new tax. 

We had the opportunity to interact with the Minister of Local Government and he gave us clarification which answered most of the items that were raised, pointing out that it was important to have these new taxes.

These taxes are mainly two. We have the Hotel Tax, which is going to be levied on people who use hotels. And, therefore, those who go to hotels, tourists, even those locals who go to spend nights there will be taxed and definitely these people will not be poor people. These hotels need to be well maintained in order for those who come later on to be comfortable. 

The most controversial was the Local Service Tax, which particularly aims at people in gainful employment. We looked at the figures from the NSSF report of November 2007 and discovered that we have over 189,757 employees. We looked at the number of districts and we were able to get figures, on page 12, of how many teachers, both primary, secondary and tertiary, including other extension workers who are employed by districts. Our rough estimation is that if each one of them contributed Shs 5,000 a year, we would be able to raise about Shs 40 billion and this would be able to fill in the gap created by the abolition of Graduated Tax.

Mr Speaker, on page 19, we are looking at the Local Service Tax in respect of self employed persons. What is clear is that self employed persons need to be registered as business entities. Businessmen and businesswomen will also be treated as business entities for purposes of taxation. But the tax will be focusing on mainly their net income. After removing other taxes, what remains is taxed and this tax is only payable once a year.

We also had the opportunity to look at commercial farmers, on page 20. These are farmers who cultivate on business terms. If somebody has 10 acres of Matooke and is growing it for business, the Bill is recommending that somebody pays Shs 50,000 a year. And if you look at it with regard to the farms involved, it is not very painful.

Mr Speaker, we want, in our conclusion, to thank government especially in this budget framework for having made a commitment of Shs 45 billion to local governments so that those local governments that will do well will be able to collect more. The vacuum that we have been having in this financial year will have been resolved and therefore we will not have a gap that will make us quarrel with the ministry of finance very many times. 

I would like to take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, and Members of Parliament to thank all my colleagues in the committee, those people whom we interacted with especially the workers representatives who gave us a lot of input, and I would like to recommend that this Bill be enacted into law so that local governments become viable and independent for the good of our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairman for the presentation. The debate is open. 

4.50
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the Committee for this report. It is true the report has just been given to us and it will be very good if we could go through and really debate competently. I do not know what you will say about it but that is my humble request. 

However, Mr Speaker, I want to make an observation. (Interjection)- Okay.  Mr Speaker, I stand to propose that in view of the importance of this report, I wish to suggest that we are given time to go through, probably tonight –

THE SPEAKER: You mean you did not go through it? You have been with it for quite sometime.

MS SENINDE: No, Mr Speaker, I have personally been given this report today and I would like to debate on this –

THE SPEAKER: It was supposed to come last week. It is only that the ministers of Local Government were not here.

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, we have just been given this report and that is the reason why I am requesting that we are given time to go through it because this is a very important issue that Members need to peruse through the report, understand it and then we come to Parliament and deliberate competently. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: How long? Hours? Overnight? Tomorrow you will be able to competently debate? [Members: “Yes”]

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, it is the position that you need time to read through and tomorrow we start the debate and the committee stage? - Do you want me to take it to Thursday? [Members: “No”]

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, we deal with it tomorrow and on Thursday we deal with Audit because I understand from the Chairman budget committee that, maybe next week, you want to sit in the morning and afternoon so that you are able to complete the budgeting process. So, tomorrow we deal with this one and then on Thursday we deal with Audit. Is that okay? Since I see no objection, I therefore I take it –

MR MATHIUS B. NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, given the importance of this Local Government (Amendment) Bill and since all of us have local councils which we want to assist, I would rather suggest that, fellow Members, we debate this on Thursday. Let us do the Audit Bill tomorrow because we have gone through the Audit Bill before and most of us are conversant with it. So, if members can accept tomorrow, we deal with the Audit Bill so that we come with some inputs about this Local Government Service tax. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I do not want to disagree with your guidance but I think my colleagues, honourable members of Parliament, we need to put in more time in parliamentary work. The reason why the Local Government (Amendment) Bill is so urgent is because we need to provide for it in the Budget. And even what the chairperson indicated may not be possible if we do not pass this Local Government (Amendment) Bill in time. So, I would like to suggest that tomorrow we do deal with the Local Government (Amendment) Bill and finish it.  

It is now becoming a practice for Members to ask for more time when reports are presented. Mr Speaker, I need your guidance. Either Members get these reports before time because on Thursday, the Minister or the Ministry of Local Government was available to move this motion but the excuse that was given by Parliament was that the reports were not ready. But even when they come on this Floor, Members want more time. I need your guidance if we should not –(Interjection)- the report was ready with the committee but the problem was with the production of copies for Members of Parliament. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence that tomorrow we do consider the Local Government (Amendment) Bill. This Bill has been with us since September, as it has been indicated, and I believe members have consulted on it and have issues to raise on this Floor. And then on Thursday we can deal with the Audit Bill but my dilemma is, if the report of the Audit Bill is brought in on Thursday, I do not know whether Members will not ask for more time again.

THE SPEAKER: I think Members have got that copy –

MS KABAKUMBA: So, I beg for your indulgence that we consider this Bill and put it out of the way, Mr Speaker.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, the Bill which is before us for discussion is a very important Bill. It touches on earnings of people and you know very well that right from the historical times, tax collection has been rejected by mankind, and that is right from the Bible. You know how people shunned the shortest man, the tax collector. (Laughter) It is because people do not want- even Members of Parliament, if it were not because of these deductions made from our emoluments as Pay As You Earn, I am cocksure many of us would even be hesitant to take money from our banks, to take money from our pockets and take it to Government.

 Therefore, since this is a matter which has got a lot of political connotations in the sense that the whole country has already been made aware that graduated tax was abolished but we are introducing it as it were with a different name and targeting the same people –(Interjection) yes, and it has got a lot of complications even when it comes to collecting it. I think it is only fair, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues that since Members have been given this document that they go over it tonight and tomorrow and then on Thursday we can be able to debate it from an informed position. We beg for that time –(Interjection)- yes Munamasaka, I will take your clarification.  

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member on the Floor is the Leader of the Opposition and he is saying that this tax is a substitute of the Graduated Tax. Is this the message he is giving the nation?

THE SPEAKER: I think even the minister explained that in view of the suspension of Graduated Tax, there was a need to find sources of revenue for local governments. The term you use, whether it is “substitute” or what, the thing has been necessitated but the fact is that Graduated Tax was suspended. But I think let us go on issues, hon. Member. And what maybe I am suggesting if it has to go on Thursday and not tomorrow as some of you are suggesting, we have a clear day on Thursday that we do not involve any other business so that we are given a lot of time to debate and then we go in the committee stage and finish it.  Yes, Madam Minister.

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. As you rightly put it, if we have to consider this very important and urgent Bill on Thursday, I would beg your indulgence that we complete it. It is extremely urgent; we cannot afford to have it completed beyond Thursday. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, for me I would love to complete the Bill. So, I think what we do, let us have a compromise here. You go and read this report, on Thursday we shall have no other business; we immediately embark on it, have a general debate and if we finish, we go to the committee stage so that we can complete. Tomorrow we deal with the Audit Bill. 
    
MR WACHA:  Mr Speaker, I am taking exception to statements which have been made here by two honourable ministers, which tend to indicate that the fault is the fault of Members of Parliament, we have no fault.  If work is brought to us late, you do not expect us to rush it and do it even when we do not know anything about it. Let the frontbench, let Government do its act, bring work in time, give us ample time to read through and we will do our part. (Ms Kabakumba rose_) 

MS KABAKUMBA: Order.

MR WACHA:  But for you to come here and indicate –(Interjection)- please, I have not finished –(Interjection)- oh order! Okay. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER:  I think hon. Members, let us not take much of our time on this. We have agreed that we shall deal with this Bill on Thursday and we shall have no other unless there is a very urgent one. We shall have no other business other than starting immediately with this Bill. But tomorrow we shall work on the Audit Bill and maybe complete it also.

MS KABAKUMBA:  Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.

5.02
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala):  Mr Speaker, I suggest that due to the importance of this Bill, we have agreed that it is handled on Thursday.  But I just want to seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, because I do not think that we shall be in position to handle this Bill on Thursday afternoon. Why don’t we come in the morning, we debate and then in the afternoon we go to committee stage so that we have ample time to express ourselves on this very important Bill?

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, I have no problem especially committees, you will be given next week morning and afternoon so that you deal with the budget. So, let us sacrifice on Thursday, we start early in the morning at 10 –(Laughter)- we start at 10 and then deal with it, then you will have a free Friday and next week when you will be concentrating on the budget. I think that is okay? Right, agreed.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard of the Audit Bill and I know it is with us but I am also wondering, was the report given out, maybe I missed out? Because if the report was not presented then tomorrow when we come with the hope that we are going to debate, we shall still ask you for the report, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  You will get the report in fairly good time to enable you study it. For me I have mine, I do not know why I have it! Let the copies of this report be issued to Members today. And I think with this we come to the end. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY, FOR THE 1ST HALF OF THE YEAR 2007/2008

THE SPEAKER:  Well the report was presented. We only wanted debate and maybe a response from the Minister of Finance. Are there some people who want to make contributions? Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 


MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, I wish to make a response to the Committee on National Economy’s report for the first half of the fiscal year 2007/2008. The analysis was talking basically on about six issues: One-

THE SPEAKER:  Minister, you making a statement, do you have copies for us?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  No, I am making a record but -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interjection)- you want this one? You will get it; these are my working documents.  Mr Speaker, the committee made six good observations, which are as follows: That there is a rise in food prices and this has undermined Government poverty eradication efforts; there was an increase in credit and loans extensions to the private sector leading to the increased investment; there was an increase in electricity tariffs; Uganda Investment Authority licensed 192 projects with a projection of employment of 17,171 within six months; the re-discount rate declined during the period under review; and the trade balance continues to worsen.

Mr Speaker, if the food prices are increasing it means the welfare of people of Uganda is worsening and I think there is need of urgent address from Government about the issue of prices of food rising. 

If we talk of credit increment and yet the interests in banks- the bank charges are on increase, we fail to understand how an investment increases when the bank charges and interest are high. We do not understand the bank charges and interest are high. We do not understand what effect the rediscount rate has in economics or what Parliament has got to do with it now. We know discount rate is used in investment projects and appraisals but the rediscount, we do not see any effect in the economics. Was it for purposes of English or what? If we are talking of trade balance worsening, it means the imports are more than the exports. And if that is the case, why do we talk about investments when imports are more than exports?

We have a few questions to put to the minister and the committee and after answering them; we shall assist them with better recommendations.

Since the price of food has increased due to power tariffs, according to the committee, what is the government doing to address the issue of power tariffs? 

If the extension to the loans has increased, who are the major beneficiaries of these loans? You could find that one person in the name of Basajjabalaba is given Shs 50 billion which are called quasi loans; no interest and they are saying credit has increased yet credit extended to people who are real local investors is not there. So, who are the major beneficiaries of these loan extensions? And what has Government done to address the issue of these high interest rates and bank charges. In fact, if you bank Shs 5,000 in some banks, you have banked zero because the bank charges are equal to Shs 5,000.

The private sector loans we have said have led to investments. Are they these 192 projects we are talking about which came up as a result of the credit given, or the investment we are talking about is another sector under another umbrella? Who are the beneficiaries again of these investments?

We talk about losses of power. Umeme has inefficiency, whereby the losses are now standing at 37 percent. Of course those of you who read The New Vision of 7 February 2008 these inefficiencies are passed on to the last consumer who pays for them. Should the last consumer pay for inefficiency of an institution? If at all they want to reduce the electricity loss, despite the fact that we gave them our investments, why don’t they apply better methods of reducing the loss than passing it to the last consumer? 

The Uganda Investment Authority says 50 percent of the projects were realised of the 192, that means 91 were realised. Which part of the country are these 91 so that we know that these projects exist?

Have we taken into consideration those which have been existing and collapsed and how much have we reaped from this investment in form of taxes and employments in Uganda? Are these investments the so-called super markets because anybody can do these ones, or what are they specifically?

In the report of the committee, under 3.1.1 and paragraph two, there are contradictions, the price of food has increased, at the same time, the price of food is affordable. So, which is which? We want to be helped so that we understand these contradictions. 

What is the concern of the rediscount rate to Parliament? Maybe you need to help us so that we understand. Some of us do not know what a rediscount rate means. Mr Speaker, what strategies has Government adopted to deliberately support the export sector, especially, in the areas of cotton and coffee? What are the sustainable alternatives for this country to boost the export sector? What is the actual implementation of the budget? That means we budgeted; we have actually the programmes agreed; what is the variance? Is it because the variance is too big that we are having these problems of food prices going high or the energy tariffs going high, or what? 

In conclusion, if the welfare of the people is worsening, and the Executive is sitting quiet, then we are in danger. Transport costs have gone high and that means cost of production has gone high and income of the majority of us either has remained stagnant or has declined. Which means we are in a worse state; what is the government doing to address the welfare of the people of Uganda? Thank you.

5.17
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for its observations and recommendations on our economy. Mr Speaker, we have studied the report and I would like to make a few observations concerning this report and especially its recommendations. 

Concerning inflation and the infrastructural problems behind it, the committee observed that although the inflation target was met in the first half of the financial year, nevertheless there were some structural problems especially in the transportation and energy sectors which need to be resolved in order to reduce the cost of goods and services. 

Mr Speaker, the government is committed to improving road infrastructure and improving road maintenance. During this financial year, government has provided resources in the budget towards reducing the backlog in road maintenance and also provided additional resources for completion of road construction projects which had stalled for lack of counterpart funding. A road fund has been proposed and the Bill is before this august House in order to address the growing problem of maintenance backlogs. 

The fund is expected to improve the financing for routine and periodic road maintenance. We also propose to treat both the energy and the road sectors as priority sectors and therefore provide them with additional funding in future years. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to add concerning inflation that actually in the first half of the year, the inflation target was met and there was a general decrease in food prices. However, the situation is changing. All over the world, prices of food and fuel have risen substantially. 

And secondly, there has been considerable inflation in Kenya, much higher than us, and because they are our biggest trading partners, we are importing some of the inflation from them in form of higher prices, and that is not to mention disruptions in our supplies from Kenya. So, we are experiencing this difficulty which we do not have much control over.

Concerning electricity tariffs, the committee recommends that the tariff rates for electricity should be reviewed with a view to revise them downwards. For the past few years, power supply has been constrained by low generation capacity as a result of poor hydrological conditions and lack of sufficient investments in the sector while demand has continued to sow. 

In order to mitigate the impact of power supply shortages, government has since gone into venture with the private sector to produce thermo power as a short term measure. However, the cost of thermo power generation remains high compared to hydro power. And in order to prevent tariff escalation as we have had, government has continued to provide a subsidy so that the full cost of thermo power is not passed on to consumers. The key to reducing tariffs lays in a reduction in high cost of thermo power generation and its replacement with low cost hydro power generation. 

Members are aware that the Bujagali Hydro Power construction is already under way while work on the Karuma project is expected to start later this year. The coming of a stream of power from these two projects is expected to ease pressure on tariffs. So, the government subsidy and the production of more hydro power to replace thermo power is the only answer I can see in medium to long term.

Mr Speaker, on interest rates, the committee recommends that government should make a study on the fundamentals –(Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When this report was presented last Thursday, we all stood up to make contributions but now I hear the minister responding to the issues. I thought we would have been given the opportunity so that he can answer them at once.

THE SPEAKER: You will be given an opportunity; should it be necessary for him to respond, he will.

DR SURUMA: On the issue of interest rates, the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda have spent considerable time studying this matter. One of the major reasons for the continuing high commercial bank rates despite low and stable inflation is high inflows of foreign exchange and subsequent liquidity injunctions from fiscal operations. The issue of government securities by the central bank to contain inflation pressures tends to bid interest rates upwards.

Mr Speaker, it is a paradox that in the past we had a shortage of foreign exchange and we wanted more of it. But as it is now, we are getting large inflows of foreign exchange. Some are coming in as investments; some are through NGOs, some as loans and grants to government; others are through tourists and our increased exports.

Now, as these dollars come in, they are changed into shillings and the rate at which they are changed into shillings is important to prevent inflation. If the increase in shillings is very fast that means you will have too many shillings chasing the goods available. So, it is necessary for central bank to make sure that the rate of increase of the shillings in circulation is maintained at a level that is not too fast. If the rate is too fast, then inflation will be the result. 

However, the way for the central bank to reduce the shilling is by selling bonds. And when these bonds are sold, they affect the interest rates. So one of the reasons why we observed high interest rates is in this government’s attempt to ensure that the rate of increase in money supply is not too fast. So, while increases in dollars is good and we want them, we want to make sure that they do not have an inflation impact on the economy. 

We have also observed that there are speculative dollars coming in to take advantage of our stock exchange and our securities, and this again has to be contained so that it does not have an adverse impact on interest rates.

The best approach to reducing interest rates in the banking sector is to reduce the fiscal deficit which we are doing and also to widen the tax base, which we are also doing. I hope that the Bill which the House discussed earlier would also be seen in that light of increasing the tax base.

We also need to have more competition in the banking sector, Mr Speaker, and to this end, the Bank of Uganda has started and has licensed more commercial banks to start operating in the market. Some of you will have seen, for example, Kenya Commercial Bank has come in, Housing Finance has been licensed and it is now operating as bank; United Bank of Africa is about to start and so on.

Many banks are applying and they are being given licenses to increase competition in that sector. Government is also strengthening Uganda Development Bank (UDB) as well as speeding up the reform of the pension sector to become a larger source of long term finance to the economy.

Popularization of the stock exchange

The committee recommends that there is a need to popularise the stock market within the general population as we prepare for the East African Community stock exchange. The Capital Markets Authority has already put in place a number of public sensitization programmes. These include the one being undertaken in schools and together with the Ministry of Education a curriculum on stock markets operations has been developed.

The Capital Markets Authority has also spearheaded the establishment of the financial literacy foundation with a broad objective of promoting finance literacy in Uganda. The effort for cross listing among the East African stock exchanges, that is to say having stocks listed on all the three stock exchanges, is part of the ongoing effort to converge the East African economies.

Mr Speaker, concerning Uganda Investment Authority, the committee recommends that Uganda Investment Authority Statute should be reviewed to strengthen the authority to be able to take on the role of monitoring and evaluation of enterprises licensed. The authority in collaboration with Bank of Uganda and bureau of statistics are presently undertaking a survey of the licensed enterprises with a view to strengthening their monitoring role.

The review of the statute, the Uganda Investment Code is about to be finalized and together with the proposed Free Zones Bill, it is expected to strengthen the Uganda Investment Authority.

Finally, the committee recommends that we should have an increase in value addition and exports as also hon. Nandala-Mafabi has proposed. There is a need to support production and increased value addition indeed. The committee’s recommendation is well noted, and as honourable members may recall government has made interventions in industrial sector which are geared towards improving the competitiveness of Uganda’s products. Moreover, removed taxes on export products and in the current fiscal year, we also reduced corporate income tax rates on companies which are involved in exporting.

We plan to continue to focus on export- oriented investments by creating and operationalising economic processing zones that support agro-zoning and processing. Moreover a new industrialization policy has been formulated and will soon be presented to this House. The policy provides for fast-tracking the establishment of regional industrial parks across the country as well as providing appropriate incentives to investors in the export business.

Mr Speaker, concerning a number of issues raised by hon. Mafabi, I have already commented on the food prices. The issue of increased credit and who is benefiting, I am happy to report that the loans are going to the private sector; there has been a 35 percent increase in credit in the private sector. Unfortunately, there is a law against publishing the people to whom the bank has given loans; so I cannot give him a list of the individuals as this would be a violation of their rights. But I would like to hope that he is happy that the increase in credit to the private sector is increasing substantially.

The beneficiaries of the investments –first of all, it is wonderful that our country is continuing to experience an increase in investments. I am sure the honourable member is also happy about that. The increase in investment means more capital formation, which is one of our main shortages as a country. More capital formation means more employment, means more production and means more goods and services for our people.

The issue of interest rates, I have already commented on it. We are working hard to reduce them and I have assurance from the Bank of Uganda – they believe that given increased competition and reduction in the fiscal deficit, that interest rates are likely to come down substantially in the coming years. But we do not have magic and we cannot use government authority to bring them down because these are economic prices like any other prices.

It is important for honourable members to recognize just as everything has a price, money also has a price and you cannot say it must go down. If you do that, you will cause a disruption in the financial sector and much of the money that is coming in to the country would actually flee our country if they sensed that we are going to use non market means to regulate interest rates.

How is government helping the export sector? I have already indicated, Mr Speaker, that we have reduced taxes for exporters. We have reduced income tax on companies involved in exports; we have provided subsidies in terms of seeds to cotton growers. So, I believe that government is indeed serious by its actions on encouraging exporters.

The implementation of the budget - there will be I think a time when the Budget Committee will present its view on the budget process and at that time we shall present information on performance of the budget. Thank you.

5.33
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for coming up with the report, which it has called the first half of the financial year 2007/08. To this I beg the indulgence of this House through you, Mr Speaker, that these quarterly reports are important in a sense that they are meant to act as early warning indicators. The economy is so vital and central that we should really have quarterly reports in time, because then we can detect the trend of the economy and devise ways and means once the situation is not moving to the desired levels.

So, I pray that whether under any other activities, though one put here is CHOGM, but we should endeavour to always find space and time to always get a report about the performance of our economy. 

Mr Speaker, I have few issues to raise but on page 2 the report says: “During the period of review, there was a rise in food prices and this had a serious negative effect on the food security, hence the welfare of the poor. This is because the poor spend 42.1 percent of their total income on food and any rise in food prices inevitably drains the welfare of the poor.”

Mr Speaker, Uganda is basically an agricultural country, with a good weather. I understand that there is a global problem of food shortage. Although there are riots in many parts of Africa, in Asia, Latin America, Uganda should be the basket of East and Central Africa and so should not be exposed to the vagaries of weather in food production.

My point of contention therefore, is that let us, as Government, take deliberate steps to ensure that the food supply and the agriculture where we have both the comparative and absolute advantages thrives. Let us not fall into the trap of other countries because we have good weather and I think we can do a little more to ensure that we sustainably supply our population with enough food. I am saying this because a hungry person is also an angry person. Once you are hungry you have to be angry. So, in order to minimise this, it is better that –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. You are very right to say that Uganda is an agricultural country, but it is also true that it is subject to hazards. You will recall that from the month of July to November and almost about the end of last year, the whole of Teso and big parts of Acholi were affected by floods. In spite the fact that crops that had been planted had shown good signs, many of them were actually destroyed. So, for people who had normally fed themselves for many months, have had to depend on food relief? 

As we talk, yesterday the Prime Minister met the big donors: Americans, British, and European Union, on the issues of food shortage particularly in the case of the areas that have suffered from floods because immediately the floods went there was draught. So, we have to raise in the range of $187 million to address the food shortage. 

The food shortage is also due to the challenges we have had in the last part of the year and the consequent draught. In fact, we are talking of Shs9.2billion, if we are to complement what we are getting from our donors. I thank you.

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Minister for the information though I also understand that is why we have a fully-fledged Ministry for Disaster Preparedness –(Laughter)- so that if we get a disaster, it should be managed within that docket, which fortunately happens to be in your control and not for us to be perpetually handicapped because of such incidents. Nonetheless, I appreciate the point and stress that we have to move on; we cannot keep looking back. I hope that the appeal is not perpetual. 

Why I said it is a global trend is because of modern technology that turns cereals and grains into bio-fuel. That means that the cereal producers are now putting their cereals and grains to other use. What is Uganda prepared to do? In that respect, Mr Speaker and honourable members, we remain with a challenge; we cannot supplicate ourselves to the vagaries of the weather; we should look up to nature; we pray and we certainly have to manage our environment and conditions for us to appear advanced and move in.

Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on the external sector performance. The report says: “During the period, the performance of the external sector remained moderate, but continues to be largely consumption-driven with large increase in imports while the growth in investments and exports remained limited.” This sounds a warning bell because an economy that is predominantly and continuously having important surpluses, experiences serious economic effects. 

In fact, that current account deficit worsened by over 100 percent points from 105.7 million in the first half of the financial years 2006/07 to Shs 362.2million. I thought the chairperson of the committee was being diplomatic to use the words, “The external sector remained moderate.” I am saying this because the deterioration is unbelievable and when you make a trend analysis, how do you think we shall overcome this? Is it because our economy is increasingly doing export substituting? Is it because we are interested in exports at the expense of companies manufacturing our own products such that at the end of the day, we rely more on imports? Is it consumerism? We need to do more analysis on that. We needed to know the causes so that we can find ways and means of addressing it.

Mr Speaker, in an economy that is really liberalised as ours, to find that there is a galloping and worsening deficit of over 100 percent, is worrying. Give it 10 years down the road, the economy will be finished.

Mr Speaker, other Members might have their own views, but the way we are proceeding on this matter is not good. Let us address the foundation of the economy. For insistence, the deterioration in the current account was mainly due to the increase in imports. Total imports registered a 41.2 percent increase compared to the same in the fiscal 2006/07. On the supply side, as indicated on page 10, the growth in exports was not as impressive. Total exports amounted to Shs825 million registering 25.1 percent. 

Mr Speaker, where are we moving to next? Unless we have structural changes in the set up of our economy, unless we address the impediments and bottlenecks, unless we come out strongly as a country to support the export-oriented efforts there will be a problem. This kind of trend is quite unsustainable; we need to address it early in time so as to find a way forward.

Mr Speaker, I know that countries that rely on imports have been caught up in a debt trap because once you do not fund your imports, you have to borrow and borrow until you are caught up in a debt trap.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I do not think we are ready, as a country, to be written off by worthy creditors and lenders and to be declared insolvent as a country. So, the earlier we address the matter, the better for us. 

Mr Speaker, I will look lastly at the electricity consumption –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Now you have to limit your contribution.

MR SEKIKUBO: Just a small one, Mr Speaker. I would really like to refer Members to page 12 where the poor spend three percent of their income on electricity while the rich spend two percent. We are now in the process of extending power to the rural areas but aren’t we extending poverty to the rural areas rather than the other way round?

Mr Speaker, there is a table. Already we are grappling with the high electricity tariffs but there is a proposal by UMEME to raise the rates that are already high. For instance, it is being proposed that the domestic current tariff which is standing at 426.1 be at 515.14; the commercial be raised from 398 to 504; the industrial be raised from 187 to 298; and the industrial small - because Uganda’s economy has mainly small industries- from 360 to 505. 

The planners of this economy, honourable minister, does this add value to the efforts you are trying to put in place, to increase our local industrial set up to compete favourably with goods from other countries? When the unit cost is high, this is translated into the price of the output. What is our economics in as far as this is concerned? Where are our priorities, Mr Speaker? I think this is quite unacceptable. We have to devise ways and means to avert this. But if we are to implement this, it will be disastrous and the consequences shall be too much to be borne by the common person. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.47
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just have a few points. I wanted to seek clarification from hon. Nandala-Mafabi. When we started this Parliament and we had the opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi used to have a written text and I knew him as the shadow finance minister, popularly known as the alternative finance minister. I am saying this because he has raised several questions. I think that we should have the alternative policies that can assist us in developing our economy rather than just raising questions and perhaps waiting for five years. 

So in a way, the chief whip of the opposition, I think we are being cheated by the other side. I would think that the opposition should be giving us the alternative policies in order to improve our economy other than waiting for the five years to come before they are in power. (Laughter) Hon. Nandala-Mafabi used to raise a text and today he has just been reading round and -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek this simple clarification. Probably it might serve as valuable information. It is a known fact that my shadow ministers are assigned responsibilities on the committees that they oversee as shadow ministers. During the time when policy statements of government are being discussed by the various committees, these ladies and gentlemen whom you see on the frontbench on the opposition side do share and give unreservedly, the alternative policy provisions of the parties on the opposition. Are you trying to tell me that for the last two years, my shadow ministers have not been giving you that information? 

And not only that; we as a Parliament, even right from the beginning of the Eighth Parliament, had a long debate on the Floor of this House as to where these people should serve. Should they serve outside these committees so that they can be able to come and present exhaustive alternative policy provision? These are the issues. If you so wish to reverse the present arrangement, they are ready. We have got alternative policies on all these ministries. That is the more reason why the other time I sought the indulgence of this House because the report that has been presented on the state of the economy of this country for the lifespan of Parliament is such an important presentation that has been made. Not all Members of Parliament here are economists and it was for that reason that I sought the indulgence of this Parliament to allow my shadow minister for finance to make a reply so that he can be able to enrich and widen our scope of discussion. 

I just wanted to tell you this so that you appreciate that they do not just occupy this frontbench for the sake of it. They make enormous contributions to improve the provisions made by government. But I hope when we make these provisions you take them as constructive criticism. Because there are others who will say, “These are opposition Members; whatever they raise, what else do you expect from them?” Of course, we are here watching. We are giving you all these brains so that tomorrow when you fail, the way I see you fail, we will be on the other side and we will propel this country. I thank you. (Laughter) 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much. You wanted me to clarify. Mr Speaker, in good faith, I was saying that we have always had alternative policies and my preamble was that when we had just opened as a Parliament with an opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi would bring forward alternative policies. And I was saying that today he raised so many questions that what has government done to improve the economy? I would have expected him to give us the alternative policy. That is what I was saying -(Interjection)- let me proceed; I have a brief one. I am on investment -(Interruption) 

MAJ. BUTIME: The clarification I am seeking from the Member on the Floor is that, if hon. Nandala-Mafabi is satisfied with the report on the economy and he is satisfied with the performance of government and the minister, but he has a few questions to ask instead of an alternative policy, is that a crime? I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Butime. I know it is not a crime but I was observing and listening. He had a lot of questions for the Minister of Finance and my contention is that he would have given us the alternative instead of raising many questions. I am sure he has answers. So, it is not a crime. But I do not think he was convinced because he looked disgusted. Mr Speaker, let me proceed.

On the issue of investment, according to the chairman, he says that we had several investments and most of them were from the manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade. My concern here is that we as Ugandans have totally kept quiet in as far as the trade policies in Uganda are concerned. I am discovering that there is a lot going round; that the foreign investors have turned out to be retailers in this country and we have kept quiet for so long. You get Koreans bringing items, to the extent of even retailing them. They sale as wholesalers and even go up to landing sites. And local traders, who have suffered to get loans from banks, have had their businesses cripple; and government has kept quiet and we have kept quiet too.

The Ministry of Trade should come out clearly to tell us who is an investor. And where should his limits be because I am discovering that the investors come, purportedly to invest but eventually put up a small structure and turn out to be business people and yet they get tax-free items. This is something that is killing this economy and especially the business sector. People are dying quietly, if I may use that word, and we have kept quiet. So, we must be very clear and put up policies saying, “If you are an investor, you are restricted to manufacturing and wholesale trade”, other than killing local businesses.

Mr Speaker, that is the comment I wanted to make and I would request the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Trade and Internal Affairs to have a policy in as far as where investor’s limits should be. I know this is a liberal economy but government should direct where the economy should go. Should we continue killing local businessmen and businesswomen at the expense of foreign investors who are instead doing retail trade? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.55
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues to thank the committee for the report and the two ministers for their response.

Let me first of all make an observation as far as what hon. Nandala-Mafabi talked about as regards food prices. That they have gone up yet they are affordable. I think economically, this is impossible because there are some consumers who do not react to price changes. And as far as food is concerned, I think that is impossible economically and I would like you to check the equation and see whether this cannot be true in our economy. So, your observation was not economically right.  

Mr Speaker, let me refer to the recommendation –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You have given your theory in Economics but you have not given me the right theory so that I can pick from you. (Laughter)

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, there are two concepts in Economics that affect prices and consumption: there is elastic and inelastic. (Laughter) So, I think he has to read about that in order to comment about the –(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to clarify that our peasants, who are food producers actually, benefit when prices go up because they are sellers and they are getting higher prices. In fact, we have evidence that increased sales of food to Sudan, Congo, Rwanda and Burundi is a part of the reason why we have increased inflow of foreign exchange. So, as a food producing country, while we would certainly like to decry increasing prices, we should note that our food producers are beneficiaries of increased prices. The only drawback is for the urban dwellers who are buyers, when the terms of trade go against them but we have to find a way to mitigate this but it is not a total disaster. The increase in prices of coffee and maize, for example, have benefited our economy. All these are benefits to our economy. Thank you.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, I would also like to refer to recommendation two on the tariffs that have been made by the committee; that a review of the tariffs downwards should be considered. I would like to propose that government could go further and look at the performance of Umeme in general and maybe later on come up with an amnesty as we had in the licensing of vehicles. Because in Masaka particularly where I am very familiar with, there is an outcry over the performance of Umeme; not in terms of prices but in terms of their reaction to our consumption. They come and sometimes bring a used meter to you and then they will charge you according to that metre reading, yet you have not used it; they give you a wrong bill. They come and complain of illegal disconnections yet these are their people who did the connections. They cut off power from the poles; they have destroyed a lot of consumers’ property yet the dirty work in being done within the institution itself. So, I would like government to check the performance of Umeme, not monetary wise but in terms of their performance vis-à-vis the consumption that is made by the people.

Mr Speaker, I would like also to say that this report has not been strong enough in as far as the economy is concerned because it has not made any mention as far as employment is concerned yet in Masaka where we do not have any industries, my people are suffering of unemployment. I would like a report like this to indicate at least a move upwards or downwards vis-à-vis employment; how many jobs have we created in a particular period in the economy or year.

Lastly, let me also say that this report does not help government very much or the nation if it does not concern itself with the quality of products that we import in this country. Developing countries like Uganda are made poorer and poorer due to the poor quality of imports that we bring in. If I have a shilling, which I would put on a product which I think would last for two months and the product lasts for a day, this makes me poorer; this makes me worse off than even before. So, I would like government to check on the imports; a lot of them are fake imports; some of them are very inferior goods. If we are going to help our people, let us check the type of products that come in. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.02
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting this report. 

Mr Speaker, I would have preferred if this report was presented earlier because we are almost going to the end of this financial year and we are getting the first quarter of this report. The reason why I am saying the first half is because according to the report, there are certain indicators which during the said period were still okay but now things are really very bad. 

I want to give you an example of the increase in food prices. Poverty is biting, Mr Speaker. A bunch of matooke today is not the same price as for the period that was given in the committee report. Even the price of salt alone, a kilogramme of salt now costs Ugshs 1,000 something which   a villager or a poor peasant cannot afford. A bar of soap is already Shs 1,600. So, poverty is just biting us as we finish this financial year. So, if this report had come early and if the relevant ministry had acted after the input of the committee at least we would see some improvement in the economy. 

However, I want to make some comments on the following areas. When we go to page 11, where the committee reports about the proposed increased tariffs of electricity, in the observation of the committee, I feel it would have added that by increasing electricity tariffs the impact on the environment would even be more negative. You know, compared to its impact on the consumption or the prices of commodities. Why do I say this? Because when electricity tariffs are hiked, consumers of electricity especially domestic consumers are likely to shift to use low cost power sources like charcoal, use of generators for domestic lighting system, which will have direct impact on our environment and definitely it is very bad. You know what at the end of it will be.

Then my next comment is on page 13, Mr Speaker, where the committee say, “However, a similar rise in the cost of railway transport would only lead to a 10 per cent increase in the prices of almost all commodities.” The committee is actually trying to say that if we had railway transport, we would experience a slight increase or low increase in prices. I wanted to ask the ministry concerned but unfortunately I do not see the ministers around especially the Minister of Transport. I actually wanted to ask what happened, Mr Minister, with our railway transport. I remember when I was still a young growing child -(Laughter)- I would hear about railway transport on the Pakwach line in Northern Uganda but these days it is unheard of.  Actually children who were born –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, earlier on when hon. Nasasira was here, he talked about the railway line up to Pakwach.

MS AKELLO: Oh, yes, Mr Speaker, thank you for that clarification but I think I even heard. Unfortunately, I remember last year there was a launch of railway transport, I wonder what happened to that launching? Every now and then when I think about railway transport I think about a project that was launched to kick off last year but there is nothing moving on. I only pray that this year or in the next financial year we shall see things moving.

Lastly, but not least, Mr Speaker, I want to make a proposal to especially the Ministry of Energy as far as this UMEME business is concerned. Uganda is a liberalised economy and all of us know this. Why do we allow UMEME to be the only monopoly in the distribution of power whereas we have chances; we have investors out there who would take interest in buying these distribution plants and also help in the distribution of energy, which would actually reduce the costs and create competitiveness in the market and therefore reduce prices of electricity? 

So, the following were what I had to propose to the ministry: That the ministry  identify more power source plants like we have Karuma Falls, Ayago and several other plants in Northern Uganda  that have potential to produce electricity. If all these plants are developed - actually the way it is done in Switzerland where load shedding is unheard of because of this generosity in distributing power. If the ministry was liberalised the way Uganda was meant to be by asking Uganda Investment Authority to market all these potential power plants and having so many people in the market and we reduce the monopoly of UMEME which would reduce the prices of electricity. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the time given.

THE SPEAKER: Yeah, but I think I should end this debate because first of all, this report should be used by the various committees to consider what is said there and during the budget process to take it up with the various sectors concerned. I think that is what we are expected to do; do we have to conclude it here? No, in sessional committees we take up various parts of the report and see how to improve on it. 

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just have one clarification from the minister and maybe other economists like hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the others. Arising from the liberalisation process, we got so many companies coming into this country like in the telecommunication sector, UMEME and many others. I am developing a feeling that most of these companies are repatriating most of money and the profits. They are doing so through direct repatriation of profits, through bringing in expensive inputs and maybe employing expensive foreign staff. So, most of our money is just going back and we are just following it, borrowing it back to this country. I would like the clarification from the minister; what are we doing in this direction? Do we have a re-investment programme for these companies or they are just siphoning out the money and for us we are just staying very poor? I thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of this committee but when the committee was putting together its report, I was upcountry in the constituency battling the proposed Land Bill. And I have always wanted to inquire from the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics about the true level of our inflation. 

Mr Speaker, many countries especially developing countries use the rate of inflation as a political tool that the economy is doing well; government is governing properly, but in the actual sense inflation is way through the roof. Coming to our domestic rates of inflation here, year in year out government always reports that inflation is in single digit when you very well know that prices most times are doubling; costs of things are going up by many percentages but at the end of it, government reports that inflation is single digit. I want to take this opportunity today to ask the minister to tell this nation, what is the rate of our inflation? Not the political one; the economic one. (Laughter) I thank you.

6.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Simon Ejua): The honourable member from Pader raised something about railway transport. First, I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for reminding her of an earlier statement by the minister but I just want to assure her that railway transport needs a lot of patience.

In the ministry, we have been doing each and everything possible - as you know, the financing is so heavy and we have been trying to talk to some of the development partners. We are also trying to work out a way of developing a very comprehensive manner, at times in partnership with other countries, for example, Sudan – you know, it is a very complex process. For example, when we talk to Sudan, that means the Khartoum Government has to agree with Southern Sudan and then here – okay, in brief, what I want to say is that we have developed some proposals and, for example, China is one of those interested partners; we have sent one of our agreements to China and we are waiting for a response from China. 

But I also want to appeal to Members of Parliament to try to educate their people not to vandalise some of these lines. As you know –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Minister, the concern that was raised by the honourable was the launch of the railway line to the North. I participated and we went as a group and boarded a train with the chairman from Mbale up to Soroti; that was two years ago. What happened to it? At least that part is operational. And we were promised at that time that it was going to extend up to Arua, but now you are telling us the long term – what happened to the section which was operational? 

MR EJUA: I am happy you said that you participated and you were able to board but I think that is why I made a statement that there is need to – operating it, it needs to be economical and there are many factors - you know how that region has been. But what I want to say is that, we need some patience and at an appropriate time, my ministry will bring a paper on that. Thank you.

6.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague from Pader talked about the monopoly of Umeme but I want to give information to this House that apart from Umeme, there are other companies involved in distribution in Uganda. We have one for Kanungu; we have one for Kibaale, and we have also one in West Nile which is involved in power generation at the same time distribution. Soon also, when we give power to Pader, it will be operated by another company other than Umeme. We also have ESCOM which is involved in power generation. Thank you.

6.19
MR REMEGIO ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of this committee and actually the vice-chairperson. A number of questions have been raised on page 2 about the prices and poverty and I think the most important thing we wanted to bring out as a committee on this page, which my chairman will clarify among the questions, is that we wanted to draw Members of parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were contributing.

MR ACHIA: Yes. There were a number of questions that were asked and I think there was a misunderstanding with respect to the issues of price and other important things that have been raised on this page. 

What must concern us is why as much as we have been growing at 6.5 percent, poverty has continued to persist? This is a more important question than the price because as the minister has said, increase in prices is not as bad if we know who is participating in the economy. I think the major issue that we wanted to bring out is that, poverty has continued to persist here because a number of our people are not participating and benefiting from the economic growth that we are realising today. As particularly people who are basically dependent on subsistence farming – (Interjection)- I need to be protected from biased influence from hon. Okupa, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: He is your good neighbour. Please, finish your clarification.

MR ACHIA: As an agricultural country, we need to be thinking about those people who are dependent on subsistence farming and for their income from only growing food and because of that they depend on rain-fed agriculture. A number of these people across the country in the rural areas do not even have adequate inputs and good technology and the tools to open land to grow enough food. If it does not rain, it means they are highly vulnerable to changes not only in prices but in all their life aspects: like health bills, education bills.

And because of the persistence in poverty, in Uganda despite the economic growth at 6.5 percent and above, we need to come up with new policies that will help us to address the persistent poverty particularly for people who are dependent on subsistence agriculture. I think that must be the concern and that is why we are bringing that point and it is not a political issue but a very important issue that our minister should concern himself with.

THE SPEAKER: That should have been part of the report.

6.22
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Mr Speaker, I want to observe on page 11, I heard the minister giving us some statement on this but, Mr minister, I want you also to look at the two ministries you work with: that is Ministry of Energy and then Ministry of Water and Natural Resources. Although we have been complaining that Umeme is increasing the tariffs, there is also a cry on the side of Umeme that even if the level of water improves a bit at the source, the Ministry of Water does not allow them to use the capacity they are able to use because they prefer using the thermo electric production simply because I think there is some interest.

At one point we will request you to give us the amount of money which you give to Ministry of Water and all those who are producing thermo power vis-à-vis what Umeme is using. Umeme is quietly crying; a lot of money is going through the thermo production because it is in billions and I know your ministry knows about it. I may not ask you to reply now because it is quite a big issue where the Ministry of Energy or Umeme as a sector is crying. 

However, I want to remind the Members, especially the Leader of Government Business that every time we come here to discuss, you should remember that we have a document we sold to Ugandans. On page 46, you elaborately talked about the power sector; you are not meeting it and we have gone half way your term. I pray that you let your ministers, as a head of government business, look at the manifesto, “Prosperity for All” as a theme and make sure that they work according to this document. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we have debated this report. It is not final; it is just an assessment in the committee’s view of the performance of the economy and what should be done. And we cannot say this opinion is wrong or right. What we do is, subject to the comments and observations made, we adopt the report and then individual committees consider what is relevant to them and bring it out.

6.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): I think I need to make a few responses. The Minister of Finance said that high power tariffs are as a result of thermo power but last year, I, together with the chairpersons of the committees on Physical Infrastructure and Natural Resources respectively and state ministers for Finance and for Energy visited Ethiopia and all of us were impressed with the way they create their hydro power. In most cases, they do not have flowing water but there is a way they create it. The Minister of Energy had promised that they are going to take it up as a ministry and bring it to Parliament so that they can be supported. 

I would like also to support hon. Sauda’s argument that the performance of Umeme as a sector should be looked into. 

Regarding increase of exports, last year again we visited Philippines and we looked at their export promotion zones. This is a sector which when you read their documents, you see that they are looking at increasing their exports and there are so many benefits which they give to these people in EPZ – an off-cut. You can ask them how much of this they are exporting and they have the figures and they have the incentives. I would think that the Minister of Finance together with Investment Authority should adopt that.

We give the state of the economy report to provoke reactions from Members so that we can see how suitable our policies are and we cannot give it like the half year analysis; we cannot give it earlier than now because we need to get the figures first of all organised so that we make a presentation.

6.28
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): I think it is important that I assure the honourable member about what he calls real inflation and inflation measurement. The inflation rate is a statistic; that means that it is based on a sample of products in different parts of the country and in different areas and the sample is not exhaustive because by definition, a statistic is based on the sampled items and not all the items and is intended to be an indicator of the direction of the price level in general. We have the detailed item by item and monthly figures and the price of each of these products in each of the parts of the towns; in Mbale, in Kampala, Mbarara, Gulu. We have this data that we can give to you so that you can see what has been happening to these prices. 

But it is very important to recognise that as an average, this is simply a middle figure of the general direction of prices. Some items will be very high and others will be low. I would like to assure you that the bureau of statistics is one of the best statistics bodies in the world. And you can go and look at the report of the evaluation of the bureau of statistics. I want to assure you that you will find that they are doing a very fine job and this indicates the true direction of prices in general. It is very dangerous to imply that someone is cooking figures. If you think so, you should examine it in detail but do not make a statement that there is some falsehood when in fact you have not discovered any through your own research.

The same applies to the issue of growth. For many years, people have asked; where is the growth? People are poor! But the fact of the matter is that, you can make very simple observations of the construction going on compared to construction that was going on ten years ago. If you want to see the growth dramatically, you can look at the number of vehicles which are on the road now and compare with those which that were on the road many years ago. You can look at the number of people going to school and compare them with those who used to go to school many years ago. All these figures enter the growth rate – the new buildings, new vehicles, amount of production by the companies. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

DR SURUMA: I am winding up, Mr Speaker. Finally, on the capital repatriation, the overall balance of payments is good. We are having overall inflow although the imports exceed the exports and certainly we are concerned. We would like to increase exports to close this gap, but the overall balance of payments is positive; meaning that the overall inflow of dollars is in our favour. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, subject to the observations made on the report the motion is that we adopt the report. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

Well, honourable members, with this we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.33 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 April 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)

 

