Thursday, 14th April, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Ag. Chairman, Mr. Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

MOTION SEEKING TO SUSPEND THE NRC RULES OF PROCEDURE

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, yesterday Members gave many reasons ranging from this end to the other end, but there are some general reasons given for example, by hon. John Kawanga that the Bill has just been circulated to them and they had had not time to study its contents and, therefore debate meaningfully.  

And another fair observation from hon. Kayonde that even Committees related to the economy had not been consulted on this one.  The consultation was impossible because everybody was up country, and that could have been done before.  So, as a good Parliamentarian, I would like to suggest that we hold on and the Members have at least seven days or a week to study the Bill -(Applause)- and that same period will be used for us to consult with the committee on Parastatals on the finance and on the economy.  Why this is important, is that people had even misread this Bill, it is not intended to forgive people who borrowed money.  It is intended these people to be persuaded if need be, by an independent body while the Bank can go on to do its job, and manage to contribute the economic growth.  

So, when I heard those misleading, misreadings, I thought that they need more time to study the Bill.  Therefore, permit me to withdraw the Motion, in order to allow the Members until Thursday next week to have studied the Bill, and for us to have met the Chairmen and Members of different Committees to appreciate the need to have this law put in place.  With these remarks, Sir, I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORTS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

MR. EKEMU:  Hon. Members, you will recall that on the 3rd February this year, hon. Wasswa Nkalubo moved a Motion and presented a report of the Public Accounts Committee covering its deliberations, funding and recommendations on the Auditor General’s reports for the years 1986/87, 1987/88, 1988/89 and the special audit reports on Ministry of Education and Sports and then the DANIDA funds.  

The debate was opened on that date, and four Members contributed, namely, hon. Manzi Tumubweine, hon. Magezi Daudi, hon. Deo Rwabiita and hon. Okurut.  The House was adjourned indefinitely on the 8th of February.  It is hon. Members on that note that I wish to invite you to contribute the debate on the report of the Public Accounts Committee.

MR. KIGYAGI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With due respect, Mr. Chairman, I know a number of people had started contributing on this Motion, and because of the short notes we have heard today, most of us had turned our minds on something else.  

So, I would suggest that you at least, allow us time until Tuesday next week so that we can have time to review because most of us have actually not come with our submissions on the Public Accounts Report.  So, it is very difficult for us to contribute intelligently because I know people are complaining because of waste time but surely it does not make sense for someone to come when he is not ready to contribute to this Motion, which is before us.  

I know it had been - they had started on it, but the notes have been short, and I know most Members today have not come with their reports on the Public Accounts.  So, with due respect, I would beg that we postpone, when we come we have a weekend to read through and be ready so that we can come and deliberate intelligently.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I think you should refrain from taking generous information; I invited debates from the Members, and there are Members who are ready, we should be prepared to listen to them.  Hon. Kabuki.

MR. KABUUBI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. ADAM HARUNA:  Point of order.  In view of the fact that when the House was adjourned, the speaker on the Floor had already taken the Floor.  Is it in order to have another speaker to contribute?

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Can you tell the House who was the last speaker on the Floor?

MR. ADAM HARUNA:  Mr. Chairman, in other words, I was on the Floor when the House adjourned. (Applause).

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Okay; the Move continues.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR. KARUSOKE:  Point of order.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I am very surprised that the hon. Member now -(Inaudible)- that I was not on the Floor -(Laughter)- I am wondering whether the hon. Member was on the Floor, that is not true.  Is it in order, therefore, for the hon. Member to deceive? (Interjection)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  I will now give chance to that hon. Member first, then I will consider to give you chance.

MR. ADAM HARUNA:  Mr. Chairman, before I make my contribution, I want to make a small correction but I think - in fact I seek clarification, that is page 3(b), where it says, ‘a balance sheet of the consolidated fund brought forward from the year 1986/87 for the general revenue accounts showing a nil balance.’  However, a normal balance sheet should show accumulative, negative or negative balance brought forward from previous years

According to my understanding, Public Accounts are different from Commercial Accounts or Private Accounts.  I do not know which figure is supposed to reflect on the other side if the Committee could tell us because in Private Accounts, the other side reflects the cash then the other reflects the value of what - on what you have spent the cash.  But in a Public Accounts, it is always services that are consumed.  So, here I am not very clear with this statement.

Generally speaking, this report has rebuilt clearly the route cause of corruption and embezzlement in public sector.  But it is likely that we shall be giving sort of supervision debate on this report because the cause is not clearly pointed by the previous speakers, it is the regulations, it appears every Ministry has neglected all the financial regulations or standing orders, I think that is the most crucial part.  

So, we do not know why regulations are not enforced, if they are absolute, I think they need to be reversed I think that is the most important of what is being corruption, delay of accounts and many other things, it is the regulations.  When you talk about accountants, accountancy is an international profession, and it has associations; it is associated to the International Institution for Accountancy.  But to me, it appears that all the schools of accountancy corporated in the country co-operate with the permission of the Ministry of Health after approving - I mean sorry, Ministry of Education, after satisfying that the standard they want to give is acceptable. But when the report says that the accountants are not qualified also the public service is not appointing the qualified accountants.  I think this part is really misunderstood because the Public Service Commission according to the standards set, I think by the Ministry of Public Service.  So, it seems the Committee –(Interruption)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that this report is a reflection of what was on the ground; people who appeared before the Public Accounts Committee were asked what their qualifications were, they were calling themselves Accountants when they actually they are not professionally qualified as Accountants, and I do not understand what this hon. Member is arguing about as if he was interviewing those people, it is a report concerning the Accountants who appeared before its Committee.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If the hon. Member really agreed that the actual report are not statement by the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, because the statement he is quoting from, is a summary of the actual report which he is supposed to have read.  In the report it is extremely clear that the people who work in accounts in mort of the Ministries, enter after Senior Four, they are given no further training but they are given promotion in the process and at the end of the period of about 20 years, a man ends up by being the Chief Accountant of a Ministry when he actually has never been trained in accounts. 

But by the nature of his work, he is called an Accountant and that means, he is actually not a qualified accountant although by name he is an accountant and, therefore, was very clear that in future, we should have qualified accountants doing the accounts jobs and not having clerks being promoted in order to do accounts jobs.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that some of those people who are working in ministries and departments of the Government, including Parastatals, in addition to not being qualified, are after stealing in one Ministry with connivance of the powers that be.  They are again transferred to another Ministry and, therefore, maybe they connive with the powers that be, that if you steal more, we can share it and this is a weakness, which must be corrected and must be understood by our government.  

I would go further to inform the Members that in future if Government wants qualified accountants they should be trained, and it takes quite a bit of time that I can tell you to grasp the figures and the intelligence that goes with it to become an accountant.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. HARUNA ADAM:  I appreciate the information given by hon. Members.  I do not argue about it but you cannot convince me to say, we employ an accountant from Makerere to just a Ministry which controls only one Vote.  I think there is no way out because, these schools were set to train those who drop out in S.4, in S.6, so that they set up appointments in Government because if you employ a qualified accountant from Makerere, definitely you will have to pay him equivalent to that salary of a Permanent Secretary.  So, well if that is the case, the Committee should have put it clear -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order hon. Members.

MR HARUNA ADAM:  Mr. Chairman, well this draw me for an argument, let me leave it there.  I come to the setting of Internal Audit Department.  I think this department has a different duty from that of Auditor Generals, because Internal Auditor deals with internal transactions regarding the accuracy of figures, but Auditor General involves in about four times of auditing; that is periodically auditing, supplies auditing, special auditing, then annual auditing.  

So, we should set this in the Department of Internal Auditing in the Ministry of Finance; in other words, we are saying, we put into departments of auditing, an Auditor General and Internal Auditor, where they will perform perhaps similar duties, if the internal audit is instructed to do the work of the Auditor General.  So, to me, the work of Auditor General -(Interruption)

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, setting an internal audit in a Ministry does not remove the opportunity for external auditors.  For example, the Auditor General is serving the role of external auditors, while the internal auditors are just full-time in that very institution.  

So, definitely even in parastatal organisations or in companies, you have internal auditors who are just full time auditors, their knowledge is almost the same, they do the same job, but these are called Internal Auditors and then you have External Auditors who are supposed to come in once in a year.  So, these come in to certify the Accounts and these are not supposed to be full time but Internal Auditors are full time employees of that organisation.

MR. ELYAU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, let me give the information to the Member holding the Floor that in a given organisation, if you have a very capable Internal Auditor, there are watch dogs and they can even still manage because they are nearer to the activities whereas the External auditors come once in a while after an old Accountant had done.  The Internal Auditor is ever there, and so if they are effective and efficient, they can bring a lot of good changes in the Accounts.  Thank you.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  In fact, what I am saying here, I think Members did not get me correctly while I repeat what I have said, I first said that the work of the Internal Auditor and the External Auditors are a bit different as he put it, but the report recommends an Internal Audit Department to be established in the Ministry of Finance.  I think that is what I am driving at.  If you establish a big Internal Audit department in the Ministry of Finance as well as the Auditor General’s Department, how do they correspond?  

Finally, I come to the training of accounting officers.  I think this part is very important and sometime back, I was the one who raised this, when you train these accounting officers, they cover the most important areas like the Budget control, so, I do not know why this suggestion has not been fulfilled since it was suggested about a year ago.  With these observations, Mr. Chairman, I support this report.  Thank you.

MR. KARUSOKE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity.  Before I give my submission, I would like to welcome all hon. Members back to this House from that very vigorous exercise of the CA elections and on the same note, I would like to congratulate those who managed to sail through.

If we want to create a very viable society, a society that operates according to plan and develops day after day, we must first of all, very seriously look at the question of discipline.  Discipline is very, very important in whatever one wants to do and discipline starts right from home up to anywhere.  One thing that is very clear in Uganda is that we lack discipline, we deliberately lack it, even where we are able to exercise discipline, we just do not do it because we hate discipline and some of these crimes that were stated in the report arise out of a deliberate effort by some of the people to refuse discipline.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the statement he has just made that most of us in Uganda or all of us do not follow discipline is not true.  He is a suit.  He is following a certain discipline.  Therefore, I would like us to not make these generalised statements, there are certain people who do not follow discipline but most of us are disciplined.  Thank you very much.

MR. KARUSOKE:  Mr. Chairman, I am wondering whether the Member has any elasticity to ‘most of us.’  From the behaviour of most of us, it is true that we lack discipline and I still maintain that we do lack discipline.  Of course, there are exceptions to this and you may be one of those and we should call him lucky if he is.  

It is true we have trained people in most of these ministries, including Ministry of Finance but when you look at situations like money being spent without authority, money being spent and there is no accountability accompanying, where even the mother Ministry of Finance over spends its approved budget without any approved supplementaries.  We do not attribute this to lack of trained manpower.  We attribute it to lack of discipline.  

It was also reported that the Ministry of Finance which is supposed to over see the accounting regulations in the country throughout all Ministries had a backlog or unaudited books of accounts.  Now, if they cannot have their books properly audited and up-dated, one wonders how they can enforce this discipline among other accounting officers in the ministries.  When the debate was on, the Deputy Minister of finance defended the Ministry on the question of employing unqualified staff; he argued that it is the Public Service Commission that appoints these people.  It is true, Public Service Commission appoints people in various ministries, but where qualified people are not easily obtainable, the Public Service Commission gives permission to mother ministries to keep on with unqualified staff.  

It could be possible that the Ministry of Finance does not give a correct picture to the Public Service Commission about the suitability of people they want for the various jobs, because the onus is on that Ministry, to guard the Public Service Commission on what sort of people to appoint and moreso, when they are interviewing people who have applied for various jobs, the Ministry concerned is represented and has a final say on the advice as to who takes to whom not to, so, and I do not think these people have been imposed on the Ministry of Finance, they have been employed with the blessing of the Ministry while graduates with Bachelor of Commerce degrees are roaming the streets.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  This problem of manpower shortage as well as qualified accountants are concerned, I would like to inform my friend that it should not really be used even to locate blame.  There is just a shortage of qualified accountants.  Nobody opts to use an accountant who is not qualified and leave there a qualified accountant.  We have got here a Bill to create the Institute of Accountants, and now we have already discussed with the World Bank, how we can put up a full time Institute to train because it is not easy for one to create accountants as hon. Wanendeya has said, it takes time.  So, we are putting up an institute to train, to examine, to award qualifications in this discipline.  

So, really it is not that the Accountant; there are no accountants in this country you can talk of honestly to serve the private sector, the Parastatal Sector and the Government Sector, so, people who are not of these qualifications and in these places for lack of qualified personnel, every qualified Accountant here has more work than that one person can take on.  So, the solution is to create qualified accountants instead of placing the blame, and the problem is manpower in this particular aspect.

Lastly, while the country has trained, and we have a number of lawyers and a number of doctors, a number of Veterinary Doctors, in the past, there was no plan, deliberately to train and equip people who would be accountants; that is the problem we have to solve now.

MR. KARUSOKE:  I thank the hon. Minister for this information.  However, much as it may be taking a lot of time to train Accountants, it is very true that we have Accountants in this country some of whom are even unemployed.  Nakawa, the National College of Business Studies, trains some Accountants who are even better than some of these old timers in Ministries working as Accountants.  

Then we have the Bachelors of Commerce from Makerere; they are all Bachelors of Commerce and they have the accounting option and we used to have what we used to call training on the job.  If someone has been trained rudimentary up to the University level, he is not an expert, okay, but he is being given some rudeness and is brought into a job and is also gradually trained on job.  Is he not much better than someone who has just jumped out of O’Level and has worked through experience for 20 years and is now an Accountant who is really better of the two?  Some of these people are not even of O’Level; they joined the Service long ago and they have been promoted through experience without any proper training and it is really a shame for this country to deny our graduates in Bachelor of Commerce and our graduates from Nakawa jobs while trying to protect these old timers, and the practical experience although it is painful to hear, is that most of these people now who hold these jobs especially those who do not qualify for the jobs resent working together with the new comers who are Graduates, they do not want them anywhere near them, they want to work alone; so that they can continue to work without being detected.  So, if you want to put things right, you must really examine this problem very, very seriously and put matters right.  

I want also to submit that there is lack of central control in the Ministry of Finance.  Ministry of finance is lacking the proper grip of situations. I remember at one time here, when His Excellency the President was opening one of the Sessions, he informed this august House that Government has passed a policy, that once an Accounting Officer was unable to account for the money given to him, he was not going to be given money in the proceeding month and the reports here say, there are no many accounting officers who have failed to account for the money but yet they continue to receive money from Treasury contrary to this Policy.  Who is supposed to enforce this Policy?

MR. BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member that the problem there is actually the Secretary to the Treasury, it would appear the job of Secretary to the Treasury is too big for one person.  I got the impression when we were interviewing the former Secretary to the Treasury that although he had been in the Ministry for very many years, he did not actually know what was going on, and I am now worried that since now our present Secretary to the Treasury has got an added job, that one of planning, I do not think that he will really cope with the situation.  I believe that even now our Secretary to the Treasury does not know what is going on in his own Ministry.

MR. KARUSOKE:  So, that one emphasises the point that there is lack of serious control at the centre.  I, therefore, call upon the Minister of Finance to be more concerned and become more aggressive with controlling funds by other ministries.  There are areas where crimes and mistakes are committed and they do not have to go to court.  Disciplinary Action can be taken against culprits without necessarily taking these people to Courts.  For example, if an Accounting Officer advances money to one of the junior staff members to carry out a certain operation and then that man fails to account for that money and the operation was not properly done, can he not take disciplinary action instead of waiting for Police and other people to take action where in the end the case is dismissed from court because of lack of evidence and so on.  Can some of these people not be serious enough to take disciplinary action against junior officers who defy accounting regulations?

Finally, I would like to submit that Government and this House in particular, gets to respect the activities of PAC more seriously.  I wish to call upon this august House and Government in general to take the activities of PAC with more seriousness because PAC is really an eye opener for Government in matters of accounts.  

It is surprising that these very, very important reports have been lying on shelves for the last two, three years and yet money has always been swindled here and there.  The report said about Shs. 8 billions had been spent and has not been accounted for.  Shs. 8 billion is a lot of money.  We were told that during CA elections the Government was supposed to spend the Shs. 10 billions for the entire exercise; which was a very heavy exercise and I do not think all the 10 billions was spent, it is a lot of money, now if Shs. 8 billion just disappears in thin air like that and PAC reports are not taken seriously, they are not even brought in front, they are not even discussed in time to save the situation, I am wondering what we are doing and where we are moving to.  

I still repeat that PAC activities be taken very, very seriously beginning with this august House.  In fact, as soon as the PAC reports are ready, the Chairman PAC should inform the Chairman of this House so that other activities are suspended and PAC reports are discussed first and foremost and whatever this House recommends to Government for action, we make sure that action is taken.  It is not enough to just write things on paper and leave them there.  

The people that brought us in this House are wondering what we are doing here when so much of their money is being swindled here and there, and there is no action taken.  Some of them tend to think that we connive in this exercise, that we are a party to eating public funds because we have been keeping quiet for long, it is time we started shouting at the top of our voices to make sure, Cheeye has been fighting it alone and we have not joined him.  Let us join the struggle to make sure public funds are protected, and let us make sure that the Ministry of finance has the grip; it is controlling all those people who spend public money.  Mr. Chairman, I thank you for this opportunity.  Thank you.

MR. WASUGIRYA (Kibuku County, Pallisa):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members.  Before switching over to the subject, I would like to say, just to make one observation and that is to do with what is obtaining in my district that is Pallisa District.  It is unfortunate that Pallisa is experiencing some famine, that place is famine stricken and this has come about because of the long pronounced draught and also the fact that what is our staple food there which is cassava was attacked by the cassava mosaic.  In fact, we have been lacking that our neighbours in Busoga have done much to run to our rescue as far as procuring cassava is concerned.  

My appeal is, let Government at this material time do something about it because we have just two to three months, if nothing is done, then our people are going to starve.  Then secondly, I was saying that since we have got institutions, we have say, Namulonge Research Station which actually has done a lot of researchers on different varieties of cassava, if it could be possible may be the Government could send us some cassava cuttings of a particular variety which is very resistant so that we begin now, now that the rains have come, that would move a lot way to improving the situation.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

Turning to the issue in place, I want to begin from where the previous speaker had stopped -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please make your point and go ahead.

MR. WESUGIRYA:  Mr. Chairman, this is a very sensitive matter.  The matter to do with public funds is very sensitive.  I must remark here that many of us did not make it in this CA contest and that was because of that reason -(Laughter)- no, let me clarify here.  We were recognised as being weak when it comes to public funds being spent and therefore we were associated with this kind of arrangement.  I will cite an example of a new district where I come from, the new district of Pallisa. 

A lot has been written about embezzlements going on Pallisa right from the infantry of the district.  Some embezzlement you have been reading about concerning the procurement of prices for iron sheets and this money had come from the Ministry of Local Government, this money was meant to procure scholastic materials for schools but then, it got diverted to buy iron sheets, moreover over quoting the prices.  That has been there.  There has been a problem of actually diverting the recent 50 per cent Government contribution to Government Primary Aided Schools.  The new policy stipulates very clearly that let this money go directly to the recipient primary schools.  I have to say, through you, Mr. Chairman, by way of informing the Members that much as many districts have received such cheques for their schools, it has not been the case with Pallisa district, Mr. Chairman.  No single school has ever received this money -(Interjection)

DR. CHEBROT:  Point of information, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to thank the hon. Member for making that clarification.  First of all, it is not true that the Ministry of Local Government is withholding any cheques to any district.  What happened was that the Ministry of Education did issue out a very contradictory circular to the district asking them not to use the money.  The Minister of Local Government had written out another circular which empowered the district councils to disburse the money to the schools.  So, another circular came from the Ministry of Education denying them that right, but as of now, we have already written out another circular empowering the district councils to use that money immediately because the circular which came from the Ministry of Education contravened all the laws which were passed by this House.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WESUGIRYA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I have got to thank the Minister for that bit of clarification.  The line is long.  There is a problem of paying the road gangs, these chaps who works on the roads.  I recall very well that we worked out an understanding whereby the government - that is the Central Government, the Ministry of Local Government was to meet 50 per cent of that payment and the districts were to meet the other remaining 50 per cent.  It is unfortunate as far as Pallisa District is concerned that Pallisa has never met that obligation of meeting the other 50 per cent.  We have been thriving on the 50 per cent coming from the Ministry of Local Government and, therefore, that means that the people who have been working on these roads have been cheated because what they have ended up getting as wages, is not the money they expected to get.  That problem is there, and even as I speak now, they are not up to date with that payment.  The same people, the bureaucrats in Pallisa, have connived to see to it that this money does not reach these workers and there is even a glaring example here -(Interruption)

DR. CHEBROT:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, the issue of non-payment of road workers is because salaries have been specifically increased while the tax base has remained very low in the districts such that if you increase the tax, you will find that the citizens are against it and as the salaries are increased the districts have failed now to meet their obligations and yet the Minister of Local Government has constantly given a small and constant amount without revision and that brings the districts into problems.  Thank you.

MR. WESUGIRYA:  Mr. Chairman, what he is saying is to some extent true, but what I am emphasising here is that even the money, which has come from the Ministry of Local Government, has not ended up to the rightful recipients.  That money has been held up somewhere and that is why I am citing this example as an element of embezzlement as far as the bureaucrats there we have are concerned.  

Lastly, there is this question of officers making places of work more or less permanent in permanent stations.  We have a few cases in Pallisa where you find that the officers who were sent there in 1987 when we were just a sub-district, are still there.  We have tried to raise some dust to say that the longer some of these people stay in stations they want to become for the people of that particular district.  This we have tried to do but then it appears some of these officers have got some god fathers at the Ministry headquarters, however much you try to raise up the issue you say this man is due for a transfer nothing is said about it.  I am suggesting that if we were to pursue this kind of arrangement whereby we have to check on how long one has stayed in a particular station and transfer that person.  If that person is bad, then there is even no need of transferring him; like the cases in Pallisa I have enumerated.  So definitely, as I am going to sit down, I am saying the problem is lying with embezzlement in this country and I can assure you the country is burning if we are not going to devise ways and means of containing the situation.  Thank you very much.

MISS NAMPEERA (Youth Representative, Buganda Region):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My first information to the House is in response to the hon. Minister’s comment that there is shortage of manpower as far as accountants are concerned.  You realise that we have so many accountants and when it comes say to advertising for these jobs, they say, we want ten years experience, five years experience.’  Now, how do you expect a fresh graduate or somebody with a diploma holder from Nakawa or any other institution to be employed?  Unless hon. Members address this issue, then I do not think our nation has a bright future and then another information that I want to pass around to the hon. Members is still in response to the hon. Member from Pallisa.  A certain hon. Member, a fellow youth, reacted that it is because some of these people do not pay enough taxes.  You find that people pay taxes and when they pay, they do not see anything that they benefit from these taxes; the hospitals are few, and the roads are almost impassable.  You find that most people are even transferring their vehicles to use Tororo route just because it is okay and people are suffering; then how do you expect the poor man to continue paying tax when he is not realising any benefits and yet other district are getting these benefits?  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Gerald Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, one, I wish to thank the Members of the Public Accounts Committee for having produced a report and my comments would be general but I consider the debating of this report is so vital as far as accountability to the public, to the voters is concerned.  First of all, I would like to say something about the accountants.  This has been mentioned several times, the hon. Minister of course has had his own comments and has even referred to a Bill passed here in this House to create a body of accountants.

Hon. Members, we have a problem; we are looking at Makerere to provide accountants through those who are either reading the B.Com. with a finance option, who will possibly be potential accountants.  But then such people are not very ready to take charge in most cases.  There are professional bodies that help in training even if you come out as a graduate I know, for sure organisations like say, the banks, whenever they use to take on fresh graduates, they will take them on as trainees, give them opportunity to (a) understand the work; (b) even get proper professional training.  

But this is totally lacking in our country and since we passed the Bill, I do not know what progress the hon. Minister has made to ensure that we create a professional body for accountants in this country because this is totally absent and it is extremely unfortunate that poor peasant parents are sending their children to institutions which are mushrooming everyday where you cannot get consistency in qualifications because the only one place that we would know are those institutions that are properly recognised by the Ministry and UNEB and providing proper examinations -(Interjection)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Information.  I would like to inform the hon. Minister holding the Floor that, progress has been made because we have identified the requirement, we need from the beginning to set up this institute because it requires setting up a syllabus first of all which we accept through the Ministry of Education as being relevant and competitive in the region, identifying a body which will set examination and also train and also awards the relevant qualifications and exemptions according to the Council.  This has been identified and funds have been found because it is an expensive exercise in the beginning.  So, I hope before this year ends, the institute will be functional in terms of training, examination and award of qualification.  That is a progress so far.  

MR. NTIMBA:  Further information.  Mr. Chairman, the information I would like to give to the hon. Deputy Minister of Trade on the Floor is that we should not really waste time listening or being told that a professional body of accountants is going to be set up and that we are going to look at qualifications, consult UNEB and things of the kind.  The simple reason why in Government Ministries we cannot get properly qualified accountants is that those who qualify at Makerere are being frustrated and discouraged in remaining in Government Ministries.  No sooner are they appointed to work in Government Ministries than they find the salaries are far below the expectations and are forced to go to seek greener pastures.  I think this is what we should address ourselves to.

MR. SSENDAULA:  I thank you very much for the information both from the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance and from hon. Ntimba, but my reaction would be really first to the hon. Minister of Finance that the sooner we get this matter sorted out, the better because, going back to the point raised by hon. Ntimba of Makerere, Makerere surely are just giving option on accounting, they are not training accountants really if we are to talk seriously, they only just give opportunity to someone to expose him to accounting you really need proper qualifications and you need to have a body in this country, at least, if we cannot immediately, okay, we can take the word as given by hon. the Minister but, I would advise that if we are not really ready there are professional bodies which are known the world over, we can really look for affiliation, we can seek for their assistance so that we know that the people who are going out to train as accountants come out with proper qualifications.  It is keeping us on the one hand that the people sometime who pose as accountants when you get them, when you give them work to do, they do not measure up to that work and that is very unfair to the peasants, the parents, who sponsor their children in those institution that are now giving us people who have accountants qualifications which are not fully complete.  

On the control of our finances, I feel that there is a real need for us to revisit the Financial Regulations in this country.  The Financial Regulations give us the Permanent Secretary as the accounting officer.  I am not here to really assess and possibly give a verdict on Permanent Secretaries but I think this is too much a duty for Permanent Secretaries to be accountable, to be answerable to this nation as accounting officers for our money.  I would instead suggest that we create a position of say Financial Controller for each Ministry so that that Financial Controller becomes a total accounting officer with less responsibility but only attending to matters pertaining to finance.  You see the Permanent Secretary is extremely busy, and he is actually the consultant basically in a Ministry; he is the one who is very busy -(Interruption)

MR. SIBO:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  With deepest respect to the hon. Minister of Trade, I am not quite sure whether he is well grounded in the accounting systems of government, but I would like to tell him that the accounting systems of government are extremely clear, very, very clear, so simple that if they were followed the accounting officer will not have a very serious job to do.  I was myself an accounting officer, I never signed a single cheque and we never had problems we are having now.  It is because systems have broken down.  They have broken down because the existing rules and regulations are not being followed, they are not being respected, they are being broken down left, right and centre and, indeed, those who would supervise them are not bothered, they close their eyes, the embezzlement that we have is as a result of refusing to follow the existing instructions.  If they were followed, we would not be having these problems and a lot of loss of money as we have.  So, I think really let us snot address our minds to the wrong direction; let us address minds to the right areas where things are taking place.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ELYAU:  Another information, Mr. Chairman. Being an accountant somewhere it is something which is lacking in the Government and that is accounting procedure -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  It is there.

MR. ELYAU:  If it is, then there is nobody following, for example, if you look at page 6, you will find that within 86/87 there was 26 million, but in 1989 it went on to 1.8 billion. That means money is spent and nobody bothers to record.  Now, can you afford to have this because I am sure t does not need an account to record a primary record it just needs a clerk it is a deliberate refusal to record Government transaction that brings these mess.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Chairman, you see I expected much from the former Permanent Secretary to tell me exactly I had not said, I insist that the person who is supposed to be the accounting officer is over loaded and I will still maintain that position.  It is just to protect that someone should be accounting officer for the sake when he has no access, he has no opportunity to look at what he is supposed to see.  I think it is not very fair for all of us, what we want is to provide accountability for the income that we finally give to the people to dispatch in ministries.  

The time I have been in Government I have observed that surely this Permanent Secretary is extremely busy and that Permanent Secretary should have time to look at what goes on in the Ministry as far as finances are concerned, and that time will normally not be there because he is the one to write speeches, he is the one to write this, he is the one to write reports, he is the one on this, extra, extra.  What is the problem, why do we not have financial controllers for each Ministry if we can identify those people and make sure that these are properly paid, because the - is that if we manage to get a properly qualified accountant he will be demanding a premium salary.  Let us ensure that those whom we give that responsibility, we pay them properly and at the end of the day, we will have people who can stick to the job and give us the service.

Another issue that I have observed that is covered or involved in the financial regulations is that for us as politicians who come to the House here to debate and get the votes passed, we seem not to get any information as to what happens about finances in the Ministry.  Now, I stand to be corrected by these other colleagues, but these are observations that I have, because I will expect as a politician who is answerable to this House that I would be also kept in the know as to what is happening because if one time I say, I would like to travel and either attend a general meeting of the cooperative Union and only the Permanent Secretary answers or transport officer says, there is no money and that is the end of it we have had no release and I am not kept informed of what is happening about releases and whenever I asked, I am told by the Permanent Secretary that that is not your responsibility, how would you operate?  (Interruption)

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Sometime back, the President wrote a letter where he was instructing Deputy Ministers to become Chairmen of Finance Committees of their Ministries.  I wonder about what is happening in the Ministry of Industry and Technology.

MRS. KALEMA:  Point of information.  I was a Deputy Minister before in Public Service and Cabinet Affairs, I would like to inform the hon. Member that the Permanent Secretary is resented it very, very much and I think that is one of the reasons why he never succeeded.

MR. SSENDAULA:  I think slowly as the information comes in, you get to see really that the follow-up for the politician on the public finances is a bit minimal the hon. Member mentioned that the President did mentioned, did it become part of the financial regulations?  Because what the Permanent Secretary is going to ask you tomorrow is whether that kind of instruction is part of the financial regulations.  Because he stands by financial regulations and whenever you ask him anything, he will tell you this is not in line with the financial regulations.  

So, unless we attend to the financial regulation, unless we amend the financial regulations seriously in this House so that the financial regulations get up to date, really move with the situation because the financial regulations we were talking about which were referred to by the hon. Member by the time he was a Permanent Secretary and he was a Permanent so many years passed -(Laughter)- now, I am talking of a current situation.  

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the Deputy Minister on the Floor that we have up-dated financial instructions dated 1991 and it should be of interest if he avail himself a copy.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Chairman, I really welcome information as it comes in and I am only wondering whether what he has the most recently is a law and that we have passed it in this House and when we - because I cannot remember having ever debated these regulations.  Now, moving to the unfinished projects -(Interjection)- I have been extremely generous with my time and I am losing truck of my speech if I continue receiving information and they dwell me.  

Moving to the unfinished projects and there is a project here mentioned on our Ministry that is concerning Kigumba, now I have been following and I have been, year in year, out since I got into the Ministry whenever, we have been getting money under capital expenditure for rehabilitation of Kigumba Co-operative College when we want to get the money to get the job done you find that that money is just about of what one would require o do the job.  So, we really need also to up-raise and even revise our system on how we decide on money we put forward as capital expenditure for jobs because by the time the job gets to be done the money has already lost value and will continue like that and nothing has been done and I think it is a same case with most other Ministries they also find themselves in the same story.  

Then I have embezzlement, and I feel this issue of embezzlement I think requires to be addressed through the laws of this country.  I think time has come when we should seriously consider a special way of handling cases involving embezzlement of public funds because these public funds some of the funds are either borrowed or these are collection from taxation of the peasants and if we allow the normal trend of the court to attend to these matters we shall never get lead of embezzlement because whenever, somebody has embezzled, he embezzled 600 million he goes to court, he is bailed out on one million shilling the next day he is out and whenever you hear any bail you know that that case is finished nothing will ever happen about that case.  So, that now we know that the time people have embezzled are bailed out we cannot get hold of them any more why can we not have a special section of the law saying, those who have embezzled public funds should not be bailed until the case is fully attended to -(Interjection)- that is my point of view otherwise we are going to continue writing points -(Interjection)

MR. KASAJJA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Minister who is deliberating on that important point, that point I remember sometime back when we were discussing here issues regarding management of public funds there was an over whelming in the whole House where we said that people who embezzle a lot of funds should not be bailed out and this thing was supported by this House and what we are waiting for was the Government to come up with something at least, to re-enforce the law.  Now, when the Minister reminds us about it, I think it is just the weakness within maybe, the Government which is failing to take some of the cases which we deliberate here seriously to put them into practice, but otherwise this case was supported, of people not using the larger amounts of money that they embezzle to us the same amount of money again to bail themselves out - of the matter when we were discussing at that time, Sir.

MRS. NJUBA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that the court do not allow bail for people who have embezzled, they allow bail for people who are alleged to have embezzled.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Chairman, the last information is very interesting because surely one is not guilty until he is proved guilty that is the situation.  So, all that I am appealing for is that these people who are alleged to have embezzled let them not be bailed so that we get these cases heard, otherwise, someone tells you investigations are still going on and yet the parties that are involved are basically in office, then why do we not have those people in the office brought and they provide the necessary evidence and we have the people convicted.  With these remarks, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

DRANI DRADRIGA (Ayivu County, Arua):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and the hon. Members.  It is important for Government to respond to issues relating to public sector performance and if you look at our history the last few decades have been eroded seriously by poor performance in the public sector I am, therefore, proposing that Government should revise if it has not done so a quick reaction mechanism in order to have raised these issues, and I am saying this because - with democracy for the citizens and important institutions like this House to speak out on behalf of the people so that corrective measures are instituted.  

Corruption has been a very big problem in Uganda we speak about corruption but we take little or no action to remove it, a lot have been already said about cases of embezzlement, cases of corruption but nobody can convince me that for quite a long time we have been able to bring to book all these embezzlers and corrupt fellows.  The laws are there we do not enforce them allegations are made the prevailing institutions for Justice like the courts of course they are using the laws which exist always bail out these people.  I think we must also find a way of punishing these corrupt proven cases I would even suggest that when somebody is waiting for a bail the person should be locked up in the concentration camp allow them to cultivate crops they will keep them here until they are bailed or they are not bailed.  Government must, therefore, take the lead in fighting corruption this should be at all times.  Secondly, we are now hoping to achieve what is called result-oriented management -(Interruption)

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  What was said in the Public Accounts Committee meetings was that we have corruption among the people who handle finances.  When you have corruption among the people who are supposed to arrest them, when you have corruption among the people who are supposed to judge them in the courts.  In the long-run, therefore, you have a chain of corruption and where to start to kill the corruption becomes a problem.  I think we need special laws to fight corruption because apparently the system is itself corrupt and, therefore, it is sick and more sick than what we thing.

MR. DRANI DRADRIGA:  I thank the Member for his information, but I am saying we must take a start, I wish the Member has told us when we shall start.  Mr. Chairman, I was saying -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, this House very painfully debated the Leadership Code which we said it would go somewhere to at least stop some of these embezzlement.  We even submitted it to a Select Committee and it was eventually passed it, I remember unanimously, but for many, many years now we do not know what happened to that Leadership Code no Minister has ever explained why it has not been implemented, I wonder whether the Ministers present could give us a clue as to what happened to that Bill. 

DRANI DRADRIGA:  Let me thank hon. Babu for the information it goes to strengthen my own lamentation and condemnation of the methods we are using to address corruption.  Mr. Chairman, with Public Service the civil service itself, I think one of the problems has been the absolutely loss, but even those absolute loss were not being applied at all, I was myself in Civil Service I know about the evils which are in the current Civil Service in Uganda; what is important now is for us to make a start we make sure that the terms and conditions of workers are improved upon, we make sure that we strictly and seriously begin to advise the issue of a living wage, I know it is a philosophy but we must begin to advise it seriously.  With financial control, what is important is the control itself; we must be able to control at all levels right from the highest level to the lowest level.  

Our current regulations are very clear, we are now to add to what somebody has clarified upon that a Permanent Secretary is a Chief Inspector, a Permanent Secretary apart from doing the overall administration of the Ministry is actually the Chief Inspector and it means therefore, nothing can escape his desk.  The only difference is that a Permanent Secretary does not necessary deal with documents like examination and all those, but a Permanent Secretary must be in-charge, a Permanent Secretary must be able to do financial management, financial controller and must be able to supervise.  What is important again is that there must be authorised expenditure at all level, if believe in authorised expenditure only, then we can minimise corruption.

Another area that needs to be addressed is that of personnel.  The personnel problems are many, I have already talked about a result oriented management what has been happening is that, the establishment you know in a Ministry there is establishment section of the personnel department, these establishment sections up to now are not properly organised and that is where most of the problems are, files get missing from there, there is a lot of bribery, sometimes you are not promoted for the last 20 years, you are still attending meetings for promotion.  

Another area which must be addressed is education, there must be further education, there must be seminars that was recommended by the Committee, there must be on the top training, and most important of all, there must be manpower planning.  In some countries like Tanzania, there is a whole powerful department devoted.  Actually, at first it was a Ministry devoted to manpower planning.  It assisted Tanzania a lot maybe we have something to borrow from there.  Let us have a strong manpower planning.

Finally, I want to talk about projects.  We have on record, I do not know what the position now is but, when I used to get in touch with projects, especially of non-governmental sector, I knew of at least between 1,000 and 1,500 projects which this Government has been undertaking for the last ten years including the government which came in before NRM.  There has been a very big problem with projects, and half of these projects are up to now unfinished.  And the problem has been that first of all, conceiving of projects is done by outsiders.  You find even today, some Ministries are not involved until at the level of signing.  You find the Minister for Finance, of course, I am not talking about hon. Kafumbe, but I am talking about the office for the Minister of Finance.  He signs a lot of documents, which are not really clear to him.  That one has happened.  Sometimes the Attorney General is not involved, and you find a lot of clauses which can really be a document to this country, and that is why in fact most of these projects are not finished.  There is no counterpart participation or very little of it.  Monitoring is very poor and then finally, evaluation.  Evaluation is done to the interest of the donors.  

In other words, we are just used to a filling station for petrol like IMF and World Bank institutions are doing to most of these projects we have here.  I think we need to do something about it.  Thank you very much.

MR. NTIMBA JOHN (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, my contribution is going to be on the law that we passed in this country, namely, the Leadership Code of Conduct.  Recently, when I was campaigning for the CA, at almost every candidate’s meeting, my other seven rivals were accusing me and all of us here, of having given step-motherly treatment to the Leadership Code of Conduct.  I took pains at every meeting to explain to the people that as far as this House is concerned, we did pass the leadership Code Bill, and according to my records, this Bill was given a Presidential ascent on the 6th of April, 1992, which is exactly two years and nine days ago.  And my hon. Colleagues here have talked about it, and it seems there has been no follow up.  

Now, and I want to warn those of us - those of you who have been elected to the CA, that when it comes to discussing the Leadership Code of Conduct, you have other fellow colleagues who are not Members of this august House, and are going to take you to task and say, what has happened, what has the Parliament of this country done or said about the Leadership Code of Conduct?  

Now, why I am talking about the Leadership Code of Conduct in the context of our Public Accounts Committee report.  There is a lot this law can help us in weeding out corruption and inefficiency.  First of all, if these accountants and auditors some of whom have turned themselves into suppliers to various Ministries; if the Code of Conduct were put in operation, then these people will be required to declare their access and I am sure they will have to second thoughts before thinking of being the suppliers to the various Ministries which they are auditing or which they are employed.

So, let me take this opportunity to ask the Government through you, to prevail upon the Government to ensure that follow up action is taken with regard to this law which was passed more than 2 years ago.  

The Public Accounts Report talks about widespread mismanagement of funds, projects and lack of access to the regulations.  A lot has been said about inefficiencies of various officers in the Ministries.  And it is a pity that we are debating this report when most of the ministries which this report talks about are not represented in this House today by their ministers and know that the accounting officers that are attending.  If this debate continues until next Tuesday, I am specifically requesting that arrangements be made to invite Ministers, and accounting officers of the following Ministries; Local Government.  I say Local Government; it is a pity the Deputy Minister has just left us.  

When we were sitting in the Public Accounts Committee, we took it upon ourselves to make a list of various districts and urban authorities in this country to find out how ready these districts which are about to be decentralised or which have been selected as pilot districts to be decentralised.  To what extent are they ready to take on the important task of managing the accounts of the government of this country?  And I think my fellow members of PAC will be my witness that we found that the amount of training background, most of them still left a lot to be desired.  So, if the ministers of Local Government were here, maybe you would be able to tell him, maybe give him a message and say, as you decentralised these districts, please make sure that you have accounting officers who are properly trained.

Now, I come on to the ability of people to carry out the work of accounting officers.  It is good the hon. Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry touched on the importance of professionalisation.  Since we are getting into the age of professionalisation, as well as the age of what we call ROMA - mean Result Oriented Management System.  Before they agree with hon. Ssendaula’s, I am of the proposal that we revolutionalise our training and appointment recruitment system and appoint professionally qualified accountants, to serve us accounting officers in our Ministries, instead of just picking un anybody who wants to be a Permanent Secretary and give him illegal appointment of being an accounting officer.  I have myself seen a situation where one priest in good faith was appointed to be a Permanent Secretary of one of the Ministries.  And I emphasise the fact that the appointment was made in good faith because that particular person was a very mature person, very trust worthy, but unfortunately, when he got into that particular Ministry, what happened?  The little professional accountants said they could now take advantage of a person who has never handled government accounts.  He was a god man, very strict with his accounts and the administration, but just because - and he was a very good priest, but because he was not familiar with accounting procedures, he was at disadvantage.  So, entirely, I would like to support the idea put by the hon. Gerald Ssendaula that we need to revolutionalise our Civil Service and to professionalise these posts of accounting officers.

The other ministries, which really should have been represented in this House when we are debating, are ministries of Housing, and the Treasury is represented.  Now, let me say one thing about Treasury.  Now, I am sorry to have to mention and I am glad the Deputy Minister is here, so that I will not be accused of talking behind somebody’s back.  In all the meetings we have been having in the Public Accounts Committee for the last few years, we find that Treasury was always poorly represented.  Because, when the Public Accounts Committee sits, it needs the accounting officers and within the meeting we are supposed to have the auditors who are the accusers, and people from the Ministry of Finance are supposed to attend the meeting.  But I want to repeat here an accusation that Treasury was invariably being poorly represented if ever.  And to make matters worse, as we were interviewing the accounting officers, we discovered that the Secretary to the Treasurer that particular time; name withheld, put up the poorly show of all the accounting officers - we had to interview.  So, there is something, Mr. Chairman.  The other Ministries that really should have been here -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, allow me to inform hon. Ntimba, that the Permanent Secretary and Treasury - Secretary to Treasury is not the accounting officer of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning.  So, if the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to Treasury appeared not to be conversant, it was not a surprise because he is not the accounting officer for that Ministry.

MR. NTIMBA:  I thank the hon. Deputy Minister because, he has helped me to emphasise the fact that it is high time we professionalise the post of accounting officer of the Ministries.  I am glad the Minister of Education and Sports is around, next week we are going to be talking about Education Policy Review Commission Report.  And according to information I have here available, we are going to require over Shs. 900,000 billion to implement the capital development projects that the Education Policy Review Commission stipulates.  And in his Ministry, I think he has had - he is not an accounting himself, the Minister and I think he too must have been taken advantage of by his very smart accountants, and we see that in the report, the tax payer lost no less than 800 million -(Interruption)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, may I inform the Member holding the Floor through you that this report before the House, covers the period when hon. Ntimba was Minister of State for Higher Education, and the Chairman of the Finance Committee of the Ministry, so definitely, his view should be taken seriously because he is conversant. (Laughter)

MR. NTIMBA:  I am very grateful, Mr. Chairman, for the information brought forward by the hon. Minister of Education and Sports.  But again I want to repeat what our Colleague, hon. Mrs. Kalema pointed out that the idea of the Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers sharing Financial Committees, was thoroughly frustrated by the accounting officers.  Very often, we would call meetings, to say, let us have a meeting of the Finance Committee, nobody turns up, and I think by now I am no longer in these Ministries, but I will not be surprised if we are told that these Committees are probably no longer functioning.  But as far as the loss of Shs. 800 millions concerned, I thin this is supposed to have lost long after I had left the Ministry.

So, further, I want to talk about the recommendations that the Public Accounts Committee had made.  These appear in page 15 of the Report.  I am not going to repeat them, but by way of emphasis, let us as a legislature, address ourselves to putting in place laws which will held us to recover money that has been embezzled.  I think there has been a talk of denying somebody a bail if he is accused or alleged to have embezzled more than Shs. 1 million.  This has snot been - the law has not been put in place and I think the sooner we do it, the better, the ball is in our court.

And secondly, the question of recovery of money that has been embezzled.  We must put in place a law that will help us to recover money that has been embezzled.  It is not enough to send somebody to jail for four, five years when he has embezzled Shs. 50 million, he goes to jail for five years and leaves the stolen money impact on the back account.  Why do we not - while there is still a chance put in place the law to ensure that money embezzled can be recovered?  Let me use this opportunity to congratulate the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, Members of the Committee, as well as congratulate ministries which have corporated with the Committee.  As time goes by, some of these accounting officers are getting more and more sensitized into the importance of being responsible for our funds.  And I would like to express the hope that, as times goes on, the Public Accounts Committee Report will be thinner and thinner and this will be - very well to the desire by the National Resistance Movement to bring up this country.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me an opportunity to contribute on this debate.

BRIG. MOSES ALI (East Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I must thank you for the choice of electing you as a Chairman, and even if we were asked to vote, I would have given my vote to you.  

I want to also thank all the successful candidates for the CA, for their success of victory and I thank also those who missed narrowly to try again next time. (Laughter)  And, I also want to thank the Historicals for having come out this time to be measured and I am sure they have tested now the power of the people and we were all the same, now there is no more historical, I believe.  

I want to talk about government gross neglect of certain areas of this country.  It is high-level corruption by the Government to neglect for example, Moyo District, Municipality, the massive support the population has given.  If we extend, the entire West Nile is neglected although the entire West Nile is behind the government, so we do not know the secret.  What should we do apart from supporting the government?  We thought if you support the government, there is going to be reciprocation by perhaps giving you some developments to support those on the ground.  But to neglect the place totally, it amounts to undermining us on the ground.  So, this is corruption politically.  Maybe we will use ‘Juu juu’ perhaps.  

Very soon you will hear some of us are washed down into Sudan by fault ferries.  The ferry in Laropi is so dangerous, so dangerous, in fact, hon. Butele would have told us.  He escaped narrowly, having stood for five hours on the Nile.  And also, hon. - escaped although he passed his victory, but he was trapped and ferried.  So, we do not understand what is happening.  The Minister of Works has been to this place; his Deputy has been there, up to now, and we do not understand, what we should do to be paid attention?  We are supporting the government but we are not being helped, what else is missing?

MR. NASASIRA:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, I recall having met him one time in the workshop, and when I asked him what he was doing there, he said, he had brought his engine for his maize mill for repair.  Which means the maize mill had broken down.  Now, the Nalopi ferry has been working for years, it is a machine like a maize mill engine, and if there was a mishap once or twice in three months, he should take it in good faith and I think we have corrected those mishaps in a number of occasions.  Machine break down and definitely I am not doubting the support for the Movement in that region.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr. Chairman, we have heard thousands of these sort of statements from hon. Ministers, but we do not know whether we should believe it or not.  Our people will only believe some of these statements only when they see the new ferries actually on the spot.  So, that one is a very, very serious question.  

I want also to inform the House because of neglect on 21st February, 1994, nearly 19 people traveling on a double cabin pick-up of our DPC newly posted to Moyo entered into ambush, six miles from Atiak and they were shot and set on fire.  They were burnt completely.  That DPC with our young lady who is now contesting for the CA for Women, escaped miraculously; a girl of about three years was finally killed when she was crying on the mother’s cobs.  These people were burnt and nobody was going to save this child because of the fire.  I think they poured petrol on the pick-up.  Finally, the girl also got burnt.  Not two weeks ago, four miles from NRA detach in Pabo, a complete bus burnt.  

Now what can we do?  Sincerely, what can we do?  We are not blaming the Government, but we are saying perhaps we should be assisted to do what Government wants us to do so that we get some of these things.  Our road is not attended to, and previously, the man in charge of Gulu Regional Works in Gulu, grades the road up to Ferry in Laropi, then somebody in Arua brings it up ti the other side of the Nile.  But now, the grading is done up to the border.  What is happening, we do not know, who is responsible, they say now, everybody is independent.  The district of Gulu is independent, now, we an Island in the middle.  Nobody is telling us.  The regional asset has not been divided; we are not capable of making this road.  The refugees hosted are being in our country - in our district, over 100,000 and we have a convoy of over 20, 30, 40 tones lorries digging more holes on this road.

MRS. NJUBA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I realise the Member is raising very serious matters, but is he in order to do so irrelevant to the topic which we are discussing?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think the hon. Member’s points are very, very grate and whereas he is in order, I would now request him to proceed to the relevant debate, please.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr. Chairman, I think if I am not relevant, then I do not know what else.  That would be relevant because if we are talking of services, which is provided by these public sectors, including roads, including people being killed and so on, then, I do not understand.  In fact, we should start by scrapping the NRM Secretariat and save the money for improving some of these places.  We do not need the Secretariat, spending a lot of money for nothing there.  What do we need it for?  Now, that we are going to do the something, we are all the same people now we should start with the Secretariat.  We do not need it now.  What for?  We need the money to improve, to take services to other people.  These dead woods should go back to their places.  So, I think I appeal to the public sectors to assist taking services to some parts of this neglected areas.  Thank you very much.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  First of all, I would like to congratulate you upon your being elevated to that big chair.  To begin with, it was indeed a big achievement for this House to have time for us t debate these reports.  I know many people were not interested to have these reports debated.  Many people in government, not the MPs, but those who are in government did not want these reports to be debated and the purpose why this Public Accounts Committee was formed, was almost useless.  I mean, public money is wasted, paying Members who attend these Sessions and yet what they produce is not put to use.  So, this was something, which has been an oversight on part of Government.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I rise on a point of order and my point of order is based on the statement made by the hon. Member and I would request that before he continues, he substantiates his statement.  He says that members of the government, we are not interested in debating the reports of Public Accounts Committee, not the MPs, but naturally, he is talking about the Front Bench.  I would like him to substantiate because it is not fair for him just to make a statement without stating who was particularly not interested in debating the report.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think it is clearly understood the hon. Member was generally talking about people working in government, not necessarily Members of the Front Bench.  So he is in order. (Laughter)

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Mr. Chairman, what has been a problem for us in the rural areas has been partly caused by our friends, because people in the rural areas have been blaming us.  They have not got the services and they expect us to deliver them services.  Now, where do you expect NRC Members to get money to grade roads, whereby money is embezzled in Ministry of Local Government with collaboration with the local authorities?  So, these are all issues which are creating more problems for us and may be before I finish that point, I would like to talk about some of the Members of this House who were pouring so much money in these CA elections.  Where did they get that money?  Because all these parties were held, you needed money, let us be honest.  So, therefore, I do not believe that if this country is to progress, it leaders are not accountable, then you cannot call it democracy.  Democracy with no accountability is no democracy.  

Now, turning back to the report, I would like to talk about the Permanent Secretaries who are called the accounting officers.  Most of these Permanent Secretaries have over stayed in those offices, some have been there for more than 20 years and Government has never bothered to even transfer them.  They should at least, be switched so that, there is what we call internal check.  But how can you keep someone for 20 years?  You think he is the only brain who can do that job?  So, that is also responsible for this massive financial embezzlement of Government funds. 

MR. MAGARA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that although Permanent Secretaries are accounting officers for Ministries, corruption is not only limited to Ministries.  Corruption is all over the place except we hear in other countries when a Ministry if found corrupt, the Minister in protest resigns, but this is not the case in this country.  Thank you.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, I thank the hon. Member for that information.  You will find that someone is talking about privatisation that may be the remedy of reducing this embezzlement.  But I do not agree with that sentiment, because even in Government, which is public, there is a lot of embezzlement.  Now, when you privatise parastatals, you have reduced, okay, embezzlement in the parastatals, but how sure are you, you have not cleaned the Government Ministry, are you also going to privatise the Ministry so that you can rid this?

Recently, about two years ago if I can recall properly, we passed a Bill here, setting up Certified Accountants of Uganda.  But I can assure you, Mr. chairman, the hon. Minister for Finance has talked that we lack qualified accountants.  Ever since this Bill was passed, there has been a lot of fumbling, people have been fighting, because what happens is, there are a few qualified accountants in Uganda and now, when they have these institutions set, then they produce more.  So, now the few certified accountants would like to maintain the monopoly.  So, this is a problem.  I know the Minister did not want to disclose it.

MR. ELYAU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, it is true.  when we passed a new body called Revenue Authority, do you know what happened to all these fellows?  The fellows who are appointed are not qualified at all; most of them are just girlfriends.  (Laughter)

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  So a country like Uganda was the first to receive this idea of setting –(Interruption)

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of clarification.  I seek clarification the hon. Minister for Finance is in this House.  As issue has been raised concerning the Bill we passed here two years ago, with particular reference to accountants, can he please clarify the position?  Why has it been that this Bill has not yet been implemented?

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know where my dear brother Dr. Magezi was.  I gave a progressive report on what is being done to effect this body.  This body is going to be a professional body.  Therefore, you need to negotiate amongst internationally recognised bodies which body will help you to set up a training - the syllabus, the examinations, the marking of those examinations, determining who should get what exemption; because people want to do this and get these qualifications but they have basic qualifications.  Others are university graduates, while others are graduates from Nakawa, and others are from different colleges.  

So, I reported that this exercise costs money and it has been included in the discussion we have with the World Bank under the programme which call capacity building in Uganda, for them to facilitate us with resources, either to take on the certified accountants of London or the Chartered Accountants, so that they can help us to get a framework, so that we arrive at the qualifications which also Kenya will accept, Tanzania will accept in the region, not purely only for Uganda and I have said this as far as where we have gone to identify resources and people to do the job, because even if the qualified accountants, they are not trainers, they cannot pass on that knowledge they have to others.  They cannot be examiners, they cannot set exams and they cannot mark exams.  So, to do it properly, we have had to lay all this background work.

Now, about qualified accountants in Kampala mainly trying to fight on whether the body starts or not, the Government cannot allow them to be monopolists and fight the creation of accountants.  That one we cannot accept.  That is why there is ex-officio on this Committee as you agreed in the law.  The Commissioner of Education is an ex-officio on the Council, because we must give people education.  The Commissioner for Treasury is ex-officio; the Auditor General who is giving these reports is the Registrar - for one to accept that one has the relevant qualifications.  So, the disputes amongst qualified accountants notwithstanding, the Government is pushing to make sure this body is put in place.

Lastly, it is not true also that Revenue Authority is filled with useless people.  Before we started the Revenue Authority, we were collecting per month only Shs. 8 million because of the qualitative change in the personnel in the Revenue Authority.  Today, we collect shs. 33 billion per month.  So, I beg, you can also give credit where it is due please.  Thank you.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  So, Mr. Chairman, my only worry was much as the Minister has elaborated, I am not very much convinced.  In the first case, because this thing was set long time ago, we have had priorities, we have had a situation where you find one Minister is having three vehicles at his disposal.  That is using public funds and you find three vehicles.  We have always complained about issues of public vehicles, but this has never been adhered to, even in this report.  

So, really, why can’t government whenever they are doing their budget, why do they not allocate money for this institution to be started?  Because it is a shame for this country.  Tanzania that started later than us, they has formed their own association, Kenya even later.  We had this idea - we conceived this idea in the early 60s, but up to now, nothing is on the ground.  We are just hoping something is coming and we are lacking accountants and we know the remedies for getting qualified accountants.  That is by creating these institutions.  Why can this not be a priority area?  This is why at times I tend to laugh at my friends who are in these offices, because whenever they are doing their budget, are they really serious?  Because you find a very important area is not looked after.  

I have a simple example.  This is Kinyara Sugar Works.  Last year in the financial year 1993/94, Kinyara was not put under core projects.  Kinyara itself, we had to battle it out to make sure that Kinyara get the money.  Do you imagine all that money the 50 million dollars that had been procured and yet it is not taken as a core project that means it cannot be funded from the Treasury from the Consolidated Fund.  So, really, I would hate this haphazard way of doing things.

Talking about accountants in government, I would believe, well they are not qualified, that is a point I agree, but also commitment is lacking because in 1960s we had Secretary to the Treasury who was a Goan.  This man was only a primary chap, but all his accounts were up to-date for all those years, they were up to-date all the time.  

So, despite the fact that he was not a qualified accountant, you can have a qualified accountant but with no commitment, he will do nothing.  I would really call upon Government, having set up these organs, these organs are not against government, you know some of us who have been pointing out some of these weaknesses, we are being branded somehow, somewhere, but, that is the job why we were elected.  We came here to make sure that public funds are not misused.  But now, if you are bringing that and someone from another quarter because he knows he is a culprit, he says, ah, this man is anti.  So these Committees, these organs, should be seriously be respected and should be given credit for what they are contributing.  I take into account the Parastatal Accounts, I take into account the Public Account, the Committee on Economy.

MR. AGARD DIDI (West Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you Mr. Chairman for this opportunity to make a contribution on this very important discussion.  I would like to associate myself with the sentiments expressed by my Colleague, hon. Moses about the situation in Moyo and I am happy that hon. Nasasira has given us some assurance and I want to assure Mr. Nasasira that from today when I pray, I will face Kazo.  You face where you pray so that what you pray for is easily appreciated.  Coming to this discussion, I would like to appeal to hon. Members that it seems there is a tendency for us to only treat the matter under discussion as post mortem or as an opportunity to criticise one already after the other.  Instead of trying to go for concrete areas of recommendation, and therefore, I hope the Minister will in his summing up refer to some of the issues which I hope to propose that is the Minister of finance -(Interruption)- or the Chairman of the Committee, thank you.  

First of all, I would like Members of the House to agree with me that the starting point is the creation of a new order and I want all of us before this House ends, to push for legislation that will reverse the current onus of proof.  In some countries, to treat cases of embezzlement, the burden is placed on the person being charged so that it is for him to prove his innocence.  Put the case of someone in-charge of an institution.  His salary is known.  With two months he builds houses but the system is quiet.  I think that is the starting point.  One should be put on notice to explain how we came by whatever he has.  So, I think if legislation was started in that direction, we would be encouraging - thinking the right direction.  

Secondly, I want to talk about the institutional codes.  When you talk about the Leadership Code have this type of provision, whereby the enforcement agencies like in the Draft Constitution - the Office of Inspector General is being encouraged - is being strengthened to among others, follow up such cases.  So, even where there are Constitutional Codes, there should be that authority like the Office of the IGG, who should be able to go beyond the authority implementing the Leadership Code to check whether indeed, it is being implemented correctly, because if you leave it only to build in disciplinary methods or disciplinary structures, sometimes a tendency exists for the over all leader to be the very one who will end up electing or appointing members of the disciplinary committee.  So, if the Office of the IGG can be uplifted, so that it becomes a general overseer in those sectors especially, of the Institutional Committees, I think it will also help us.  

Thirdly, we all know that from the days of independence most African Governments inherited the Office of Controller and Auditor General whose only report Parliament can debate.  Governments found these offices challenging their authority especially where they wanted to spend some money or where they wanted certain access to consolidated funds without too much scrutinies.  So, actually the structure existed.  It is the Office of Controller and Auditor General, which was watered down by one government after another in the developing World.  So, today when you find somebody like the Auditor’s report appearing like a lame duck, it is because we have not seen that it was watered down.  So, if we have anything to correct, I think that is where we should try to go back and I think if that Office of Controller and Auditor General was reinstated, it will go for a long way to correcting what has gone wrong. 

The other area is the question of decentralisation.  I will give you one example of the feeder road project.  In my own district, well conceived idea of decentralising the feeder road programme, was nevertheless hijacked when one individual who was in charge of the project decides to take - to build houses.  I understand they have even offices in Kampala.  So, it seems what we did not do or what this House should do is that the decentralisation should be followed logically by a request that Members elected in the districts from Committees for the various sectors - whether it is health, whether it is education, because I have a problem even with this 50 per cent contribution which the government has given.  So, the problem has been - when Idi Amin took away powers from the districts and concentrated them in the Centre, people in the name of civil servants ended up uncontrolled.  

So, if today you found an officer in the district, in whatever field, well versed or well connected with someone from head office - such forces normally corroborated and ended up drawing money in the name of districts and these funds were never in fact used in the district.  So, I believe that elected officials in the districts, especially when decentralisation is going to affect the districts should be focused to look into this area, because once the sub-sectors of let say health, of education begin to scrutinise at the district level the misuse of funds, it becomes easier for the District Council to redress the question and becomes even easier for this Parliament to follow up how the districts are performing.  Of course, the answer should be privatisation but before we reach there, before our economy is fully in private hands, we have this problem of making sure that even our attitude t privatisation follows correct patterns.  We have heard stories of disposition of assets in non-transparent manner.  I feel that this House should help to encourage the transparency of the privatisation exercise.  

Lastly, the proposal in the Draft Constitution is that Ministers and Permanent Secretaries should have joined accountability for funds of the Ministry.  That might go a long way to solve some of the problems of where some Permanent Secretaries have considered themselves as untouchables or as the only authorities.  In the countries where civil servants have born this title of Permanent, I am sure most Members are conversant with the series of films called ‘Yes Minister,’ which clearly bring out that kind of authority to very absurd levels.  I believe, therefore, that during this period we accept that the Draft Proposal that political authorities in the Ministries be allowed as much blame by making them jointly accountable.  

Finally, rather than go to specific areas of abuse of money - if Members can address themselves to how to correct; it is true where funds have been lost, let us say the Office of Controller and Auditor General and the other profit organs must continue to investigate that but I do no think we shall do justice if we just end up with a litany of abuses in this House, as if someone thinks that he is an insult to this authority or that he is fixing that authority.  I think we should go more than that.  I know that with a long recess that the CA gave us, members may not have - because this report was circulated long time ago and I am only saying this so that I want Members to go more into those areas of recommendations so that from here - by the time this House adjourns or this session of ours end, our Parliament which NRM according to the Draft is supposed to be 25th of January, next year - we shall have left a very concrete document or something for Uganda to remember us by.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, before we close up today’s business, I would like to bring to your attention that in the order of business to follow, there will be a debate at a later stage on the first of all on The Non-performing Assets Recovery Trust Bill, 1994, followed by a debate of the Government White Paper on Education.  I would like to take note and on that, I now adjourn the House to next week Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.


(The Council rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 19th April, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

