Tuesday, 12 April 2011

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

 PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you but in a particular way, I welcome hon. Reagan Okumu who has been away for some time because of indisposition. I thank God that now he has recovered and he is with us. You are welcome hon. Okumu! 

2.53
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker, I would like to make a simple statement. You are aware of the unfortunate incident that occurred yesterday, when leaders of the Opposition parties and groups came in contact with the Police during their campaign to walk from home to their places of work. 

I want to state that we will be making an exhaustive statement tomorrow so that the Members are given the chance to debate the issue because it is not only that incident, but there are a number of other ramifications which I thought should be brought to the attention of the House so that we are able to find a better modus operandi in a multi-party system.

THE SPEAKER: So, he will make the statement tomorrow.

2.54
MS BETI KAMYA (Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for his very short statement. Although we have been informed that there will be a more comprehensive statement tomorrow, I have also heard that there will be more walking tomorrow; so before we come here, there is good reason for us to be prepared for tomorrow. As for me, I have lost my grandmother, so I will not be here tomorrow and on that account, I beg to say a few things.

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether Government knows which people are hurting –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, he said he will make a statement tomorrow and when he makes it, you will be able to make a contribution. Sorry about the death of your relative, but that will be the appropriate time to make a statement after he has finished then you will be free to make your contribution related to the matter rather than making one now. 

MS KAMYA: But, Mr Speaker, people are walking tomorrow before the statement is made.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know about that. The point is, you will make your contribution after he has made his statement tomorrow or you will appoint somebody to deputise for you.

MS KAMYA: But I may be inside - we may not be able to come here; we might be arrested for walking here. People were not allowed to walk to Parliament yesterday and we do not even know whether we shall be allowed to walk to Parliament tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: I really do not know about that; but what I know is that tomorrow, when he makes that statement, I will give opportunity to everybody who has a contribution to make a statement. 

2.57
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County Pader): Mr Speaker, let the minister enjoin in his statement tomorrow what appeared on Thursday, 07 April 2011, and was in the newspaper where two people were caning each other in State House. They said they were caught stealing car lights and they say the two are thieves. The coloured pictures show that both of them are bleeding in the head and they were asked to cane themselves. So let the minister also explain how State House, which is supposed to be the safest place in this country, could have people being forced to cane themselves. He should also tell us whether it was voluntary or they were forced to cane each other. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but contribution to this matter will be tomorrow.

2.57
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I rise on another matter of national importance. In Kagadi Hospital – 

THE SPEAKER: But the procedure is that you approach me and I get to know in time; you do not ambush me. So you will come tomorrow. Let us follow the procedure.

2.58
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I am not in any way trying to undo what you have already ruled on, but I think it is important that tomorrow as the minister brings a statement to this House, we would want this statement to be comprehensive because what we had yesterday more or less coincided with the report by the Secretary of State in the US Government talking about violation of human rights in Uganda, which among other things highlighted the issue of arbitrary arrests of politicians, especially those in the Opposition. 

And of course this connects my mind to the saying which was made by the late Mahatma Ghandi to his English friend in South Africa during the time when the Apartheid regime was on. I wish to quote him, so that tomorrow the honourable minister takes it into account. The late Mahatma Ghandi told Rev. Charlie, an English friend of his that, “We are God’s children and citizens of this empire, why shouldn’t we walk the streets like other men?” When we talk about “men”, in biblical language, it refers to both men and women. 

So I hope that tomorrow the minister will take this into account because we are in pain. Please, come with an exhaustive explanation so that we will be able to engage you and to further enrich your debate.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, we need assurance that tomorrow we shall walk here because we do not even have that assurance that we can come here. If we do not have fuel in our cars and even if we want to walk – the debate may not happen if we are not here. What does the minister have to say about tomorrow?

3.00
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I had already briefed you about this incident which devastated areas in Agule County on the eve of 08 April 2011.

Heavy rains and a windstorm affected Agule County rendering most families homeless and soaking all the crops and groundnuts which were being planted. 

When you go to Kameke sub-county, one primary school’s roof was blown off and it was housing 890 pupils. The roof of one Church of Uganda was blown off. Houses of 214 families were destroyed and in Akisim sub-county, 39 households were destroyed. In Agule sub-county, Pachwa Primary School’s roof was blown away. This school is also housing over 1,000 pupils. A total of 45 houses were blown away and in Kyerekula, 31 houses were blown away. Details from the other sub-counties are going to be delivered to my office in Pallisa today. I hope they have been delivered by now.

The main purpose of raising this matter – I also wrote to the office of the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees yesterday, and I delivered the letter personally. Unfortunately, I did not get him in the office but I delivered it to the secretary who promised to hand the letter to him. 

The purpose of this communication is to request the ministry to make strategic interventions to support these people. They lost groundnuts and other crops which they had planted and the crops were doing very well. Even the grass for thatching houses is not seen; most of them are rendered homeless. They have requested me to request the Government to make strategic interventions in form of planting materials, some equipment and possibly some materials for roofing their houses. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

3.04
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was away yesterday and came back last night. I have not been able to see the letter but if it was delivered to my office, I will certainly attend to it. 

I would like to inform the House that we have difficulties in addressing challenges that affect schools, hospitals, dispensaries or even private homes by not being able to provide materials like iron sheets or bricks. Our immediate intervention is usually food relief. We liaise with the Minister of Agriculture for seeds or planting materials since we do not stock them. What we normally have is a bit of food. The seeds that you eat are often not the type you plant. So, bear with us. 

We shifted from drought abruptly and some people have been very unkind to me saying, “Why did you talk about drought and now we have rain?” But I did not anticipate, for example the Tsunami in Japan which obviously affected the temperatures in the ocean. But as far as I am concerned, we do our best and certainly, I would have been happier even with the honourable if the CAO had a detailed report of what happened. Sometimes we cannot intervene when we do not know the quantities. If they are in there, that is quite a help. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, hon. Minister. The clarification I want to seek from the minister is: an incident of a similar nature occurred in my constituency in Bufundi sub-county, Kanyerere Parish, Rubanda County West. I requested the chief administrative officer to compile a report and bring to the Office of the Prime Minister to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to see how they could help the people. 

We need to be guided by the Minister of Disaster Preparedness that when an occurrence of that nature occurs, when there is disaster, on what should be the procedure. We need to have guidelines. We need to be guided on how we should approach it; whether it should begin from there, or the CAO should approach the minister or a Member of Parliament to raise it here and the minister responds. 

Again in this case, when the minister says they have challenges to respond to where schools have been  destroyed and blown away by winds; hospitals have been brought down by the rains and the storms; where else can the citizens go if the Government says it cannot help? It has challenges where health units and schools have been - there have been hailstorms like what happened in Bufundi Kanyerere. Where else do we go?

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that I have had a similar experience in my constituency and upon getting in touch with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, I got guidance that the assessment should be done. This is a case where we had a storm affecting Okoboi Primary School. Of late, we have had Ngora New Primary School also de-roofed. The Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness advised that I get in touch with the district education officer and the chief administrative officer to write a report on the status of the school after it had been affected. I submitted a very big report, even with photographs. The office of the CAO has been trying to find out now; what is the way forward? 

My problem with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is that upon receiving such a report, they do not provide any feedback. A copy was sent to the Ministry of Education. They also never sent any feedback. I fear for my colleague, hon. Opange. The minister has stated here that they do not have the capacity to intervene. It is the same story in Rubanda. Even when you submit a report, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness; all these sectors - if it is a health unit which is de-roofed, the Ministry of Health will keep quiet. If it is a school, which is de-roofed, the Ministry of Education will keep quiet. You submit a report to them and never get a response. Is it a disaster? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, when disasters strike, it is the lives of people at stake and the whole reason why I imagine Government put up a ministry of disaster preparedness is to come in and save situations. The problem has been that even the little they have in the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, they use it for politicking.

In my constituency, during the primaries of the NRM, trailers of beans and posho were ferried from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and yet there was no disaster in my constituency. (Laughter) One of the NRM candidates was using this food for politicking and this candidate is actually a minister in the Prime Minister’s Office. I had to complain to the Prime Minister because I was threatening to take Government to the Constitutional Court. People were dying because of disasters in Bududa and other areas and here was an NRM stalwart using food for politicking and campaigning.

So, when it came to my notice through one of the officers in the Office of the Prime Minister, what I did was to ask for evidence and they said they were going to start loading the trailer. I got a video which I am ready to lay on the Table and followed that trailer until it reached Nkutu Memorial School. It was escorted by Police - the Police escorts of the Ministry of Internal Affairs -(Interjections)- I got it on video. I have them loading food for Disaster Preparedness into the stores of the school. I picked this one and I told the Prime Minster, “This insanity must come to an end.” People in Bugisu were dying -(Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to impute motive on the part of the Office of the Prime Minister that it guides Tsunamis, earthquakes, winds and storms; that the Office of the Prime Minister, through my office, has power to guide these politically and that if there is any problem in Bugweri the direction has come from the Office of the Prime Minister? (Laughter) Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No. Gathering from what he is saying, he is saying that instead of sending the food to that area, they were bringing it to his area where there was no disaster. (Laughter) This is what he was saying. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. And let me tell you, I expected the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to get concerned. Unfortunately, you can see the mentality. They do not care for the people who are suffering. They do not! Because eventually, I got those pictures and told the Prime Minister that this was what was going on and I told him I was going to court. Then he told me, “No, no, no. I am sorry. This must come to an end.” So, he invited the officers responsible, communicated it in writing, they even gave me copies of the letters and he thereafter directed that that store be immediately locked and said that the following day he was going to send a trailer to pick the foodstuffs because I had organised people so that we go and actually lock up the stores ourselves. So, what the Prime Minister did was to send a trailer the following day - I have it on video - and that trailer eventually loaded this food and it ended up at a place called Bulucheke in Bududa. 

This is the problem of this ministry. It is really a disaster -(Laughter)- because the people in Bulucheke were dying. Somebody there was using the foodstuffs because he wanted to win the primaries. 

So, my brother, do not expect so much from that ministry and if you must talk to somebody, talk to the Prime Minister and not the ministers responsible because they are political beneficiaries of what goes on in that ministry. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we should end this debate because what hon. Banyenzaki wants from the minister in charge of the disaster issue is to give him guidance on what to do when a disaster happens so that they know what steps to take in case there is a disaster. I think that you can give -

3.16
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The first step is to have the information reach the CAO in the district for the information to be transmitted to our office. This is because the CAO is our contact administratively in every district and we expect the CAO to have a network that goes to almost every village. So, as much as possible, let the details be sent immediately through the CAO. But that is not to say that if there is - the extent of the emergency determines the intervention as well. It is not the bureaucracy we are talking about. If an area has been really devastated and without bringing in food people would die, we do not expect to go through that procedure. We need to get the information - telephone calls even from anybody like an MP or a citizen can let us know what is happening on the ground. That is when we are talking about food.

When you have something like an earthquake or people are drowning or something like that, again the speed at which we get the information to mobilise resources of rescue and so on is important. So, I would like it to be clear, hon. Members of Parliament and anybody else listening in on this procedure, that the fastest you can get the information through the district to us the better so that we can intervene.

Now that I am standing up, I think the separation of the Prime Minister from my office when I am in the Office of the Prime Minister is for purposes of being personal because I expected hon. Katuntu to appraise the  Prime Minister but also think that it is a directive to go through me.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek brief clarification from the Minister of Disaster - (Interjections)- yeah, “Disaster Preparedness” has no problem. You talked about liaising with the Ministry of Agriculture for post-disaster planting. That is very important. I think you need a more comprehensive policy on that because we have NAADS. There are portions of money given to sub-counties but when you have a whole sub-county hit by a hailstorm and crops are destroyed and your office is notified, sometimes you respond with relief depending on what you have in your stores, sometimes you do not. 

What arrangement do you have with the Ministry of Agriculture and its agencies to give priority to these disaster stricken sub-counties? Maybe we could see more special releases from NAADS for special planting seeds – we have not seen this. How do we cause it to be there such that as NAADS is planning, we have a disaster fund mainstreamed into their main budget? 

3.21
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am following up on these matters of disasters and I think by now the Office of the Prime Minister should be aware that there is a food crisis in Teso. The pregnant women of Teso eat termites and the ones of Kitgum eat herbs. Some of them are eating rats. That for me is very serious! And so on top of these disasters we are talking about, for example, schools are being blown away. If, as my colleague hon. Katuntu says, that they had enough food to influence the NRM primaries, can’t they find food to help the pregnant women who are feeding on termites and herbs? I thought that the Office of the Prime Minister would have responded appropriately. I know that the statement will come tomorrow. 

Yesterday, we tried to identify with this matter and we got an “appropriate response” from the Government of Uganda. Can’t there be an appropriate response to salvage the starving people of Teso? We are hungry and there is money with the Government of Uganda to feed all of us. Besides, one of my colleagues in this House once said that the people of Teso were being punished by God for voting badly. This time President Museveni is said to have won in Teso; can’t he feed the people who gave him that vote, if they indeed gave him that vote? (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, just a brief note. A while ago, hon. Katuntu was saying that food is used as a political weapon. Now hon. Alaso is saying, “Feed these people because they voted for you.” This is now a contradiction which should be obvious to all of us –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no! Hon. Minister, the thing is that hon. Alaso has said they have a problem of food. Can’t you organise food and send to them? You can ignore other comments. Look into the matter and find a solution.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, let me inform this House that as we talk now, hon. Ecweru is in the Teso sub-region - but I also want this House to give the number of pregnant women who are eating termites -(Hon. Anywar rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I think the point hon. Alaso is making is that the situation in the area is bad and food is needed. What you have to do is to look into this matter and do what you can instead of prolonging these exchanges. You have to investigate and see what to do.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I want to assume that we all know that a good government should be responsible and very sensitive to its people’s needs. 

Secondly, if my assumption is wrong, is hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere in order to be so insensitive to pregnant women as though he had ever been pregnant and starving? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think hon. Kabwegyere’s impression is that you are exaggerating the situation. But I am suggesting that the ministry investigates this matter and sends relief to Teso to stop the suffering.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, hon. Alaso raised this very matter here on the Floor last week and it was instantly taken up by the Prime Minister. As we speak now, there is a team on the ground in the districts of Teso and Kayunga where there is such a problem. We shall be receiving a report this week and corrective measures – pertinent interventions – will be made and we shall keep you updated on the progress we are making to ensure that this problem is dealt with. Thank you.

PRESENTATIONOF PAPERS

ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION, JULY 2009 – JUNE 2010

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker, the Health Service Commission is required under Article 170, clause 4 of the Constitution, to submit its annual performance report to Parliament as part of accountability for its performance and the appropriated resources. Accordingly, I beg to lay on the Table the annual performance report of the Health Service Commission for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

THE SPEAKER: Let the relevant committee undertake study of the report and make an appropriate report to Parliament.

ANNUAL REPORT, 2010 OF THE MEDIA COUNCIL

3.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, the Media Council is required by law to submit to Parliament an annual report so that Parliament can be in a position to closely study the activities of the Media Council. I, therefore, lay before Parliament the Annual Report, 2010, of the Media Council.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the relevant committee study the report and make its report to Parliament promptly.

THE ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010

3.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table five reports of the Auditor-General. The first one, volume 1, is the Annual Report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2010 – Performance Report of the Office of the Auditor-General. 

The second one is Volume 2 and it is about the Central Government for the same year ended 30 June 2010; Volume 3 is about the Local Government Authority for the year ended 30 June 2010; Volume 4 is about Statutory Corporations for the year ended 30 June 2010; and Volume 5 is about value for money for the same year ended 30 June 2010.

I would like to ask Members to read the copies because the reports help us understand how the budget for the Financial Year 2009/2010, which we appropriated, was utilised. And most likely you might be able to realise that hon. Stephen Mallinga is supposed to be hanged. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the relevant committee study the report and report to the House promptly.

STATEMENT ON BWINDI IMPENETRABLE FOREST

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TOURISM) (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Speaker, the statement on Bwindi Impenetrable Forest is not ready. I request that my ministry be allowed to present it on 19 April 2011.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is allowed.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, after I raised this matter, I later on received a copy of a letter from the Government Chief Whip to the Minister of Trade and Tourism asking him to have this statement ready. This issue of Bwindi was raised on the same day when we raised that of oil governance. And shortly after that, the minister for oil and energy development made his statement, but now when it comes to the Minister of Trade and Tourism, excuses are coming for there being no statement.

Mr Speaker, you remember I made a statement to the effect that this issue affects the people of Kisoro who are not represented in this House, but whom I am ably representing because they are my neighbours. So, is it because there is no Kisoro representative in this House that you are now dilly-dallying with this statement to deny them justice?

The Minister must make a commitment as to when he will deliver that statement. The people of Kisoro and Kigezi generally are waiting for it and I know that hon. Rukundo understands that very well. I would like to move that the next commitment be for real.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is a commitment that on 19 April, a statement will be delivered to the House.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, it has become a common practice that each time there is an issue on the Order Paper, a number of ministers report being unprepared. In that regard, let me inquire: before an issue is put on the Order Paper, isn’t there any consultation that is made with the responsible minister to find out how prepared that minister is? I am saying this because it is not fair for a Parliament to have an issue on the Order Paper and the minister comes to just say, “No, I am not ready.” 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, let me add something to what hon. Epetait has just said. This is not the first time such a thing is happening. We actually experienced a similar problem last week. Anyway, in that regard, may I take this opportunity to recognize those ministers that have been very efficient in responding to some of these issues? One of such ministers is the Minister of Education and Sports. I know for sure that if a matter is raised, hon. Bitamazire does not take a week. (Applause) Hon. David Wakikona will always deliver his statements immediately a question is put to him. I also know that hon. Ruth Nankabirwa usually does the same. Also in that line are: hon. Matia Kasaija, hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga, hon. Aggrey Awori, but the rest – (Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, is hon. Okupa in order to insinuate that I have ever come to this House when I am unprepared? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well –

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I beg to withdraw the order. (Laughter) I didn't know he was appreciating my efficiency.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga was one of those ministers whose efforts I was appreciating, but now that he seems not have been alert, he might prompt me to withdraw my appreciation. (Laughter) 

Anyway, those ministries that have been very effective in giving timely responses to issues with statements – I don’t want to name those who haven’t been responding in time, for example, there was no report from the State Minister for Disaster - you can name the others. I would like to appreciate those ministers who have been very active. I would like to appeal to our other colleagues on the Front Bench to emulate those others. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, last week I raised the issue of radioactive materials in goods that are coming from Japan and you directed that the Minister of Trade and Tourism makes a statement tomorrow, Wednesday. I hope that minister will be ready with a statement on pre-shipment inspection and the safety of goods coming from Japan tomorrow. I also hope he will not ask for more time to present it on another day because the situation in regard to radioactive materials is very serious in the entire world.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To add on to what other Members have said about the issue of Bwindi Forest, I would like to point out that last week, after we debated a similar issue on the Namanve Forest Reserve I was taken aback when we said that the Minister for Water and Environment was not being able to visit Namanve. We got an assurance from the Minister of Internal Affairs that there was no minister who could fail to visit wherever they wanted to go to due to insecurity. He went on to promise on the Floor of Parliament that should the Minister of Water and Environment want to visit Namanve Forest Reserve, he would provide full security. 

It was again a shame for me to see the government minister literally being chased away by veterans when she went to visit Namanve. No statement has been made on how a government minister can be enabled to reach his or her place of work and yet we have a whole security department in this country. I would like you to put to task the minister concerned as to why they put the government ministers at risk of attack by veterans and how they are not assisting the sitting ministers to report here. Possibly because they are not able to do their work, they are doing a disservice to this country. We would like this to be on record and we need that assurance that ministers of government will have security and more particularly that the Minister of Water and Environment can access that place and make an on-spot assessment. Otherwise, I see that there is a big risk to government ministers and I do not see how the government is coming up to protect its ministers. It is a shame!

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, the minister is not in the House. We do not want to rely on hearsay. She will make a statement when she comes. Thank you.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM)

(Debate continued.)

(Whereupon members of the Opposition withdrew from the Chamber.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us proceed with the report.

3.44 
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will not take Parliament to be a conference. I believe Parliament is a place where ideas are exchanged and if you are defeated, you sit down and listen and maybe tomorrow you will also defeat others. I would have hoped for my colleagues on the other side of the House to have stayed here – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, continue with your debate. We cannot harp on this every day. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I want to proceed to debate and to add my voice to those who have said that PAC has the mandate of examining the Auditor-General’s report under rule 148(2). 

When you look at the report, you find that in many instances although it had good intentions, PAC did much of political work. On the area of Shimoni, for example, fees were being collected from private exhibitors. This matter did not surface at all in the Auditor-General’s report. I did not understand where the Public Accounts Committee got this mandate to pick issues, which were not raised by the Auditor-General’s report. The committee took it upon themselves to audit, make a report and even went ahead to examine it. To me this was a political inclination, to look for certain individuals who were politically supervising this area. 

The other issue in the Public Accounts Committee report is that they accuse the hon. Member, the then Minister of Local Government, Hope Mwesigye, on issues of procuring contracts for decorators. When you look at the documents which were presented to the committee, you discover that this aspect was handled ably by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and never at any one moment did procurement go under her supervision. 

There is also a prime witness called Rhoda Kaisho. She made a presentation and her evidence was disregarded by the Public Accounts Committee. They went ahead to make a report against the honourable minister that she was responsible for procuring decorators during the CHOGM event. I find this as some kind of witch hunt by the Public Accounts Committee. If they were interested in who was responsible for any loss incurred, they would have gone to the officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who were in charge of procuring these contracts.

Mr Speaker, I therefore, want to move a motion that this House finds no merit –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. The Member, whom I ably know as a good orator, is standing up to read a motion that we have not had the pleasure and opportunity of sharing or having circulated in this House. I have been at pains listening to him as he uses words which are very unfamiliar to him. I have also seen him with notes in his hand. Is he procedurally right to proceed on a motion and read from notes?

THE SPEAKER: He is making a conclusion as a result of his submission. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: By way of motion, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Well, he is just concluding and he says that as far as he has reviewed the evidence, he does not think there is merit.

MR SSEKIKUBO: So, there is no motion?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when are we going to conclude this report?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I know that the honourable member seeking your procedural guidance knows that I can move an oral motion under our Rules of Procedure. 

I want to proceed to move a motion that we find no considered evidence in this Public Accounts Committee report against the name and the person of the hon. Minister, Hope Mwesigye, and hereto expunge from the report issues that seem to be political to the name of the hon. Minister of Local Government by then, who did her job very well. Even up to today when you go – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I have been making efforts to restrain myself because of the way the honourable member is proceeding. He is doing exactly what the hon. Minister, who is able and is in this House, ought to be doing. Is it a transmission of what transpired in a committee where hon. Tinkasiimire was representing a Cabinet minister over a supplementary budget? Is he extending it to this House when we even have the minister who ought to stand up and say, “My position is this”? He seems to be imputing intentions and putting words in the mouth of the minister. Is the member procedurally right to proceed and plant words in the minister’s mouth?

THE SPEAKER: I think the member is a Member of Parliament entitled to comment on reports submitted to Parliament. He does not have to consult so and so to be able to make his position. We are not saying these are merits or supporting it, but this is his conclusion based on what he has seen in the report. He does not have to consult the relevant minister because when he consults then that will be collusion.

MR BANYENZAKI: I can see my friend, hon. Tinkasiimire, moving a motion and putting your chair, Mr Speaker, in a difficult situation. The procedural concern I want to raise is: when I count the numbers in this House, we are about 22 and he is moving a motion which will require you to put a question and yet he knows we do not have quorum. So, why doesn’t he restrain himself and not move that motion which requires you to put a question because we do not have quorum. Mr Speaker, can you guide us on whether we have the numbers to decide on this issue?

THE SPEAKER: A motion can be put to debate and when it comes to putting the question, I can postpone putting the question if the requisite number is not there. If you look at our Rules of Procedure, we can debate but then you leave it to me because I can listen and then say, “Maybe we continue tomorrow”. I can listen to your contributions, otherwise we would stop here but the Rules of Procedure allow us to debate. We can start debating a matter even when we are 80 but what matters is when we are going to make a decision. That is when I will look at the quorum issue. These are the rules.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. For avoidance of doubt, I am moving under rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure, sub-rule (1) that seeks the leave of the Speaker to move an oral motion. There was a lot of political witch-hunting on the side of the Public Accounts Committee to go ahead and stretch their mandate, for example including in their report issues to do -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, when a member moves a motion orally under rule 40(1) of these rules, the rules require that he puts it in writing and gives at least three clear days. Is it, therefore, procedurally correct for the member to proceed to move a motion -

THE SPEAKER: There is no need to give notice when you are debating a matter and you reach a conclusion. You do not write a motion and then serve it. This is a general debate on a report where we reach and make a conclusion. He is just participating in the debate on the report and making his conclusion by saying, “I see this.” This is what he is saying. Hon. Members, are we going to spend years on this report?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I will follow the guidance of the Speaker and not the guidance of heckling honourable members. You heard for yourselves and this is on record. This is a House where we exchange ideas not heckles. 

Mr Speaker, I am one of those people who feel disturbed when I find a person politically witch-hunting another. This is why I disagree with the Public Accounts Committee stretching their mandate on the fees that were collected from Shimoni exhibitors and they say these were taken by hon. Hope Mwesigye. The Auditor-General, even if the report would be brought here, did not at any one moment refer to this. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, if hon. Tinkasiimire is moving a motion, before he even moves the motion he is now debating. Can he move the motion, it is seconded and then he debates his motion? Let us follow the rules. He does not want to be advised and he does not want to be guided. Let us follow the right procedure. Bring the motion and then we debate it later when it has been seconded, but he is now debating a motion which he has not put before the House.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it appears to me you are tired. When are you going to conclude this? It is hanging over our heads and people are making a number of conclusions. As I told you, we are not acquitting anybody with this report. When they disagree, it is a disagreement with the recommendations. I told you if somebody has committed an offence, there are procedures of dealing with that person. Our handling this report is not a stop to other agencies of Government, be it CID or IGG, to take up the matter if there is evidence and then they will lay charges against them. You should be conversant with Article 164 of the Constitution.

It is our duty to explain to the public. The public has been told that Parliament is acquitting people. We are not acquitting; we are just considering the report of our committee on the Auditor-General’s report and these provisions are there. Article 164 is on accountability; let me read it: 

“(1) The permanent secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for funds in that ministry or department. 

(2) Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from the use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold the office.” 

There is an assessment of the loss supposing there is political interference and that is handled somewhere else. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, I will need your guidance because when considering –

THE SPEAKER: But let us not dramatize this thing; let us explain to our constituents our role in this, our limitations and also tell them that there are other agencies of Government to handle acquittal. As I have told you, this Parliament cannot acquit.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, I am just seeking your guidance. I think the role of Parliament when considering a report of PAC that is made according to the Auditor-General’s report is explained in Article 163 (5). In my view, our role is to debate, consider the report and take appropriate action. So, are we really doing what the Constitution mandates us to do - to debate, consider the report and take appropriate action? 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, on the Order Paper it says “considering and adopting”. Considering means that you are scrutinising and debating it and at the end of the day you make a conclusion by adopting it. The report can be adopted as presented or it can be adopted subject to adjustments here and there. It can also be adopted by accepting one thing and rejecting another and then you adopt it subject to what you have found out.
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. With your guidance, you have said that our role is to adopt the report but there are statements to the effect that we would like to adopt on the one hand and on the other we want to expunge. Is it not appropriate that once we have received this report, then we can adopt it and then refer it to other agencies of Government that ought to take the necessary steps to look into the nitty-gritty issues and also conclude it in one way or the other? 

THE SPEAKER: When you look at the item, “consideration and adoption”, consideration does not mean looking at the book and adopting it. Consideration means going deep into the content of the report and then subject to your findings, you adopt it. So, there is scrutiny which we have to do on the report because it is our report. 

The committee is doing a good job but it is doing it on our behalf. After considering it, we put our seal, which is adopting. However, we may decide that we are not adopting and request the committee to take it back and look at certain items. We could even decide to set up an ad hoc committee that will look into it and give us a report on a particular subject and then we adopt it. However, we are going to adopt the report whether wholly as it was presented or as adjusted. This is what is happening. 

We are not convicting because acquittal and conviction are terms which run hand–in-hand. We could just say, “We agree with the recommendations but maybe these recommendations may have to be pushed somewhere else.” 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Since this Parliament is guided by precedents, indeed there was a precedent to this. We had a similar report that was referred to other organs of Government; isn’t it appropriate that at this point in time, we moved the motion to refer –

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think I get what you are talking about. You are talking about the National Social Security Fund and the land at Temangalo. What happened was that again we said, “We have trespassed on somebody’s mandate. The mandate of handling this kind of business is, by Constitution, on the IGG; why should we trespass?” But then people said, “Oh! It is our duty to explain our role - what we do and what we do not do.”   

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, can I move a motion under rules 46(1)(a) and 46 (2) of the Rules of Procedure and in view of the provisions of Article 163(5) of the Constitution? The motion is that Parliament, having debated and considered the report, takes appropriate action by urging the Executive arm of Government to refer the matters raised in the CHOGM report to other institutions and report to this House on the progress of the action? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: There must have been a rehearsal, but can you say what you want to say? 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, in my very considered view, unlike reports of other committees, the report of the Public Accounts Committee, which is handed over to it by the Clerk under rule 148(3) of our Rules, seems to have an entrenched provision in the Constitution. The effect is that the mandate of Parliament when considering  the findings and recommendations of the Auditor-General on which PAC makes its report are limited to debating, considering and taking appropriate action. Accordingly, in my view, actions that tend to rescind the findings of the Auditor-General would in effect have a negative impact on what taking appropriate action would mean. 

Therefore, it is my humble prayer that Parliament considers and adopts the report of the Public Accounts Committee and the action it should take is to recommend to the Executive arm of Government to forward this report in its entirety to its other organs to implement and then report to this Parliament on the progress of the implementation of the findings of the Auditor-General. It is my view that this Parliament cannot vary the findings of the Auditor-General so sent to the Public Accounts Committee.  So, I beg that this motion be allowed even without debate. 

4.09
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I find this motion with merit and properly constructed with good intentions. As parliamentarians, I think that we need to support this motion because this is a report from the Auditor-General and the Auditor-General does his job on behalf of Parliament. So, we also need to look into what the Auditor-General has brought before us and the only noble cause we can do, as Parliament, is to refer this matter. 

If we find that there are issues which need to be investigated, then we can refer this report to the IGG and the other organs that can handle this issue. Otherwise, if we proceed and maybe decide to expunge the names of the people mentioned and the private companies mentioned, in essence it would be rendering this report useless and it would be a vote of no confidence in our Auditor-General who is an officer of Parliament. So, Mr Speaker, the motion that hon. Niwagaba has moved is to say that we refer this report to the appropriate organ. 

It is good that most of the Members, other than my friend, hon. Beti Kamya, are all from the NRM Party. Our President and the chairman of our party, who usually guides in all these matters, has come up clearly to advise as such. So, we take an opportunity as Members of Parliament and as members of the NRM committed to fighting corruption to refer this matter to the IGG, the DPP and these other organs. We are not committing anybody; we are not saying that hon. Hope Mwesigye committed a crime - 

THE SPEAKER: Allow me to remind you that when we started considering this report, I think one of the members of the committee, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, brought a motion suggesting that we abandon this matter and she wondered whether we could send it to the Police or the CID. Your reaction was that we should do our work and other things would come later and this is what we did. Are you trying to go back to that decision which you made? I know it is on record, as hon. Cecilia Ogwal suggested. 

Hon. Banyenzaki, you should note that this motion which is before us starts with “considering”. Maybe it should have been “Receiving, considering and adopting…” In the process of consideration, you would get a big marker and read paragraph by paragraph and start crossing out. 

We are going to move up to the end; are you suggesting rescinding? Are you suggesting that we should remove the crosses and instead put a tick? Consideration means that you put a tick or a cross and at the end of day, you add up the crosses and the ticks and adopt it subject to the ticks or the cross marks. This is what we are doing. However, if you now feel that it is a long exercise and we should send this – and it has nothing to do with rescinding - we can say “Yes, let us send it up to this stage.” If you feel at this stage that we cannot convict and yet you want to convict, then let us send it to the agencies that have demanded to take somebody to court, have him convicted or acquitted. I think that is what we were doing but we cannot rescind. Under what powers can we change what we decided soberly?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, according to my colleague, hon. Niwagaba – 

THE SPEAKER: Since this was in print, maybe he should have distributed it by the time he came here and we would have considered it to see what to do with the motion, but it was kept secret. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I think the issue of rescinding seems not to –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: I can explain it better. When you read Article 163(5), when Parliament is considering the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s report, my considered opinion is that we cannot vary the findings of the Auditor-General. The best we can do is consider, debate and take action – actually the catch phrase is “take appropriate action”. 

In taking appropriate action, this Parliament cannot constitute itself into an institution that gives penalties but I believe that the most appropriate action that Parliament can take on such recommendations of the Auditor-General is to forward them through the Executive arm of Government to other institutions and then we can get a report on what has been done. That is my honest consideration, which I looked at and which we – 

THE SPEAKER: The treasurer has a document which he issues; are you aware of that? Is that the appropriate action you are referring to? I think we have not reached that stage. After considering the report, we shall reach that stage. Don’t you want us to consider the report as a whole? Please explain.

MR NIWAGABA: Of course, I want the whole report as it is. Actually, my biggest concern was with the way Parliament was moving to remove aspects of the Auditor-General’s report as if we were actually valuing it. It is my considered opinion that we do not have the power or authority – 

THE SPEAKER: Are we considering the Auditor-General’s report or are we considering the report of the Public Accounts Committee?

MR NIWAGABA: It is the report of the Public Accounts Committee made on the Auditor-General’s report.

THE SPEAKER: The two are different. What we are considering is the report of the Public Accounts Committee, which has studied the Auditor-General’s report. Otherwise, if you think it is the Auditor-General’s report, then we should have adopted it as soon as it was tabled.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In relation to Mr Niwagaba’s submission, what we are trying to drive at is that once we proceed in this manner, there are other agencies of Government like the IGG and DPP, who at a certain point in time will also come here in Parliament and start saying that the way he proceeded to handle this matter to determine the prosecution of a certain case was not proper or was not appropriate. Emanating from this we can start now looking even at what the IGG’s report and his conduct of business. It is from that perspective that I would propose that we proceed with the motion. We have the report now in our hands; let us refer it to the appropriate agencies, which are going to take over from where Parliament has ended.

THE SPEAKER: Am I correct to understand that what you are saying is that we should refer the Auditor-General’s report to the CID and maybe IGG? Are you talking about the Auditor-General’s report - because now we are considering PAC report; which report of the two are you referring to? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, as you may appreciate, the PAC report emanates from the Auditor-General’s report and the report of the Auditor-General is accompanied by the one of PAC and it forms one unit. It is from that perspective that where they find fit to take up some and drop others and proceed the way they want.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard the submissions of hon. Niwagaba and hon. Banyenzaki.

4.20
MS BETI KAMYA (Rubaga Division North, Kampala): As you can see, my colleagues on this side of the House have walked out because we had agreed to walk out. I apologise to my colleagues for not walking with them. My decision is based on the fact that in the past five years since I entered this House, we have walked out about four or five times but it is always business as usual in our absence and when we walk back in, nobody even notices. I have found it difficult to repeat for the fifth time an action that has not yielded results for four times.

I have decided not to seek re-election to come back to this House. This is because I feel that I have not done anything useful. I want to advise my colleagues on both sides of the House who are usually so aggrieved with what is going on, to garner the courage to walk out and stay out for good. That will tell the world that what is happening in this country is so bad. That will tell the world we have tried everything and failed. When we go to the House, we are outnumbered; when we go to the streets, we are tear-gassed; when we walk quietly, we are told that we cannot walk. I think that a louder voice would be when people who are aggrieved walk out and stay out. 

We must raise the level of our communication to the people, to Government and to the world. We must communicate by raising the level of sacrifice for the good of this country. By walking in and out, we are legitimising a Government we call illegitimate.

We keep saying that those people out there are given money to vote and legitimise an election but we come here and get salary to legitimise what we call a one party state.

I do not know whether people like hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire know how people are hurting out there. They know that money was lost and now they hear somebody talking of expunging parts of the report making it a non-issue; this hurts them! They pay so much money to make us sit here, they pay so much to have activities like CHOGM, and they pay so much money to buy us the cars we are driving. 

We need to be sensitive to the people out there. We have lost touch with the people. If we consider Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, the people of Uganda are still at level one - they are crying for food - and the people in Government are at level five - they are crying for self-actualisation. 

We need to reconnect with the people. This is why I am supporting the motion on the Floor that the report is adopted by Parliament and passed on to the relevant organs of Government to take appropriate action or report to Parliament with recommendations about the appropriate action. We need to raise the level of accountability. Accountability is not about bringing receipts but also the money used by PAC and the Auditor-General’s office to investigate this mess. We need to raise the level of appreciating accountability for the benefit of our people.

THE SPEAKER: There is some clarification that you have to make. Some holes have been put in the report since we started considering it. Are you talking about the report as it is now or as it was originally presented? Should we forget the debate and actions taken before?

MS KAMYA: I am debating the motion on the Floor based on my understanding.

THE SPEAKER: Are you supporting the motion for the report as it is now or how it was then because some things have been crossed out?

MS KAMYA: If you want me to discuss the report, then I can.

THE SPEAKER: You may not know this because you were on national duties. The position is that when they started considering the report, certain things were crossed out. The status quo as it is now is that some pages were pulled out.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: You had asked a very fundamental question which I think that the movers of this motion did not understand. They do not know whether we are talking about the Auditor-General’s report or the PAC one. I have read both of them and the two documents are totally different. To highlight the issue of Shimoni exhibitors, for example, the issue of the fees that were collected from them was not raised anywhere in the Auditor-General’s report but it appears in the Public Accounts Committee report that was laid on the Table. That is why we are saying we should proceed to consider the Public Accounts Committee report that in a way imported issues that the Auditor-General did not consider. 

I have cited that when they were examining the Auditor- General’s report, they did a commendable job but they were politically motivated to bring down some individuals. Even this motion being brought here today is here to target a particular person -(Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. My name is Ssekikubo Theodore, the seconder of the motion. As hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire knows, we are trying as Parliament to come to grips with the way forward with this report we have in our hands. Is the member procedurally right to impute that the entire motion of competent members of this House can only target one individual very well aware that there is no nexus whatsoever between me or any minister? 

Can the honourable member, therefore, substantiate his claims by naming the particular minister he is referring to and what kind of malice aforethought we could have been harbouring by moving this motion in a competent manner?

THE SPEAKER: Before I answer that, hon. Members, do you think I should adjourn so that some of you meet? You can meet hon. Niwagaba and the others, and I think their view is that we end the debate by making a resolution to send it to other Government agencies. Do you think we should continue debating or you want some time?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I am one of the people in this world who do not fear and my conscience tells me that when you follow the activities of the movers of this motion, they are the same people who subscribed themselves to the Public Accounts Committee when they were examining the Auditor-General’s report before they laid it on the Table. Even then, they were interested in a particular minister and this is the hon. Minister, Hope Mwesigye.

MR SSEKIKUBO: But it is extremely beyond any human endurance to listen to him making such -

THE SPEAKER: Why do you think they were targeting the hon. Minister?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: If I am even given more time, I will bring overwhelming evidence on the Floor of this House that the movers of this motion have made it and have taken it upon themselves to look for this particular minister at any time she comes into the public area.

MR BANYENZAKI: My colleague, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, said he had evidence which he is ready to table on the Floor of the House. So at this moment, would it not be appropriate for hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire to bring that evidence he has to say that our motion targets hon. Hope Mwesigye when actually hon. Hope Mwesigye is not even mentioned anywhere in our motion? If he is saying that he has evidence and he cannot lay that evidence on the Table, he either withdraws those remarks or you direct that he should not be heard any more because his contribution is not substantive at all and it is not helping this House.

THE SPEAKER: I think he was still contributing to substantiate what he was saying. Let us give him time to finish and then we shall see.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: On this particular matter concerning the movers of this motion, I will stand my ground and say that just give me sufficient time and I will lay on the Table sufficient evidence to prove that they are looking for this particular minister.

THE SPEAKER: How much time do you need? (Laughter) Maybe he has documents which are in his office, I do not know.

MR SSEKIKUBO: We can allow him 10 minutes as we proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I give you 15 minutes. You go and we shall resume this.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I have a lot of evidence that I cannot just bring it within 15 minutes. I will need like two days because –(Interjections)- this is a motion -

THE SPEAKER: But you cannot be able to – three people standing at the same time.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, you have given a directive and your directive is not challengeable. Hon. Tinkasiimire says he has evidence and you have given him 15 minutes. His office is just up here. Is he in order, having been given sufficient time to table his evidence by none other than you, the Speaker of this House, to start pleading with you and challenging you that that time is not enough? Is it also in order for hon. Tinkasiimire, who knows that he actually has no evidence, to try and buy time? 

THE SPEAKER: Proceedings suspended up until 5.00 pm prompt.

(The proceedings were suspended at 4.40 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 5.02 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Let us continue with the debate. Are you in position? If you cannot, then you withdraw and then next time if you have it, you bring it.

5.02
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I would like to submit that the evidence that I have I could not reach it in the time that you gave me and without derailing the debate on the report of the Public Accounts Committee, I will abandon that argument and proceed with my motion -

HON. MEMBERS: Withdraw.
 
THE SPEAKER: He has withdrawn. That is okay.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, you know these are my very good friends but they are turning Parliament into a theatre. It is not in my interest to come here to act when the people of Buyaga -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tinkasiimire, you are withdrawing the reference that the motion by hon. Niwagaba was intended for hon. Hope Mwesigye. That is what you have done.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I have given the background to my submission and I have withdrawn. 

To proceed, I would ask this House that we proceed with the debate on the report of the Public Accounts Committee because that is what we are considering not the Auditor-General.

The motion which was brought by my colleague was intended to derail us and to buy time in debating this report and bringing out all the inaccuracies. As I had earlier mentioned, in the Auditor-General’s report, which they want Parliament to adopt -

THE SPEAKER: But please, we have limited time. Please, wind up.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: The report did not anywhere refer to the fees collected from the Shimoni exhibitors. More so, I would have expected the Public Accounts Committee to look for these people, particularly the technical persons who were spending this money and put them to task and not to look for ministers who had nothing to do with the money that was taken. After all, with the evidence that we have - I use the roundabout of Kubbiri when I am going home. I have seen the beauty that has subsisted from CHOGM up to this time and nobody can remove that. That beauty on Kubbiri roundabout was put there during the CHOGM time.

The beauty that is at the roundabout of Kibuye is a result of the CHOGM occasion. So, it is not relevant for us at this time to witch-hunt Members politically and this is why I moved a motion that we wind up the debate on the CHOGM report by removing the names of political leaders that had been referred to, including the name of hon. Mwesigye, hon. Byabagambi, hon. Rukundo and others. I beg to submit.

5.09
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to oppose the motion to amend, by way of rescission, the decisions taken by this Parliament on the PAC report and the reasons I have are simple and straight forward.

First of all, what is before this Parliament for debate now is very clearly captured on the Order Paper which reads: “Consideration and adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting”. What is before Parliament and what we have debated in these many months is this PAC report. We are not debating the Auditor-General’s report. It is true, some aspects of this PAC report are based on the Auditor-General’s report but there are many that I know in this PAC report that are not mentioned either directly, indirectly or even remotely. Even someone sleeping could not possibly connect what they have here with the Auditor-General’s report.

One clear example is that in this Auditor-General’s report, Amama Mbabazi, in connection to any expenditure, is not mentioned anywhere but this PAC report is full of Amama Mbabazi and expenditure, which Parliament has already rejected. 

So, what is before this House is the PAC report. When you look at the rules and provisions which this motion is based on, Article 163(5) of the Constitution reads: “Parliament shall, within six months after the submission of the report referred to in clause (4) of this Article, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.” And clause (4) reads: “The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament, annually, a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause (3) of this Article for the financial year immediately preceding.” 

Therefore, this particular Article which the mover quotes is in reference to a matter that is not before Parliament. Therefore, it is misguided, it is mistaken and it is improper before this House. I would like to urge my colleagues to see through this. What they are doing has absolutely nothing to do with what we are debating.

In addition to that, the idea in this motion that the House directs the Executive to implement the findings and recommendations of the Auditor-General and reports on action taken every six months until the conclusion of the matter, for the reasons I have just given, clearly falls by the wayside because this House is not debating the Auditor-General’s report.

Mr Speaker, you made this point very clear and it is such an important point that I feel constrained to repeat it. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised a motion in essence similar to this. This motion was debated and this House pronounced itself on it. I do not remember the exact rule; I will look for it, but I know the principle that in this House, when a question is put and it is negatived, no further debate on a similar question will be entertained by this House. Why should we continue to debate something that this House had not only debated but had also clearly pronounced itself on?

The Auditor-General’s report or the PAC report do not in any way hinder the performance of agencies of state in investigating criminal action. In fact, Article 227 states: “The Inspectorate of Government shall be independent in the performance of its functions and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority and shall only be responsible to parliament.”

The same applies with the DPP; they do not have to wait for Parliament to debate and take a position. They perform their duties as they are mandated to do by the Constitution of Uganda. I have absolutely no doubt that they are doing so even in this case. 

We are nearly at the end of the consideration of this report. We have gone over it; we have looked at all the personalities, we have looked at all the recommendations and we are simply remaining with three ministers, whose cases had not been considered. These ministers are: hon. Mwesigye, hon. Rukundo and hon. Byabagambi. For anyone to suggest that Parliament does not conclude the debate of this report along the path we have taken, in tandem with the decisions we have taken all along, is suggestive of a motive – maybe this is aimed at these three ministers [HON. MEMBERS: “Evidence.”] You do not have to ask me to go and look for evidence; the evidence is apparent, it is clear. There are many ministers named. We have debated all these and pronounced ourselves on each one of them. Now that there are only three remaining, you come up. What logical conclusion would any serious mind draw –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Minister for giving way. When you read our motion you will notice that we say that we rescind the action taken. For example, some of the ministers whose names have been expunged – let the House take a decision so that your names still stand in the report. 

We are not suggesting that we leave out some. We are saying that even those who were cleared should be considered. The Rt Hon. Speaker has ably guided this House and said, “We are not exonerating you”. Since we have not exonerated you, then let your name stay in the report because if you say that we expunge some names, that means that we have exonerated those people. So, the essence of our motion is that your names should also stand.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, hon. Banyenzaki has not grasped what I said. He is not getting my point, but it is alright, someone who understands it will explain to him. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. Hon. Banyenzaki competently participated in the drafting of the motion. Therefore, I do not doubt his competence and understanding; he understood it very well. The impute of the motion was, seeing the problems we have, grappling with the report where the House is divided on whether to expunge or retain some people, let us find a middle position. I think this is a win-win position and I thought the minister would even welcome it, so that we can wash our hands altogether and we leave this motion in the hands of competent organs of Government -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Is the minister imputing that I do not understand?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Certainly, I will not accept seizure of the Floor. I can see this habit cropping up. I am very well-known for this. Anyone who has a clarification or seeks to give me information, I always give way, but for someone to simply come in breach of the rules and seek to seize the Floor; it is absolutely unacceptable and I will not accept it!

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Minister to impute that I do not understand and yet I understand what he is saying, when I even seconded the motion on the Floor? I competently debated my motion and put my views before the House and while the Minister is trying to oppose the motion – the Minister said somebody else will explain to me the issues he is trying to say, yet I competently understand and debate these issues ably. Is it in order, therefore, for the Minister to tread on that dangerous path by threatening me and imputing that I do not understand when he is the one who is in the dock, now trying to explain himself and he does not understand the issues we are raising now? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: It was a question of doubting but I think you have justified that you understand. I think we can proceed. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not have any more evidence to deliver. The fundamental point I am making is that this motion is incompetent before this House. It is irregular. It is not in conformity with the rules. The matter of debate is not the Auditor-General’s report but the PAC report. I am further stating that at the tail end, for this House to adopt a motion like this, it would in effect be construed to be aimed at –(Mr Niwagaba rose_)- I want to conclude my sentence and give way.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, our rules are clear. He is the one to yield the Floor. If he has refused, what do I do?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, the problem is that some Members in this House simply blew up –

THE SPEAKER: This is what I have said. You are the one. He is not yielding. Hon. Members, for information and clarification, it is the person holding the Floor who has to allow you and not the Speaker. These are our rules. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I was saying that for us to adopt it - first of all, it would be in breach of the rules. 

Secondly, this motion is about a matter which is not before the House. 

Thirdly, if we were to adopt it, it would be construed to be aimed at the three particular individuals whose names were the only ones remaining in the report. I will take the clarification. 

5.28
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the fact that the motion moved by hon. Niwagaba should not be considered by this House. I would like to thank PAC for the work they did. PAC put in a lot of time on this issue that was in the papers, that was everywhere, to produce a report. This debate has generated a lot of anxiety and concern in Uganda and outside. Therefore, PAC has to be thanked for the work they did.

We should also realise that committees should also perform their duties diligently. The recommendations they raised should be sustained in argument and in substance because once that is not done, we create a lot of gaps which anybody can fill at will. When we were debating this report, it came out clearly that the mandate of the committees should be accurately streamlined so that we know exactly where the information the committee uses should come from. Maybe, we set the rules that in case you are not used to – for instance, if PAC is not to use the Auditor-General’s report, which other sources of information should it use to generate whatever conclusions can be drawn?

Therefore, I just want to move that the PAC report on the Special Audit Report of the Auditor-General of CHOGM, 2007 be adopted by this Parliament but with some amendments. (Applause). Allow me to spell out some of the amendments that should be made before we adopt this report. 

The political leaders who were mentioned in the report - and we have deliberated and realised that some of the issues were not properly dealt with - should be removed from this report, especially those who did not get the opportunity to explain or whom Parliament did not give the opportunity to discuss in detail some of the issues they raised. These include hon. Rukundo, hon. Byabagambi and hon. Mwesigye.

In addition to that, I want to move that the other government officials who are adversely mentioned in the report be required to explain the circumstances of their actions relating to CHOGM to the satisfaction of the head of Public Service.

Another amendment I would like to raise is that the private companies and individuals who were adversely mentioned in the report should be expunged from the report. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Let her set the motion, then you will come later. Let her read the motion. Please, give her an opportunity to outline the motion then if you do not follow, ask. 

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Mr Speaker, our rules are very clear.  A motion can even be moved at any point during the debate and these issues I am raising are actually an argument against a motion that has already been tabled. 

One other amendment I would like to be considered is that the investigative arms and agencies of Government should be encouraged to carry out investigation into CHOGM as they deem fit and to the satisfaction of this country or these agencies should do their diligent work. (Mr Banyenzaki rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What guidance?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I understand and I can see my colleague is moving some amendments. Should we make it very clear that in essence, you are amending the motion on the Floor - because you seem to be bringing a motion? 

THE SPEAKER: She is amending a motion which was under debate.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. Another issue that I would like us to consider as Parliament is that Government should take corrective measures to address any mistakes committed in the process of hosting CHOGM and it is important that this Parliament should appreciate and commend this Government for hosting CHOGM successfully. 

The motion has been tabled on the Floor and I am against that motion by raising these issues which Parliament should adopt and -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Masiko for giving way. I am seeking clarification on two issues. The first one is in regard to the way she is proceeding: she has just said that she is opposing the motion already raised but at the same time she is saying she is moving to amend the same. I would like her to specifically be clear on the way she is proceeding.

Lastly, can she please -

THE SPEAKER: I think she is telling you that she is not comfortable with the motion as it is and, therefore, she is amending it in the way she is stating.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Which particular section?

THE SPEAKER: How many motions did we have here? We only have hon. Niwagaba’s motion and this is what she is amending.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, any amendment to a motion must be governed by our rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure and I want to be guided as to whether hon. Masiko has complied with rule 48 in proposing her amendment to the motion on the floor. If she has not complied with that rule, shouldn’t she be ordered to withdraw her submission from the record?

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to make it clear that I am against -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to read rule 48 you are talking about? 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, I understood hon. Masiko very well as she was trying to amend my motion by introducing her various proposals. When you read rule 48(3) the Member should have sought your permission to allow the amendment to my motion and that amendment would be put in writing and delivered to the Clerk.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the rule you read was 48. Sub-rule (1) says: “When any motion is under consideration in the House or in the Committee of the whole House, an amendment may be proposed to the motion if it is relevant to the motion.” What we are considering here is the Public Accounts Committee report which is before us. This is what you are also moving a motion on in respect of that one. She is also moving it in respect of the report we had but her approach is maybe different from yours. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I rise on a point of order, Mr Speaker, to really concretise the point I had made in my earlier presentation under rule 59(2) which reads: “It is out of order to attempt to reconsider any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during the current session.” 

THE SPEAKER: I thought you had stated this before.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am seeking your ruling because the point I was - 

THE SPEAKER: I told them the question of reconsidering a matter in respect of which we had already decided on does not arise. This is what I said. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, Mr Speaker, this motion has collapsed.

THE SPEAKER: But then why don’t we wait for the amendment which hon. Masiko is bringing and we see? Complete your amendment and then we see what to do. Should you want more time, what we can do is that -

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance. I was still proceeding with my comments and on this note I would like to move that we throw out hon. Niwagaba’s motion and using the issues that I have raised, we continue with the debate and bring it to a conclusion. I beg that hon. Niwagaba’s motion be thrown out. 

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made an amendment and it is now up to the House to accept your amendment and we debate that way and conclude. But I suspect you are tired -(Interjections)- and I am going to adjourn. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: It is clear, therefore, Mr Speaker, that the motion before the House now under debate is not the motion of hon. Niwagaba but is a substantive motion under item No.5 on the Order Paper, “Consideration and Adoption of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Commonwealth Heads of Governments Meeting.” That is the motion. Therefore, her motion and her amendments are in direct reference to this -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The way we proceed in this House is that you guide or you alert the clerk at Table to move to another item or you guide on a motion. Now the honourable minister is staging a coup in this House by himself introducing a motion, which is alien to the one that has been under discussion. Are we procedurally right to move from one motion before it is - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Masiko, you stood up to make a contribution. When you stood up to make a contribution, there was a motion by hon. Niwagaba and my understanding is that your contribution was to amend what was on the floor in respect of how to deal with the report. There were some common features in his amendment and in your amendment but with different approaches. I thought that was the motion and I would  suggest, for the Members to clearly understand, it is  better that you put it down in writing so that they follow it up and we, may be, conclude tomorrow because now I see the confusion coming in. 

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Speaker, I think we should follow your guidance. First, there is a motion by hon. Niwagaba. Let us vote on it because following what hon. Masiko was doing - hon. Masiko thought that the motion was out of the way and she was debating the report. Let us first pronounce ourselves on hon. Niwagaba’s motion then we continue with the report.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Niwagaba’s motion is substantially amended and so we are to vote on hon. Masiko’s proposed amendment on hon. Niwagaba’s motion. If she carries the day, then we go with hers or if she loses then we go with the other. This is because she is attempting to amend. Certain aspects of hon. Niwagaba’s motion are not within the Rules of Procedure. For instance, re-visiting decisions that we have made – these are out. The others we can leave – that is what we can do. Hon. Masiko, please write down your motion so that it is in writing.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking for leave of this House to amend the motion that I have seconded to remove the word “rescission” because it is the one being taken advantage of. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall expunge it because the rules do not – I told you when you read it first that you cannot do it. Why don’t we adjourn? Hon. Masiko, please put this in writing, amending his motion and we shall consider it tomorrow and decide. There is some kind of misunderstanding which I think has to be remedied by reading your written text.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to inform Members, especially chairpersons of sessional committees, that we have now received the National Budget Framework Paper. The books which are enough for all Members were brought yesterday and each can get a copy. However, they are too big to fit our pigeon holes. Therefore, I am requesting that each Member signs for a copy at the South Wing Reception so that we immediately begin on the process of reviewing the National Budget Framework Paper. We only have about ten days and I shall be presenting a schedule soon on how committees shall be presenting their reports to the Budget Committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do you agree that the first item on tomorrow’s Order Paper should be the CHOGM report? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] I appeal to the Cabinet that normally sits on Wednesdays to be here on time so that we deal with hon. Masiko’s motion. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.47 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 April 2011 at 2.30 p.m.)

