Thursday 19th April, 2001

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 1999

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that when considering this item, we went up to the end of the Bill but having stood over, I think two Clauses and that being the case I do not think for the time being we are in a position to proceed to deal with those two Clauses. I will suggest that we proceed to the next item if the Minister of Public Service is available.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES (SPECIFIED OFFICERS) ACT 1999

THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Amanya Mushega):  Mr. Speaker, I wish to move that in accordance with section 4(2) of the Salaries and Allowances Specified Officers Act 1999, in the second Schedule of the Act, be it amended in order to provided for the following:
Chairpersons of Commissions to be paid an allowance of 2,200,000 Shillings per month Housing allowance; Deputy Chairpersons of Constitutional Commissions 2,100,000 Shillings per month; and full time members of the Commissions the housing allowance of 2,000,000 Shillings per month. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: But, why do you not read out the motion so that if it is seconded, then you speak to it.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: The whole motion?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Whereas subsection (1) of section 4 of the Salaries and Allowances( Specified Officers) Act –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Is it 1 or 91?

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Subsection (1) of section 4 of the Act of 1999, provides that Specified Officers shall be paid such salaries and allowances and afforded such benefits as prescribed respectively, in relation to their offices in the second schedule to this Act; and

Whereas subsection 2 of section 4 of the Act provides that Parliament may by resolution amend a second schedule; and 

Whereas it is necessary that the second schedule be amended to provide for the housing allowances for the Chairperson, deputy Chairperson and full time members of the Commission established by the Constitution; 

Now therefore, be it resolved by the Parliament as follows: 
That in accordance with section 4(2) of the Salaries and Allowances Specified Officers Act, the Government is here by authorised to pay the following housing allowances to the Chairperson, deputy Chairperson and full time members of the Commission established by the Constitution.  

And the Second Schedule to the Act is amended accordingly as follows: The Chairperson of a Commission 2,200,000 Shillings per month, Deputy Chairperson 2,100,000 Shillings per month, and full time members the housing allowance of 2,000,000 per month; to be dated the 19th of April 2001. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Can you justify.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Mr. Speaker, this resolution was moved in this House and was withdrawn and referred for further consultations and after a wide ranging consultations including Members of this august House, I am bringing the resolution in its old form with justifications.  First of all, I would like to appreciate the concern of Parliament about the welfare of the public servants in general; and with this support really and if this support was of course accompanied by resources and I am glad the Minister in Charge of Planning is here, he will also ensure that resources accompany the wishes of the House; then we will be moving in a direction of paying handsomely all public servants. 

Two things have happened in my Ministry, the first one is to move away from rewarding people who make demands most, to rewarding people who deserve. And this was done by carrying out what we call job evaluation exercise, in other words, every job is weighed and then the payment will be made according to the weight of that job. They take into account things like, how long the course takes to qualify, the demand on the market, it is another subject I will- to this august House at a later stage.  

This means if somebody is doing research in Mulago and has no time to demonstrate, that person may get reward earlier than somebody who demonstrated and does a job less demanding. I will give you a vivid example; you may recall that some time back a lot of publicity was made that one called Ofwono, was the tallest man in the world.  But, there is a job evaluation instrument in the areas of height; so, they measure you and after measuring you they determine whether you are 8 ft or 5ft. When he was measured some people said he was discovered to be fairly tall, but not the tallest man in the world and the matter was put to rest.  

There was some hearsay also, where they measure who qualifies to hold certain offices by the qualifications you have; and some people were saying I will go with a huge number of demonstrators to demonstrate that I am qualified. But qualified to have O'Level or P.7 or A'Level, there is a job evaluation instrument in UNEB where they look at the papers you did, the course work you did, equivalents and they determine whether you have the height of A' Level the height of P.7.  You do not win by just saying I have a number of people behind me. You will by showing that you are above the measures given.

So, this will be assisting us now in rewarding as money becomes available those who deserve most, not those who demonstrate most. For example in 1990, doctors were earning more money than lawyers, then there was pressure on Government that without Judges you will not solve the problems and lawyers, the State Attorneys were paid more money than doctors. Eventually because of the job evaluation instrument, recently when we were doing rewards, the doctors were subsequently paid more than the lawyers, because the job evaluation instrument showed that the doctors are more in demand and are heavier than lawyers.

The second one is moving away from what earlier we had called collective suffering to selective awards. But these selective awards will also be based on the job evaluation instrument. If you do not have enough money to pay everybody, you pick a certain section of the Public Service and reward it. But do not reward it beyond what their height or their value is.  So, these will be assisting in having a rational approach to the award of allowances, salaries and other privileges to public servants.  

There was concern about the criteria for paying what is a seemingly big allowance to these Commissions.  First and foremost, the Constitution provides in all these respects for example the Uganda Land Commission, which is Article 238. “The salaries and allowances of the members of the Uganda land Commission shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund”.  If you look at the Public Service Commission, which applies to all other Commissions, it states clearly, “The emoluments of the members of the Commission shall be prescribed by Parliament and shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund”. 
 
In other words, as far as these groups that I am bringing before you are concerned, it is only Parliament, which determines what emoluments they will be paid. The other public servants are actually decided generally and they come within the general budget; but these ones the amounts to be paid, have to be decided by Parliament.  So, it is like when you are in charge, you have inherited your father's estate but you have your own children and you have paid school fees for one son and when the other son turns up that, I also need to go to school, you say but your nephews are not yet catered for.  

Obviously your first priority is your immediate family and the immediate family as far as allowances are concerned in the Constitution, are those provided for in the Constitution and where it is mandatory that only Parliament can award these officers the amount to be paid.  

There was also concern by some Members about the figure.  Now, I think it is Article 158 (1) of the Constitution which provides that once you have awarded a public servant a certain amount of money, you cannot reduce in relationship to that person, our hands are tied. Now, through the Act I have just quoted, the second Schedule, all the offices prescribed in the Constitution where Parliament has to decide how much they have to be paid, all those provided for equal work were paid housing allowances passed by this House. 

For example, the Chief Justice gets a fully furnished house; the Deputy Chief Justice gets housing allowance of 2.5 million shillings. The Principal Judge gets 2.3.  Those are provided for, were passed by this House.  Justice of the Supreme Court gets 2.2 and Justice of Court of Appeal gets 2.1 and the Judge of the High Court gets 2 million shillings per month. That is already prescribed for in this law.

Then the Commissions were left out for reasons I am not going into now, because at that time, the assumption was that Chairpersons of Commissions are equal to Ministers and Deputy Chairpersons are equal to Ministers of State.  There was this question of equalisation, which I mentioned now has been abandoned, each job is weighed on its own merit and give its own job evaluation and paid accordingly. Therefore, we have had difficulty and you passed some provision yesterday of attracting people of substance and integrity in the Commissions; Public Service Commission, Education Service Commission, Health Service Commission and other Commissions.  

In actual fact, the Education Service Commission listed some people who opted to become RDCs rather than members of the Commissions.  Yet these Commissions are the ones to be in charge of the recruitment, training, welfare and disciplining of the public servants, and where you have a 'Nyampara' worse off than the worker, then you have a problem in your business. So, we need to attract and retain people of high calibre. 

Yesterday you mentioned that, I think the chairperson of the Health Service Commission should be to the level of the Consultant, and I recall that the current chairperson of that Commission was actually a consultant when I was just graduating and to treat him at a level the same as the Under Secretary, a Medical Doctor will be unfortunate and will be getting laxed that the people in the Commissions and therefore, will have no capacity to control and manage the various services to which they are supposed to be in charge.

Secondly, having approved these provisions and left out, you cannot have a Member of Parliament say for Igara East, being paid a sitting allowance different from a Member of Parliament for Busiro. It will definitely create problems. So, the issue I am raising here is that, these Commissions the only thing we can do is to bring them to the level of the equivalence within the specified Officers Bill. Then subsequently, if it becomes in the wisdom of Parliament, let alone they can review this schedule to affect future Commissions, not the current Commissioners, because the current Commissioners actually, some of them are on the verge of leaving because they think they are being unfairly treated compared to their counterparts in other parts of the same Act.  

So, what we are doing today really, what we are requesting for, is to give equal treatment to people of equal status within the law that we ourselves have passed with a lot of concern. The issue of these Commissioners being looked after better than Ministers, is not a case anymore, because Ministers opted first and foremost, to be treated as Members of Parliament. This was resolved here. So, they are no longer getting housing allowance, getting transport allowance; they are just treated as Members of Parliament; which some Members think – so recently we brought to Cabinet to pay a small additional fee as a responsibility allowance for being a Minister.  

So, Ministers are no longer getting housing allowance, they are just paid as Members of Parliament. Then there are a few other additional provisions, which will be considered to be paid to Ministers for additional responsibility they do in addition to being Cabinet Ministers. 

As far as the civil servants consolidated pay is concerned those ones, their figures are consolidated and they are paid a gratuity as well as a pension. But members of the Commissions are on contract, they are paid their gratuity monthly and after their contract, that is the end of the business. So, we need to bring this matter on board. I am equally  - share the concerns of the House, but if you go on the market, in areas where a chairperson of the Commission would leave, where a Judge should leave with respect, the figures are around that way, we passed them two years ago. It has not changed substantially, but in case it does, then in future, the responsible Minister will bring the new resolution before Parliament to lower these allowances, but they can only be lowered in respect to future recruitees, not the current ones.

This amendment is to bring the current members of the Commissions at par with other members in the Specified Officers Bill, which they are already enjoying and actually, they are suffering a disadvantage, because this other one started earning the housing allowances in 1999.  These ones can only earn it starting this month. So, they have lost already two years payment and in the process, we have had some people leaving the Commissions to look for what they call greener pastures and it is my considered view and my appeal to you that we need to attract people of high integrity, people of high professionalism, people who will sit down and do their job, in order to be in charge of the Public Service for which all of us would like to see their enrolments improved and the process of doing so is there. 

So, I thank you for that concern, I appeal to you that when the matter comes out for looking after the welfare of other quality – of public servants who are not specified in the Bill; the other Bill you passed is the one for Presidential emoluments, which affects sitting Presidents as well as Vice Presidents and as we may remember, a number of former Presidents are beginning to come in and it assists, because it the law which provides what is supposed to be given in case you are a current President or you are former President. 

But this Resolution I bring before you, hon. Members, concerns this current members of the Commissions, the Chairpersons, Deputy Chairpersons and full time members; so that they can get a housing allowance for which they have been yearning for the last two years, to bring them at par with their equivalents and ensure that in future, certain offices do attract good calibre people and similar offices of similar status do not attract them because of the disparities created in this House. We are just trying to cure the disparity and bring everybody at par and then we can revisit the situation when everybody is back.  

I beg for your indulgence and thank you for your concerns and I am looking forward to bringing everybody on board in this law we passed in Schedule 2; so that in getting the same as far as salaries is concerned, medical allowance is concerned, travel abroad is concerned and transport is concerned.  But the disparity exists only in the area of housing allowances, which I am calling upon this august House to cure, because that is our responsibility. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Rwabita):  Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the motion; because it is consequential to this part 2 of the Specified Bill we passed in 1999.  Mr. Speaker, when you look at this part 2 of this Schedule, the Auditor General, Inspector General of Government and his Deputies, were given by this House housing allowance of 2.5 million shillings and then another one is 2.3 million. They were given also medical allowances. When you come down to Inspector General of Police, he was given 2.4 million shillings as a medical allowance and also a furnished house.  So, is the Deputy Inspector of Police, so is the Commissioner of Prisons and Deputy Commissioner of Prisons; these have got medical allowance and houses.  

Now, when we are treating this Bill, it happened that the Minister of Public Service had not completed the exercise of arranging for the benefits of the Commissioners and we only treated the medical allowance, which was 2.4 million for the Chairpersons, Deputy Chairpersons and members of Commissioners who are full time workers. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is right and fitting that these specified officers, like the IGG, like the Inspector General of Police, also get housing allowances and housing allowances we gave was in the line of 2 million, 2.4, 2.3.   Now, in this resolution, we are saying that the Chairpersons get 2.2; Deputy get 2.1 and full time members get 2 million. So, Mr. Speaker, this is a consequential amendment of this part 2 Schedule so that these officers also get what they were supposed to get there; and as a matter of fact, if they had to insist, they would ask for arrears, but the Ministry of Finance has told them that we cannot afford the arrears, we shall only pay you from effect from the 1st April. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I request the House to pass these amounts of housing allowances; so that these Specified officers, like any other we passed last time get their benefits as housing allowances. Otherwise, we will be having two measures for the same category of people.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NYAI  (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am sorry I did not abide by your earlier ruling of recognising hon. Rwabita; I plead guilty.  Mr. Speaker, I would like, following the most persuasive and eloquent rendering by the Minister of Public Service in support of this Bill, I would like to say that I go along with him completely, except I would like to persuade him and Government, if they can do one slight alteration for the sake of equity.  Mr. Speaker, in my knowledge, house allowance is part of somebody’s emoluments and at the time we passed the earlier law, we as a Parliament taking into account the scarce resources at our disposal at the time, we were deliberately unfair to certain category of Commissioners.  

Now that the Minister for Public Service, and Cabinet and the Government of Uganda has wakened to this reality that it is only equitable that all commissioners who are working fulltime be given house allowances.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose to the Minister for Public Service as follows:

That these allowances are agreed to and should be paid to the commissioners from the date they took office. If we cannot immediately pay the arrears, we can consider the arrears as domestic debt, which we have incurred for several other categories. That when and as we get our funds correctly, then we will pay them so that one commissioner is not disadvantaged against another commissioner. 

And I think Mr. Speaker, both you and the Minister of Public Service are trained lawyers, you know the question of equity. I am really pleading for this that, if we cannot pay the commissioners off at once, we can at least- then it will be better for their morale; that it is good our Parliament has remembered us, they are going to pay us, it may not be immediate, but they will pay us over retrospectively. But you start the payment this month and work towards paying the arrears. I thank you and I trust that the Minister for Public Service and Cabinet will take this and accept it. I thank you.

MR.OKELLO OKELLO (Chwa County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do support the motion, but I have a lot of queries to put to the hon. Minister. When we passed this Bill here in 1999, I did raise the question of the basis of the figures. I did not get very satisfactory answer.  Where does the Minister get the figures from, on what basis?  Is it equivalent rent, is it market rent for a suitable house for the Chief Justice at the moment or what is it?  Is it the opinion of the Chief Justice or Government valuer? I simply wanted to know where do these figures come from? 

Secondly Mr. Speaker, I see small differences of 100,000/- between the chairman and his deputy.  I do not understand the reason for this. A house that can be occupied by the chairman can equally be occupied by his deputy. When there were pool houses, you will recall that houses were graded and tied to salary scales and I think that is what we should do. So that people on the same salary scale all of them get the same housing allowance rather than saying, chairman you get this and you make a very small difference as if to reflect the status. Housing allowance is not for the purpose of reflecting status.  In fact, in some cases the deputy may need a bigger house than the chairman. 

Thirdly Mr. Speaker, I believe these housing allowances are taxable. The Minister should satisfy us that these figures are subject to taxation. 
 
And lastly Mr. Speaker, there are very wide discrepancies if you look at those at the top and those at the bottom of housing allowance scale.  For example, a head of department gets less than 300,000/-, when a chairman who maybe doing less work than a head of department gets so much.  I think this should be rationalised so that they also reflect the responsibility being carried up. I thank you Mr. Speaker, and I do support the motion.

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. After such an able defence of the motion by the hon. Minister for Public Service, I find it very difficult to oppose the motion I support it. However, like the people who spoke before me, apart from job evaluation, we must also take these allowances on grades of housing. I think Public Service should embark on an exercise of determining what grade of housing or accommodation is suitable for category of these people.  So that instead of coming back here occasionally talking about what housing allowance to pay them, the Government valuer would be consulted in order to give a very scientific evaluation of what amount of rent would be desirable. Because at the moment it looks like it is a rule of thumb or it is a matter of defence of the people in the position.  

At least I did not get a scientific basis for determining these rents from the hon. Minister. I think that we must establish another scientific basis in terms of the grades of houses for which these people would be entitled and then the rents would be based on the Government valuer’s valuation of those kinds of premises.

Secondly Mr. Speaker, if I heard the Minister correctly, it would appear as if these people really deserve to have received this amount of rent as early as possible, even according to the chairman of the Committee. The fact that they did not get it was inadvertent, or the fact that they got much less would appear to have been inadvertent.  If that were the case Mr. Speaker, I would very strongly suggest that this award be backdated to the time when they first qualified to get those housing allowances and then the difference would be paid in terms of arrears. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.PINTO (Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too stand to support this motion.  When the motion was first brought, we wanted a comprehensive statement, the Minister to explain to us the rationale behind the allowances. And after certain consultations with the Minister, it is clear that this is really correcting an omission. Others are already enjoying these benefits in similar category, so there is no new introduction.  The only plea I would like to make is to add to my other colleagues that we must rationalise the rating of these emoluments and privileges across the board.  We allow this to happen because it is an omission.  

But all across the board the Ministry of Public Service must go back and rationalise the rating according to the salary scale, so that some civil servants who are really performing similar duties or duties with such responsibilities can be brought up with equity in these scales and those that are lower than them can also be considered according to their salary scales.  Otherwise, you do find omissions, you find inequity and this will be cause for disgruntlement among other members of our Public Service.  Mr. Speaker, I support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Is there anybody who does not support the motion?  I would like to hear him or her. Hon. Karuhanga, what is your position?  Before you start I would like to know your position.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I have some matters which I would like to raise so that the Minister can shed some light on them.  As I debate the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry. You want to –(Interruption).

MR. KARUHANGA:  As I debate the motion.

THE SPEAKER: No, I have specifically asked for your position.

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes Mr. Speaker, you want to know when I will be contributing? 

THE SPEAKER: You want some clarification before you make up your mind?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: All right, proceed.  You are somewhere in the middle?

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes, I am there in the middle. 

THE SPEAKER: What about hon. Lukyamuzi, do you oppose or do you not?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: In the same boot with Elly Karuhanga.

THE SPEAKER: Clarification.  What about hon. Mwandha?

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I want to seek some very definite clarifications, so that I am persuaded.

THE SPEAKER: You are in the middle there. All right, so the three of you qualify.

MR. KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you very much for this opportunity. I want to first thank the Minister for addressing the issue of pensioners. They are now happy and I have raised a question here in the House and I would like to report to the House, through you, that the pensioners whom I have talked to, who had asked me to ask some questions, are right now quite happy because there is quite a lot of work which has been done by the Minister of Public Service; and I want the Minister to take credit for that and the Minister in charge of Pensions.

Definitely, here I am associating my remarks with those raised by hon. Dick Nyai and hon. Okello Okello and I think that is also for good cheer, but this matter should be looked at retrospectively. To be able to serve on commissions, and I have talked to some of the commissioners, is a very big sacrifice one has to make.  It is actually a patriotic duty. The type of meetings these people attend are almost endless and it is a full time job and people who qualify to become commissioners are people of high standing, of high integrity in society and that is a requirement in our Constitution. Now it is assumed that they should have high integrity and they get approval by Parliament before they qualify for these offices.  

Therefore, it is a high office recognised by not only the Head of State, when they are appointed but also by Parliament; and for us to be able to just quibble over pennies and pence’s about their housing allowances and their other allowances and when you translate this money with our fluctuation of shilling, it is really a pity that we could even hold it back. 

So I want to support the Minister in this regard for the Amendments he has made, albeit the questions raised by hon. Okello Okello have to be answered. How do you come to these figures?  Under what criteria do you come up with a figure where the chairman earns only 100,000shillings, more than the members or the deputy, when I know that the chairman spends so much time?  Look at the chairmen of the committees in Parliament. Do you think they do the same amount of work as the Members of Parliament do in those committees? When we finish discussions those people write out the reports. They spend so much time negotiating instant things and then you just give them very little. It is not fair in my view.

Now there are other commissions and boards which are not constitutional but which are also very important. These may not be Constitutional but they come under the Act or various Acts of Parliament and the commissioners are appointed. Would they enjoy the same or is this a benchmark to be used by the Ministers responsible for giving them their terms; because I know that there are some commissions, which were just arbitrary fixed?  So we would like to see whether there would be a benchmarking for that from Public Service.

Then there are matters, which I specifically requested the Speaker to raise with Public Service:One is the return of former President Binaisa.  We hear this on the Radio and we hear that journalists saying that there was money tied towards paying his debts wherever he was before he came.  We would like to know in this House; has the former President Binaisa come in Uganda?  Is he back in the country?  Would the Minister in charge of Public Affairs assure this House that the former President, who had gone in exile and who was issuing hostile propaganda wherever he was, he is back in the country and what conditions brought him and would Parliament be entitled to know such information?

Then we heard the Prime Minister, Leader of Government Business, recently made another very serious and very important pronouncement about the return of another Head of State, His Excellency Dr. Apollo Milton Obote that he is to return; and now New Papers are writing all over the place and they want to get this information and it is also a little bit on the quiet. Was this just an accident of the slip of the tongue? –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, are those the clarifications you are seeking about this Bill?

MR.KARUHANGA: Yes, these are very important. They affect the Ministry of Public Service and it is right with the Public Service.

Then we have also seen that Amin - they say Amin has repaired his houses.  So, we were wondering and people are asking. Is he also on his way back? The former President Idd Amin Dada –(Interruption). 

MS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, this House is a respectable House and is composed of very able and intelligent Members and we are handing very serious Business regarding specified officers schedule and specifically the housing allowance of specified officers and we debated in this House a Bill and have enacted a Law for those Presidents who retire. Is it in order for the hon. Karuhanga to deliberately derail the debate and belittle the understanding of this Parliament into trivialities, which he could substantively bring before this House in form of questions as specifically his committee, which deals with the Presidency? Is it in order for him to derail the House on matters regarding Public Service? Thank you Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Karuhanga, if he is listening; hon. Karuhanga I was a bit worried by your line of argument. I think that question has the circumstances under which ex-President Binaisa has returned to the country and those under which ex-President Obote will return, Idi Amin will return, are matters which you can on a specific day direct to the Minister responsible through the normal question time.  I think to raise these issues at this stage is, in my opinion, irrelevant and therefore, you are not in order.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I am obliged to your ruling and surprised that the Member who raised the point of order, who said the matter was trivial but said that it was important enough to be asked in a substantial manner in a question form. So I do not know where she was coming from. But Mr. Speaker, be that as it may, it is very rare to get the Minister of Public Service to present a lot of views in the House. So, when we got an opportunity to do that, we thought that he would also take an opportunity to explain; and the matter which was raised, is really not within the ambit of Presidential and Foreign Affairs committee.  

The matter I have raised were squarely on matters of Public Service, although we have an interest as Presidential Affairs and that interest is the one which had motivated me to ask the question. 

On the Bill of the Minister when he was making contribution, he talked about Ministers being paid as Members of Parliament and he raised the issue, which I think with your permission, we are free to comment on.  I really get very surprised that the way we look at our public servants is so mean. How are you going to accept a person to serve as a Cabinet Minister or Minister of State or whatever name the Minister is called and not pay him or her?  And if a Member of Parliament is a Member of Parliament, he or she should be paid as a Member of Parliament. But once you are elevated to the position of Minister, there must be benefits equal to the task. 

I remember one time here somebody mentioned something to do with the furniture of Ministers and an hon. Member stood up and said Ministers should not have furniture in a Committee – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I will give you five minutes to deposit your phone outside. The hon. Member to the right of hon. Eresu, can you leave the Chambers and deposit your telephone outside?  Can you deposit it outside?  Proceed.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am saying this well knowing that in a month to come, Government will be presenting a new Budget to this Parliament on the 15th of June to be exact and I am saying this knowing that the tender of affairs that our Ministers have suffered in the last five years may re-occur. It is not right and I think this Parliament should be able to look at this especially the Committee on Public Service together with the Minister in–charge of Public Service to revisit the issue of Ministers. 

It is now a pity to be called the Minister in Uganda because, they get invited to various places and you know they talk and say we are paid the same way as Members of Parliament. And you know our Members of Parliament are regarded in Uganda that you are highest paid, which you know very well is not the case. Now, so this has kind of constrained our Ministers and what does it do? It opens them to temptations because a person who cannot afford fuel to go to his Constituency or to a Ministerial function or when they get to Ministerial they have certain constraints and they meet people who demand favours from them or Ministerial authorities from them.  What do you expect them to do?  So me I think and I am glad the Leader of Government Business is in the House.  

Even you find that the Prime Minister may be paid 100,000/= more than a Minister like they had proposed for Chairmen of the Board. That is a matter, which I would like to be addressed.

The second one is another matter of concern. There is no Commissioner in the Ministry of Energy. The job was advertised sometime ago. People sat an interview for that post and they were told that they were over-qualified.  Is this a good reason to deny somebody a job?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, which Commissioner?

MR. KARUHANGA:  The Commissioner for Energy.

THE SPEAKER: But that is a Civil Service appointment. We are talking of Constitutional Commissions.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes, I am aware Mr. Speaker. I got permission from you to raise certain issues that have faced Public Service. I do not know whether that permission has expired?  

THE SPEAKER: Now ,can you come to your concluding remarks?

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you Mr.Speaker, So any way the point is made and I hope that somebody is going to look into the issue. With that I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Although I am a very strong supporter of the dignity of the worker, my eyebrows are still raised until the Minister in-charge of Public Service answers my questions.  

Many people I represent would like to know the scientific form in which that money is paid to those workers and I am saying this because it is on record that this House in the recent past has debated a great deal, the saga related to the politics of furniture buying both in the State House and the Movement Secretariat. It is on record that senior officials on a number of occasions inflate the figures for buying furniture and furniture is attached to housing in serious terms. So, we would like to know in which physical form that money is paid?  

I would also like to know, what is the rational behind an arrangement where the Housing allowance of an individual far exceeds his salary?  And I am speaking for the ordinary people in Lubaga South; they would like to know because in normal understanding if I am earning a salary of Shs. 300,000, before the person I am speaking for, it is an imaginary for one to get an allowance of Shs. 1,000,000 for his Housing.  And I see a semblance of that in this framework.  So the people I represent would like to know that.

My eyebrows are raised for one reason by hearing the Minister in his statement or in his submission, saying that, it not time we regretted for having hurriedly sold off Government houses because for our country to be seen going forward, the Government in total must have a sense of Economics and Saving. We cannot create a situation where simply because we have need to cover the housing problems of our senior officers, we pay whatever is supposed to be paid simply because those people demand for that money. 

We are creating a difficult situation for the people who will occupy Government tomorrow, because I can see a situation where the Minister is saying because the Judges and Doctors are likely to run away from Uganda for greener pastures, we must establish a situation where they can be held up, so that they do not leave. What about other disciplines? Are they not important to Government? By concentrating your attention on the two disciplines, you create even a more precarious situation, and I would like you, as a Minister in Government, to clarify to me and the people I represent, why you are over concentrating on one sector in terms of discipline.

The other point, Mr. Speaker, is as I end, I have had the occasion to interact with public servants beyond Uganda and I realise that a number of Governments, including the Government of Great Britain and Sweden, they have established property – they have put up property to house Senior Ministers or Ministers, for example, and Senior public servants, so that they can save the public funds.  But this question of saying that because these people might run away, we must pay them highly is unexplainable!  We are creating dangerous situation –precedent – for ourselves and we may not be able to answer those conditions as time goes on. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have no objection to these officers being given housing allowances. I am however, concerned because you see, when you pay these housing allowances, the taxman will compute all his income and tax that allowance. At the end of the day, the beneficiary will probably not get enough money to rent a house, which is suitable for his position.  

Not only that, a person who is getting money in cash with so many demands, he may chose to take a smaller accommodation, may be in a poor allocation, in order to apply this cash to some other pressing demands. I think that the Minister, and I think the Government in general, should consider the possibility of providing official residences to some of these constitutional and statutory officers; so that, they can live in accommodations befitting their positions which are said, so that they are not attempted to go and live in places, which are not suitable for people of this status. I think this is a matter, which should be seriously considered for the future, that people occupying these high positions should have accommodation provided by Government as official residences.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you, hon. Mwandha for giving way. The question of taxing housing allowance, I am aware we do tax housing allowance, but then you are taxing cash that has been received.  However, if someone gets accommodation in kind, you also value it and actually tax him. But when you tax him, you are reducing even the salary that he has and yet he is not to receive any cash. Is he better of being taxed on the only income that he has because I have given him the house in kind?  Or, is he not better of when you tax him on the cash received as housing allowance and therefore, re-organises his expenditure?  

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, of course this is debatable – at least, one has specific figures to work out and see whether what the Minister is saying will be disadvantageous to the beneficiary. Nevertheless, I think in terms of status, it would be a very good thing to do. 

The other thing I wanted to raise on the question of housing, I think the Minister of Public Service has been monetarising benefits of public servants, and I was wondering why in this situation we do not have monetarisation of their benefits, so that a person is given emoluments which will enable him even to hire or rent a house which he would use.  

I think the Minister also mentioned that some Commissioners have opted to become RDCs rather than to remain as Commissioners because of lack of accommodation – I was not very clear, but I thought that these people are appointed by the same authority. I am not sure whether the authority gets them an option, whether to be an RDC or to be a Commissioner and therefore, the side of the Commissioners is disadvantaged because the RDCs are given benefits. So, that needs a bit of clarification.  

He also mentioned that Members of Government, that is, the Ministers, opted to be paid as Members of Parliament.  But then he said, in addition they have been provided a responsibility allowance as Ministers. May be he can indicate to what extent this allowance is being paid to Members of Cabinet. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAMBEDE (Bungokho North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It may not be a contribution, but it is something, which is of importance. It is not directly related to the Commissioners; but this is in regard to the former employees of Local Government and urban authorities.  These people were employed at that time by Government, but when we went to decentralisation, even those who were laid off before decentralisation have not been paid their terminal benefits until today. 

When they come to Public Service, they are referred to the districts. The districts are saying, “No, at that time we were not your employers”. So, they are being played ping-pong. So, what is the status of these people?  Are they going to be paid or not?

I remember even at one time, there was a communication by the Prime Minister, hon. Nsibambi, to the effect that they were verifying and ascertain them, then all of a sudden that exercise was called off.  Until today, nobody knows the fate of these people. What is happening?  Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to raise this, but it is directly concerned with the Ministry of Public Service. Can we know this, because when we go back, the people keep asking us “what is our fate” and we do not know?  Can we have a benefit of having explanation and may be carrying that information. Because it is very saddening for somebody who has worked for Government and he has never got his retirement benefits.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Before I call the Minister to wind up, for those of you who really do not know the Rules of Procedure, which relate to things, which we may bring into the House or not bring into the Chamber; and regards to telephones and the similar gadgets; I would like to read you the following:
“No Member shall bring into the House any camera, tape-recorder, transistor radio, mobile telephones” – I repeat – “mobile telephones or other electronic devices.” It does not say you are allowed to bring it by pocketing it quietly and have it switched off; you are not allowed to bring it in, and if you bring it and I see it, then I will declare that you have transgressed this rule.

And once I have done that I will give you the moratorium of depositing it outside. But if you repeat it several times then other sanctions will apply- (Interjection). What order?  Are you calling me to order? It is all over. I was not directing it to any particular person just in case people do not know - hon. you should speak in the microphone so that I can hear.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr. Andruale Awuzu): Mr. Speaker, my point of order is not addressed to you.  It is addressed to the person you sent out with a phone; although you said you had closed the issue but I thought there was a point of order to be raised there. I do not know whether you will allow me to do that?

THE SPEAKER: No, I have already referred to the rule.  Hon. Minister can you wind up.

THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Amanya Mushega): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First I would like to thank hon. colleagues for the support they have given to this matter; and I will start with the queries raised then I will summarise. The issues actually raised by hon. Mwandha are policy matters and these policy issues were substantially debated when this Bill was presented in 1999 and resolved.  All I was doing today is just to adjust the consequences of those policy decisions we took.  

But for purposes of harmony, I will answer some of them briefly. The question of taxation has been answered and the question of giving somebody an allowance and he leaves in a house smaller than the allowance is not our responsibility; because the moment you are paid your salary how you use it is your choice.  Some may choose to go for a mortgage; others may even choose to leave on their farms, that is their choice.  The only advantage with paying somebody an allowance instead of a house is that, once you - it is easy to budget. But when you say you are entitled to a furnished house - we had problems and I do not want to mention offices, because it can create me some other problems, because we do not have uniform houses in the country.

So, one may opt to leave in Kololo, another one in a smaller house in Kololo, which may cost even more than a bigger house in Ntinda. But the moment you pay an allowance the easiest part is that, it is very good for public servants because they know that once somebody is appointed a Judge or appointed a Commissioner you know what to budget for. But once it is a housing allowance, it may depend on the where the person is leaving and the prices fluctuate. The landlord may charge a million today, and choose to charge 1.5 million tomorrow, that is the problem.

Secondly, we resolved to go for – unfortunately, I am the one who has brought this Bill.  When I brought this Bill in 1999, we had actually provided for houses and not housing allowances. If you looked at the original draft, it was talking of fully furnished houses for Judges and furnished houses for High Court Judges. The whole thing was housing. In the wisdom of the committee here, they said let us swift a way from providing houses to providing housing allowances, for the reasons I have just given; that it is easy to budget. If you want to appoint a certain number of Judges, you know how much money you need in the budget. But when you are providing a furnished house it becomes a problem.  

We had even provided for furniture and this House moved an amendment and we instead provided a furniture allowance, for all those people entitled. So, we are revisiting the matter we had resolved wisely, but by good luck has come also with the Bill and has helped us to re-corporate those matters and I thank you for reminding me also.

I think I have answered the question; where they leave is not my business. The issue is that you pay them what they are entitled to. I do not want to alude to the House; when we were given our allowances to buy vehicles, we bought different variety of vehicles, but the Clerk to the Assembly is only interested in deducting the amount due. What you bought is not his business. What he is interested in is, what you are entitled to pay every month. I think it has made matters easier and my sympathies are with everybody on those matters.

The issue of Ministers I brought it in because it was being raised that, they are getting an allowance of half a million while this way we are going to get two million.  I was only raising it, I know Ministers do not get housing allowance; they get a flat allowance as Members of Parliament. As to how much they are being paid, I think I will bring this matter at the appropriate time to the House.

The same matter applies to hon. Wambede. Yes much as this matter concerns my colleagues, Ministers are not moving encyclopaedias, but even in encyclopaedia you need to know it from a to z or a to b, so that you open it. So, if you could give me some time, I will go back and check the facts, so that I give the House because they will be on record the exact positions. I have a rough idea but I prefer not to make a statement that is not fully researched, because this House is entitled to information that is thorough. So, I will be bringing it to your attention at the appropriate time; but today we concentrate on giving this entitled office their part. I am concerned about your concern and I will be checking and giving you a proper answer. 

Hon. Lukyamuzi has raised a point and I am still going to check on the state of the environment. I have already answered that question because when we had houses; one, the houses were never enough. The public servants went up the housing stock was not increasing. Number two, Government was paying heavily for the maintenance of those houses and it was hard to budget. But since the houses were got rid of, the housing units themselves have improved. Those who have owned them, if you look at the Kololo airstrip you think houses, which were due to be condemned, now are brand new. 

So, the housing stock in the country has improved, Government has saved money on refurbishing those houses. We have created a loan scheme from those houses sold. So, we have just recently passed another Cabinet paper, which will entitle public servants to borrow that money and then put houses for their future.

And finally, those who were in houses when this amounts were consolidated, their pension has substantially improved. Because if you were getting a house, it was never taken into account on retirement and that is why you found the civil servants who retired around 1999, were earning over Shs. 0.5million; and those who retired with better facilities in 1990, were struggling with Shs.10, 000 and thereabouts. And we had to struggle to improve that situation. So, overall that was a policy matter passed long ago and it is not the right time to revisit it and it is doing very well.  

Hon. Karuhanga raised the question of Ministers being catered for. Maybe it will be the appropriate time if this House, that we are due to expire in a few weeks time, we are to pass some concern for future people because, under the current arrangement whenever was raised the current the incumbents were the issue.  But it will be good if the matter was revisited and I definitely sit with the chairperson of the right committee of the House and we see how to reward different people differently for different services. That one I have no problem with and I fully appreciate. 

 Let me state categorically, that hon. Binaisa His Excellency the former President of Uganda, Godfrey Binaisa has returned to the country. He is being catered for fully, and my Ministry is in a process of working out his entitlements, according to the law, which this House also passed a few years ago. 

You raised a question of there is no commissioner in Energy, what I know is there is a commissioner in energy definitely, most likely the job which was advertised was for assistant commissioner. But I will cross-check that matter and bring it to the attention of hon. Karuhanga and sort it out if need arise. But of course, we need these commissions to be well facilitated, in order to do their work.

So, let me summarise the issues that were raised.  First of all, Mr. Speaker, the genesis of this Bill has been winding just to re-co-operate a few things while it is still – but I think this is a final settlement of it.  Originally when these commissions were created after the 1995 Constitution, there were certain commissions, which were in existence and those, which were created by the Constitution.  

Those which were in existence because of the earlier luck of the job evaluation exercise, people wanted to be equal to others where they thought they had benefits. So, chairpersons of the commission had equated themselves to Ministers; and commissioners had equated themselves to either deputy Ministers then or Ministers of state. Then when the new commissions were created, like the Human Rights Commission, the Electoral Commission, they got a pay better than- no they were paid less than these commissions and the problem was how to equate. 

That is how we came up with this amendment of the Specified Officers Bill or Act, because then it was 1984, Act that was in operation, which also replaced an earlier one of Independence, because the existing commissions were equated to Ministers. When these ones were being handled because Ministers had not been sorted out, they remained with the Ministers with Shs.0.5million per month, as housing allowance. Subsequently the Ministers opted to be treated as Member of Parliament, because it was better to be treated as a Member of Parliament than to be given a status that had no resources in the pocket.  So, these commissions were left high and hanging.

So, this resolution is to separate different groups that they are treated differently and ensure that all the people who fall under the Specified Officers Act are treated equally, and if subsequent alterations are to be made, they will be made across board either to improve or to decrease the entitlements. So, the purpose of this resolution is to put them equally with their counter-parts under the law.  

As I mentioned earlier, the Bill we had brought had a housing allowance but this House in its wisdom preferred to go for – sorry it had housing arrangement and this House changed that Bill and provided for a housing allowance as I mentioned which was easier to budget, easier to work out and easier to administer and gave the public servants freedom to do certain things. Because when the houses were given out, then you would find this entitled officer on the back of the public servant, that I prefer that house and not this one. So and so is living in a better house than mine.  But when you pay them the allowances then, where they choose to live is not a problem and the public servants are really now very comfortable and entitled officers okay.  

How was this figure arrived at? One; judges were already living in houses. So, a survey was carried out including a Government valuer to find out the average cost of the houses, which these entitled officers were already living in. I had mentioned if you check the Hansard, I gave these answers at that time.  

Secondly, the same team went on the market and found out where these officers will be fitted to live and they worked out an average of what the house at that time was, the value of the houses were at that time. So, there was a combination of valuing the houses on the market and valuing the houses in which the entitled officers were already living. And this figure of Shs. 2.5 million for the deputy chief justice; Shs. 2.3million and the rest was arrived at through that method. All we are doing today is just apply that method of 1999, to everybody who is entitled and give them what the equivalents are; that was the rationale.

The question to arrears: Much as I was also in sympathy, the paper I presented to my colleagues in Finance actually included arrears. But we were constrained by other budgetary issues and arrangements with their development partners and the whole arrangement is to avoid arrears. And my colleagues the commissioners are saying well, better than nothing, so, if they get the allowance now it would have been better, if they were arrears but at least better to get something than nothing as was the situation up to now.

The differences in amounts it is really a question of policy now, because we have been having a situation, - now we are applying a policy that different levels must have different rewards; so that if somebody is promoted from being a deputy commissioner, to a commissioner, there is a difference as resources improve, then we can put the gaps to be appropriate. But now we are implementing a policy that when you have been a Minister of state and you have been promoted to be a Cabinet Minister, there should be a difference however small. And if tomorrow you are a second deputy or first deputy there must be a difference.  

So, we are implementing that there should be a difference between different grades. It is to emphasize the policy approach; then how big the gap should be, can be done by those who have done statistics. Ours was mainly to emphasise the policy approach that in future people of different status within the ladder, within the same arrangement should be differently rewarded; and if you are performing better, then you will get accelerated promotion. Yes, are figures taxable? Yes they are taxable.

I have already mentioned the issue of public servants, it is true the public servants are not fully paid as they should be and that we moved away from providing houses to a consolidated allowance and definitely it is fairer. Because all people are not getting houses now and they are getting a consolidated pay, their terminal benefits are much better improved and they get better pension and they get better civilise pay.  

About improving the welfare of the other public servants yes, this is the concern of my Ministry and the Government. But as I mentioned earlier, first, we had to get a job evaluation exercise completed, so that jobs are rewarded according to their value not according to how they are related to the unions, to the editorials in the papers or to the friends they know in Government. You are occupying a certain job, they will check what its value is and you will be paid accordingly. 

Secondly, since we do not have enough resources to go around, we shall be handling one sector at a time but generally making a general improvement on everybody but certain areas going up a little bit faster than others.  

We have recently handled the question of the doctors in the current budget. This was a budget issue; it was within the budget. Maybe let me take this – no let me not mention this because it is elsewhere.  I will do it later on but it was in the budget and we chose to reward doctors because of the reasons I have already given. 

We have now recently handled the police. I think I can mention out the police because, we thought that the welfare of the police needed attention, their pay was very low. Recently after discussions with the Minister of Internal Affairs and my colleague, the Minister of Finance, you heard the announcement put out by the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs, improving the welfare of the police. Under the current budget, while we look at everybody at the same time, but we choose certain sectors to be above the water, so that they can breathe and handle the other areas. 

We shall be dealing with the areas of the teachers both for primary, secondary and others. So, the exercise of improving the welfare of the public servant is on-going.  But at the moment we are dealing with the sector of the Specified Officers, which is the purview of this Parliament to improve.

I thank you for your support and I call upon you to pass this resolution, so that these ladies and gentlemen at the end of this month, can live more comfortably than they have been doing in the last two years.  I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: So, that brings us to the end of the debate on this item. I would like the Clerk at Table to advise whether we can proceed to the next stage in considering this item.  If there are hon. Members who are outside, in the lobbies, in their offices, in the north wing, in the restaurant, will you please come in so that we can take a head count. We cannot make a quorum. I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes for you to mobilise.  

(The proceedings were suspended at 4.6p.m)

(On resumption at 4.27p.m, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Members, we are still under quorum.  Now may I suggest this? While we wait for nine more Members to come in, there is one other matter. I do not know whether hon. Dick Nyai can confirm, which we could in the meantime dispose of without this technicality. Is that correct hon. Dick Nyai?

MR. DICK NYAI: Yes, Mr. Speaker, if I can get only one clarification from the Minister for Energy, on the motion for a resolution I propose to move. 

THE SPEAKER:  Maybe why do you not proceed this way? I think it is only fair that, I quote that since giving notice to move that motion, you have received some information from the Minister responsible; indicating certain developments, which go to partially meeting on the concerns which you have expressed in this House twice; first time verbally from your seat there and the other one in your motion. Now, if that is the case, then maybe you can kick-start because you are on the Order Paper as having a motion.  

MR. DICK NYAI (Ayivu County, Arua):  Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, a motion for a resolution of this House was circulated on my behalf having been redrafted by me and seconded by hon. Salaamu Musumba, to the effect that the Minister for Energy ensures that, Uganda Electricity Board when it is being disbanded, it is done in recognition of the fact that a report of the Inspector General of Government and the recommendation made in that report is adhered to.  

The concern which forced me to move that resolution, was that long ago, a distinguished son of Uganda engineer Dr.Adriko, said that power is 60 percent requirement in development. If that is so, you will recognise that power supply is of utmost importance to this nation. Mr. Speaker, a World Bank report one time said that the total system loss in our UEB both domestic and for exports, continue at high levels of 32 to 35 percent. Total losses for inefficient utilities such as UEB should be in the order of 11 to 12 percent.  In order to meet such a target, heavy investments in the network –(Interruption).

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the resolution by the hon. Member holding the Floor was circulated; but one would have assumed that he would have to move that resolution first and then begin to talk to it.
  
THE SPEAKER: Move the motion?

MR. KUTESA: Yes, but now we are getting figures from the World Bank, statements from Adriko, a very distinguished son not only of Uganda but also of West Nile. So, I am wondering what we are listening to!  Can we have the motion; so that we know what the hon. Member is talking about?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The position is this, before the hon. Member comes on the Floor, I think I was trying to lay the background. I was trying to introduce the subject but then it seems the hon. Member is going far. You see the position is this; it is the hon. Member’s position that – at least, that is what he communicated to me – that is the person to whom he gave the notice for moving that motion; that since giving notice to move that motion certain things have happened, and those things which happened were communicated to him by the Minister responsible for this sector. 

That being the case it is now his position that he does not intend to proceed the way he originally sought to proceed; but is now giving a background as to what, actually, prompted him to initiate the motion in the first place, and why he is going to proceed the way he is about to do!  In other words, why he is not going to proceed with the motion. So, if we can just listen to him then it will be – I think he will make his point. But hon. Dick Nyai, I think we should not go into – that should be between you and the sector Minister really. 

MR. KUTESA:  But, Mr. Speaker, if there is no motion, if there is no resolution, are we engaged in conversation; what are we doing?

THE SPEAKER: No, as the hon. Member is going to explain to you why he is withdrawing the motion – let us be precise. You see, hon. Kutesa, I did not want to put words in his mouth, but hon. Dick Nyai can you be very brief and precise!

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, it looks like that hon. Sam Kutesa, who does not think that West Nile is part of Uganda, wants everybody to do things only the way he sees fit. Mr. Speaker, according to the Order Paper, I am supposed to move a motion for a resolution. I was taking time to explain why I might find it necessary not to move the motion for arResolution; that is the only way I hope I would proceed and we get it very clear. So, Mr. Speaker, since there were happenings in UEB –(Interruption). 

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I think the real matter raised by hon. Kutesa is really valid; if the hon. Member moved a motion and that motion was on the Order Paper, but has not moved it now in the House, he can withdraw it and it can be deleted there in the office of the Clerk.  We do not need to be addressed about the reasons; but if he wants he can move his motion, then he can stand up and withdraw it in the middle of the debate. Right now if he is trying to explain anything, we do not know what to do with it. Is it a motion; is it a personal statement – under what rule is he moving? Is it a Ministerial statement, what is it?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us now be very formal.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE RULE 39 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

MR. NYAI (Ayivu County, Arua): Mr. Speaker, I had brought to your attention, a motion for a resolution of this House requiring the Minister for Energy to hold and halt the disbanding of UEB, until the Minister does things to ensure that the report of the IGG is fulfilled. 

Mr. Speaker, since I gave that notice to your office, two things have happened.  One, on 9th April 2001, the hon. Minister wrote to you a letter, Mr. Speaker, and copied it to me, saying that the Ministry had done certain things in that direction; and last weekend, the Minister through the Press directed that the culprits in UEB who were going to take key positions in the newly created organs of the disbanded UEB, were going to be disciplined.  Mr. Speaker, in the light of the Minister’s letter to you, and pending confirmation from the Ministry that the Press report is correct, I beg to withdraw that motion. 

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member says pending clarification from the Minister or confirmation from the Minister; is he withdrawing or is he withholding the motion?

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I have had interactions with the Minister, and I think the Minister is prepared to give that confirmation now; and if that confirmation can be given, then I will withdraw.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENERGY AND MINERALS)(Dr. Kiryampawo): Thank you Mr. Speaker, and I also thank hon. Dick Nyai the mover of the motion. Indeed as hon. Dick Nyai says, we have had some substantial discussions, and I have enlightened him on the steps that we have taken.  In other words, according to the IGG’s recommendation, we have directed the Board of Directors to follow the recommendation of the IGG, and the Minister went a mile further to indicate the names of the people who should be disciplined. So, indeed hon. Dick Nyai is right and this is to confirm that we are following the IGG’s recommendation in the letter.  I thank you. 

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, following that explanation that administrative measures are being taken, to take care of our Energy Sector; I withdraw.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we can now proceed to the next step; that is to pronounce ourselves on the motion tabled by the Minister of Public Service. I will now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 1999

Clause 19.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr. Mutesasira): Mr. Chairman, after extensive consultations including consultation with the Solicitor General, we have decided to withdraw the amendment 19(4). The reason is that, according to the Attorney General, we feel that providing that a person may appeal against the decision of the Health Service Commission might be a redundant provision. This is because Article 42 of the Constitution allows any person to appeal against any administrative decision taken against him or her.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 19 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 26.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, after consulting with the Ministry and the Solicitor General, the opinion of the Solicitor General reads as follows, “This provision is okay because it seeks to involve the Health Service Commission in guiding in decision-making.  It does not in any way remove the power to appeals given to the Public Service Commission by the Constitution.” 

I therefore, wish to propose that the proposed amendment to insert a new Sub-Clause 3 of Clause 26 remains as part of the Bill, which reads as follows, “The Public Service Commission shall, in consultation with the Health Service Commission, hear the grievances of the health professionals at the districts.”  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 26, as amended, agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr.Wabudeya): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr.Wabudeya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered Clauses 9 and 26 of the Bill entitled: "The Health Service Commission Bill, 1999", and passed them with some amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr.Wabudeya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 1999

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr. Wabudeya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, "The Health Service Commission Bill, 1999", be read the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION ACT, 1999

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this is a convenient time to adjourn.  The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.53 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24th April, 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)















