Wednesday, 13 April 2011

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I hope the Budget Committee and its members are seriously working on the budget because there is a timeframe within which we have to send our reactions to the President before the budget is finalised by Government.

MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, we had come to Parliament today expecting a report on the Uganda Police incidents as you instructed yesterday. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean the statement from the Ministry of Internal Affairs?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not see him here. If it is item 4, it will be item 4. Hold on.

2.40
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of public concern. I would like to apologise since I did not alert you. This is in regard to what appeared in today’s dailies about the hike in university fees. With effect from next academic year, fees for students going to universities will be increased by almost 100 percent. I think this House demands an explanation. We are informed that the rise in the fees structure is attributed to a report generated from a study conducted by various universities. 

At the moment, all of us will appreciate that most university going students are finding extreme difficulties raising the requisite university tuition fees. This is in addition to bearing the other expenses related to education at the university like accommodation, scholastic materials, et cetera. 

If university tuition is raised to that level, as a country we are going to experience a rapid number of drop outs from the university. I think it should be in the interest of this House to address this matter so that children of the poor - people coming from poor backgrounds - can afford university education. I would like to call on the Ministry of Education and Sports to address this Parliament on this matter. 

2.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Amuriat for raising this very important matter concerning education and the future of our children. This is a matter which I will bring to the attention of the hon. Minister of Education so that he can come up with a clear statement on the issue of fees. 

However, I am sure you have read our manifesto - the NRM Manifesto. We have clearly pointed out that we shall come in with student loans to assist those who may not be in a position to raise tuition on their own. The minister will come up with an authoritative statement on this –

THE SPEAKER: I think what is relevant is: how is this loan scheme going to operate and when is it starting?  

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, as I have indicated, the hon. Minister of Education will come up with a comprehensive and authoritative paper on this matter. Can’t you wait for the statement from the Minister of Education? (Interjections)       

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Daudi Migereko, whom I can also ably say I host because there is a Terego camp in Karongo in your constituency; but that is not the point. 

In your manifesto you have provisions for students who cannot afford school fees at the university.  Are you aware that over 90 percent of the students in the universities are from poor families that cannot afford and those who are able to afford are the children of the likes of you and the hon. Aggrey Awori who sit here in air conditioned offices? -(Interjections)- In your explanation, you need to give us that information because if it is about affordability, most of our children in this country are from poor families and cannot afford education at any level right from primary up to the university. So please, in the report that you are going to give us, put that into account. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information. I am not the most conversant with the NRM Manifesto but I am very conversant with the goings-on in the Committee on Social Services. Throughout last year we reviewed the Education White Paper. In 1992, the issue of the loan scheme came up but up to now, it has not been implemented. At the committee level, we have required the minister to come to us with a legal and policy framework that will govern the implementation of the loan scheme. Up to now, we have not been provided that vital information. It, therefore, makes me wonder whether the argument of the Government Chief Whip can hold for now. 

What I think can hold for now is perhaps just an explanation of what they intend to do with the students. However, that the loan scheme is the immediate remedy, unless Government intends to implement it without a legal framework or without a policy framework. Mr Speaker, you know all ad hoc arrangements of that nature have failed, actually concluded in very embarrassing ways. We had Entandikwa without a proper framework. It just collapsed and no money was refunded and no money was paid back. So, I think that while the Government Chief Whip wants to argue along the lines of the loan, he should be informed that they have no policy framework and there is no legal framework and it has been on the table since 1992.

Mr Speaker, I would like to beg your indulgence to let me ask for an additional statement on education so that when they come, they bring both of them as a response. 

On 18 March 2011, the Daily Monitor newspaper ran a story of an RDC called Milton Odongo of Amuru District who went to a school and caned pupils of Kololo Primary School. The story goes on that the land belonging to the school had been allocated to Madhvani to grow sugarcane. We all know that corporal punishment was banned long ago but that aside, if the RDC wanted somebody to cane, maybe he should have looked for the parents or whoever and caned them but not the miserable children who cannot even decide where they should sit the next morning. Somebody decides that for them. So, I would like to ask that the Government Chief Whip picks up this matter as well so that we get a proper explanation. If this is the patriotism the RDC was supposed to teach our children, then we should know it is terrible, it is unbecoming and it is not good for the future of these children.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. To supplement my colleague’s point about school fees at the university, sometime back in this House the issue of these public universities came up. Under the Budget Act, under Appropriation-in-Aid, they collect money at source and use it and there was concern in this House that actually these institutions do not report to the relevant ministry. 

At that time, the minister undertook to bring a report before this House. Had that report been here and had they been complying with that provision of the rules, maybe there would not have been these skirmishes concerning increasing of school fees. This is because at times they just use that money at source without any supervision. 

So, when the minister is going to bring this report, I think the minister should clarify further on how far they are complying with that provision of the law on Appropriation-in-Aid. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, the matter raised by hon. Banyenzaki will also be dealt with in the minister’s statement on the general subject of the hiked fees.

Regarding the caning of pupils in Amuru District, the matter is going to be investigated and we should be able to come up with a report. I do not know how the Madhvanis came in because they are known to be in Kakira but the investigation will help us to unearth the facts and we shall be presenting a report to this House.

As far as the issue of student loans is concerned, we have just won a new mandate and we are going to act accordingly. You will be advised in regard to what actions are going to be taken to ensure that this is actualised. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.02
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance, with your permission. As you are aware, the Government of Uganda decided to compensate the Asians under the Departed Asians Custodian Board but the problem is that since 1997, several governments have been postponing to close this matter. 

Under the current practice, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Lands, the Minister of Local Government and other ministers constitute the board of the Departed Asians Custodian Board. As we speak, according to the report available, there are 3,000 unclaimed properties. Out of 5,000 properties, it was only 2,000 that were claimed and Government compensated others. Every officer who has been appointed by Government to handle this matter has received threats to his or her life and has abandoned the matter. This is because most of the people occupying properties have formed cartels and they have threatened people. 

Last week in Mbuya Hill LC I Zone, death almost occurred because the local people were resisting eviction and the Police are protecting somebody who wants to occupy property illegally. As we speak, His Excellency the President, because of the gravity of the matter, delegated a one Lt Bernard Tumwesigye to the Ministry of Finance and he was appointed duly by the board to handle this matter. 

Last year, which is this financial year which is ending, the Minister of Finance requested for Shs 8 billion to carry out a survey, advertise the properties and close. However, to our surprise this officer is now under detention for murder. This is a murder which the Police was investigating but instead he was arrested by the military and he is under military detention. Therefore, all the records about the money we passed and what the Government was carrying out cannot move forward. Every person you talk to in Government fears the matter. 

The purpose of raising this matter is to request that if the gentleman whom Government delegated to handle this matter committed a crime, there is a civil procedure of handling the matter. It should be handled through the civil procedure under the Police. He is entitled to bail if he complies with the conditions, and Government should table a report to this House on when they intend to wind up the custodian board so that we avoid the corruption and the threats that are going on.

So, Mr Speaker, can the Minister of Finance table a plan of action as to when this custodian board will wind up? Can the minister also explain where the 3,000 properties are and also why the Government officer is under military detention and yet he is a civil servant and he is supposed to be in civil custody? Thank you very much.

MR DAUDI MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I will be requesting hon. Ekanya to avail me the facts so that I can be in a position to pass on this information to the Minister of Finance so that they can be in a position to take appropriate action as far as this matter is concerned. However, if it is true that the officer you are talking about committed murder, then it is not a civil matter which should be dealt with according to the laws of this country. However, I will appreciate getting the facts but either way, I will be in position to get the Minister of Finance to take pertinent action on this matter.

MR EKANYA: I would like to take this opportunity to lay all the documents that I got in my pigeon hole on the Table. I am laying a report of a special audit on the departed Asians’ custodian property by the Auditor-General dated 15 May 2009 and signed by John Muwanga. Attached also is a letter dated 28 March 2011 to the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence, Brig. James Mugira, from Ruyondo and Co. Advocates. There is also another letter from Mugarura and Co. Advocates also to the Minister of Finance. I wish to lay them on the Table.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING

(Debate Continued.)

(Whereupon Members of the Opposition withdrew from the Chamber)

3.09
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to proceed as guided yesterday in the debate. I want to contribute to the motion moved by hon. Niwagaba, especially looking at the issues he wanted the House to resolve itself on –(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have observed with a lot of interest that when we come here to proceed with Government business, the Opposition normally interrupts it. After delaying us, they walk away. I have also observed that we do not condemn this behaviour, which is not typical of statesmen and stateswomen. I think we should pronounce ourselves on such behaviour because they just choose whatever business they attend. I do not know whether this should continue like this without being condemned. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I cannot say they came to interrupt because yesterday there was a statement by hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, the Minister of Internal Affairs that he would make a statement today concerning the Members you mentioned. I think they came because they expected it to be the first business in the House. However, remember also that a week or so ago they came here, and they are on record, saying that they have ceased to participate in debates concerning the CHOGM report. That is why when the item on the CHOGM report was read out, in fulfilment of what they had earlier stated, they walked out. 

Earlier, we had commented on this conduct and we cannot comment every day on their conduct. Moreover, we cannot say that they should not come in to listen to business they choose to. If they have decided to go, well, what do we do?

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: “That the House should rescind the decisions which were made by this House”. Allow me, Mr Speaker, to draw the attention of this House again to rule 59(2) and I will read it out. It says: “It is out of order to attempt to reconsider any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during this current session.” So, I think this issue cannot stand -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, yesterday when we adjourned this House, you directed hon. Masiko to go and write the amendment she wants to make on the motion of hon. Niwagaba, which we seconded. To the contrary, the Member has not brought the amendment to the motion of hon. Niwagaba. Instead, she is going to debate, negating the motion and yet she was directed to bring an amendment. I would have expected her to table that amendment.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Banyenzaki, for giving way. Mr Speaker, yesterday when we were debating the motion that I moved, hon. Amama Mbabazi for one reason or another misled this House that a similar motion had been brought by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. In respect of that misrepresentation of facts, hon. Masiko seems to be proceeding. 

The matter referred to yesterday by hon. Mbabazi was discussed in this House on 18 November 2010 and I have got a copy of the Hansard. The motion was not even a motion, but in the wisdom of the Speaker he made it a motion. The Speaker ruled that the motion would refer to the report without pronouncing ourselves to a Government agency. 

The motion I brought here yesterday has nothing to do with referring the report without pronouncing ourselves. I brought a motion to say that we debate, consider and take appropriate action. I did not allude to anything to do with “without pronouncing ourselves”. That is the information I wanted to give. I hope hon. Masiko will now not fall into the trap of hon. Mbabazi. If she has a motion to amend my motion, I will welcome it and sit. However, if it is this one which is being circulated, I want to be on record that this is not a motion to amend my motion; it substantially alters it and I will not concede to it.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, you can even see that what hon. Masiko is going to pronounce herself on is irrelevant to what you directed her to do. Please, guide the House. If she has forgotten, remind her about what you directed her to do so that she complies with it.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think what I said yesterday is clear. I said that hon. Masiko was making a contribution and amending a motion which was moved by hon. Niwagaba. He said this verbally without having it in writing. So, I said that it would be better for her to commit the proposed amendments in writing.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I have done that and the copies have been circulated. I have given a copy to you. Also on the table in the corridor, there are more copies of this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can you now go on to move your amendment?

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to state that my amendment has a direct bearing on hon. Niwagaba’s motion. I am saying this because it also urges Parliament to take appropriate action. So, under rule 48(1) of our Rules of Procedure, allow me to move my motion to amend hon. Niwagaba’s motion. In that regard, I would like to move that we amend the title, preamble and the prayers that were requested for in that motion. 

I would like to move that the report of the PAC Committee on the Special Audit Report of the Auditor-General 2007 be adopted by this House as opposed to hon. Niwagaba’s motion that is on the Floor. I also would like to move that this motion be taken up with amendments.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, you already guided the House appropriately. I would like to inform the House that what has been circulated to us is a motion, which has even been seconded. I have never seen a situation in this House where a Member writes an amendment and it is seconded. This amendment is signed and seconded. I think the Member should be guided on how to comply with what you have directed, Mr Speaker.

Let me also point it out that this House has to move on the basis of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The outgoing Member of Parliament for Rukungiri needs to know this –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, this information is laden with a point to seek your guidance. The honourable member says that her motion is not here to only amend the title and the preamble but also the questions that I prayed Parliament should pronounce itself upon. However, perusal of rule 48(4) of the Rules of Procedure indicates that this rule prohibits any amendment to a motion that substantially alters the principal question to be proposed. The proposed amendment by hon. Winnie Masiko entirely waters down and substantially alters the motion that I tabled – 

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, what rule are you reading?

MR NIWAGABA: I am reading rule 48(4) of our Rules of Procedure. So, if this amendment indeed alters the motion as proposed by me, is it therefore in order that the motion moved by hon. Winnie Masiko should be allowed to proceed as an amendment or we proceed to first resolve the issue in my motion then handle hers later?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do you want us to debate and conclude this report? Is it your view that you do not want us to wind up with this report? Can we dispose of his motion?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you heard hon. Niwagaba’s motion. Can I now put the question?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion as moved by hon. Niwagaba.

(Question put and negatived.)

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Mr Speaker, allow me to now move a motion that the report of the PAC Committee on the Special Audit Report of the Auditor-General on CHOGM 2007 be adopted by this Parliament with the following amendments:

a) 	That the political leaders adversely mentioned in the report have explained the circumstances of their actions relating to CHOGM to the satisfaction of this Parliament; and special mention is regarded to those ministers who presented their defences but without the House debating them to exonerate them as it had done to the other ministers. These ministers include: hon. Hope Mwesigye, hon. Isaac Musumba, hon. Serapio Rukundo and hon. John Byabagambi;

b) 	That the Government officials adversely mentioned in the report be required to explain the circumstances of their actions relating to CHOGM to the satisfaction of the Head of Public Service of Uganda;

c) 	That the private companies and individuals adversely mentioned in the report be exonerated;

d) 	That the investigative arms and agencies of Government be encouraged to continue carrying out investigations into the CHOGM 2007 as they may deem fit;

e) 	That the Government takes corrective measures to address any mistakes or errors that were committed during the process of CHOGM; and

f) 	That this Parliament goes on record to appreciate and commend the NRM Government for hosting the CHOGM successfully.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. At one time while we debated this very matter, you guided that Parliament does not have the powers of a court to acquit neither does it have the powers to exonerate anybody. In regard to that, I would like to move that the sentence that talks of exoneration of those implicated by the CHOGM report be deleted.

MS WINIFRED MATSIKO: I concur with her suggestion only that I would like to move that instead of using the word “exonerated” we use “excluded”. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

3.22
MR KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I stand to second the motion as moved by hon. Winnie Masiko. We have debated this CHOGM report many times and we have heard submissions from different Members of Parliament. I would like to move that Parliament as a whole – unless somebody can say they were not satisfied with submissions of some Members – agrees to pass point No. 1 - to consider their submissions and agree that it is satisfied, and that if need be other appropriate bodies take up the matter for investigations. These bodies could be the IGG, Police or any other arms of Government.

I also agree to point No. 2 where it is mentioned that public servants, especially those who have not had the opportunity to come to the Floor of the House to defend themselves, do submit their defences to the head of Public Service and to the satisfaction of him or her, they are either exonerated or punished accordingly. After all, the head of Public Service is in charge of all those officers mentioned in the Auditor-General’s report. 

I also want to note that we have not distorted any facts of the Auditor-General’s report. We are only looking at the recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee to Parliament. So, the investigations of the Auditor-General do stand and form a basis for other Government agencies to go ahead and do their work.

We have heard from the President, through the press that he directed the Prime Minister to go ahead and take corrective measures, within his powers, against political leaders or public servants where they are found at fault in following any procurement rules or guidelines. He also directed on where exaggerations were done in as far as costs were concerned in implementing projects and whether there was value for money for what they did. 

So I do submit that Government should take corrective measures in as far as investigations are concern or in streamlining. We recommend that maybe in future when we happen to have bigger summits, we should create a body parallel to Government which is accountable to the dot, so that we do not have these multiple accounting centres where we get confused as to who flouted the rules, whether political or technical. Thank you.

3.29
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I rise to support the motion but to oppose the amendment proposed that paragraphs 1 and 2 be amended to say, “excluded” or “deleted”. As I said yesterday, this debate is the tail end of the long debate that has passed on a long PAC report that mentioned very many people. This Parliament has pronounced itself on all these individuals who made their presentations. 

Whereas it is true that Parliament cannot acquit or convict, the fact is, and I want Members to note this PAC is a committee of this House. It carries out a mandate, an assignment given to it by this House, in accordance with rules of this House. When they present a report, they present it for consideration and adoption, as the Constitution says in Article 163(5). It says: “Parliament shall … debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.” This is the Auditor-General’s report of course. 

Hon. Niwagaba’s motion was obviously not proper because this is not what was before this House. What is before this House is a report by PAC, which was considering a special report of the Auditor-General; so this is to debate and consider the report and take appropriate action. 

The PAC report makes findings and recommendations; it recommends action to be taken. This House cannot say that – you either just adopt and endorse the actions which they are proposing, or if you do not agree you do not endorse them and you adopt the report as amended so that it becomes a report of Parliament. The Auditor-General does not report to PAC. The Auditor-General reports to Parliament and it is up to Parliament to make those decisions. Therefore, I think, consistent with the decisions we have taken as Parliament on this matter, those two should remain. They do not in any way mean that someone is acquitted. They do not mean that the other agencies of state that have the responsibility to investigate and prosecute wrongdoers will not do it or are prohibited or constrained in any way by decisions of Parliament. I think the two should not be mixed up. 

I support the motion as it is; and to be consistent with what we have done, in the case of hon. Hope Mwesigye, hon. Isaac Musumba, hon. John Byabagambi, hon. Serapio Rukundo, I agree with the motion. I imagine that was an amendment because it does not appear here that they should be treated like the others. If this Parliament thinks the recommendation should be adopted, we adopt them. If we think they should not as this motion is proposing, then we should adopt it as it is. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure on two issues. In the first place, as it is I find this motion unconstitutional in the sense that it sets two standards. Whereas the first amendment reads that political leaders adversely mentioned in the report have explained the circumstances of their actions to the satisfaction of Parliament, the second says that other Government officials adversely affected or mentioned in the report be required to explain the circumstances to the head of Public Service. 

Why are we setting the two standards? If the categories mentioned were in the wrong, why are you saying that this group can be handled and entertained here and another group there? I am saying so because Article 21(1) of our Constitution says, “All persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life and in every other respect and shall enjoy equal protection of the law.” (Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo for giving way to me. The information I want to give is that the two categories are necessitated by the fact that the political leaders mentioned are members of this House. Each was given an opportunity to respond to the report and that is why she is saying their response was satisfactory. 

In the case of the second category, the public servants, they did not have the opportunity to present their responses in this House. So, she is only saying that those too should be given the same opportunity as those in No. 1. So, it is actually not discrimination. It is giving equal opportunities to both categories of groups. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In that respect, therefore, we fall into a fundamental landmine, which is under rule 80(2) and (3) of our Rules of Procedure. It reads: “A Member, having any interest in any matter before the House, shall declare the nature of his or her interest in the matter and shall not vote on any question relating to that matter”. 

(3) “At the time of voting, a Member who has declared his or her interest under this rule shall absent himself or herself from the meeting until the voting is over.”

If we agree that there is equality the other way round as per the constitutional provision. This then means that the ministers and Members who are mentioned ought to have taken leave of this House but they are here, voting on motions and amendments of motions.

Mr Speaker, why don’t you liberate this House? Are we procedurally right when we cite a constitutional provision and in order to subvert the same, we say, “Now because the other groups are given an opportunity …” – yet this puts the concerned Members of this House under terrible scrutiny. Are we procedurally right to continue in this matter when they have acknowledged that, indeed, they are interested and they have vested interests but continue in the House and continue to incriminate others? When they say we absolve them, are we doing the right thing? Can’t the Members really allow this House to proceed with some semblance of dignity and fairness?

THE SPEAKER: Has this House implicated others? From the text of the amendment, I thought she was saying other Members have been able to come here and tell us this and so the public servants should go to the head of Public Service and explain themselves. Is that implicating?

MR SSEKIKUBO: It is the report of this House but that is not the gist of the matter. The gist of the matter is that the ministers who have acknowledged that they have vested interests in the matter continue sitting, debating and voting on the matter within this House. Are we procedurally right, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Who are those? Can you name them? Are you referring to hon. Mwesigye, hon. Rukundo and hon. Byabagambi? Because the others have been -

MR SSEKIKUBO: No, we have not in one way concluded this debate. Hon. Amama Mbabazi is -

THE SPEAKER: So, what are you suggesting, hon. Ssekikubo?

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have just agreed that this House does not have powers or exhaustive investigative mechanisms to exonerate anybody. Under the circumstances and under number two on the motion, I would wish that it read that, “The Government officials adversely mentioned...” not “...that the other...” Let us leave out “the other.”

Under No. 4, let us paraphrase the writing by saying “Parliament highly recommends that the investigative arms of Government take over to expeditiously carry out investigations into the CHOGM 2007”.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, first of all, I want to address something which you have not addressed yourselves on the issue of accountability and this is Article 164. Under this Article, it says, “The permanent secretaries or the accounting officer in charge of the ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for funds in that ministry or department.” This deals with the accounting officers, PS and so forth.

When it comes to the political leaders, this is in (2), political leaders are not lumped together with accounting officers in 164(1): “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold the office.”

It would appear that the treatment of these two categories is not the same. For instance, Parliament cannot say, you are a political leader so pay this. There is a different approach or procedure taken to deal with these political leaders and for assessing what they have to pay. So, there is a different treatment here.

But what hon. Masiko is saying is that those public officers maybe who are not accounting officers but have been mentioned here, should be handled by the head of Public Service to find out and listen to them because they cannot come here and give their account to us here because they will be strangers. I think that is why she is sending them to the head of Public Service. Depending on what he finds out, he will then decide on what to do either to send them to court or take disciplinary action. I think that is the intention.

But we cannot say, well, we afforded the political leaders opportunity to come and say something here, let us afford other public servants to also come. They will not be able to come, that is the problem. But at the same time, they have to be fairly treated and they can be fairly treated outside Parliament rather than here. Let us hear from the Attorney-General. 

3.44
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS, AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, thank you very much for this opportunity. May I begin with rule 80 of our Rules of Procedure? The title is, “Declaration of personal interest in any matter before the House.” Sub-rule (1) reads, “A member shall not, in or before the House or any committee, take part in the discussion of any matter in which he or she has direct pecuniary interest unless he or she has declared the nature of that interest to the House or committee.”

This rule talks about a Member having a direct pecuniary interest. I am not a native speaker of the English language but the term “pecuniary interest” has been around in the conduct of public affairs and I do not think this rule is meant to apply to the subject matter of the PAC report, which we have been discussing. 

Therefore, we also have Article 164 of the Constitution, and the marginal note is accountability and Article 164(1) states, “The permanent secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a ministry or a department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that ministry or department.” And Article 164(2) says: “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.” And Article 164(3) states that, “Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds.” 

It is good to refer to earlier Articles which talk about equality or treatment but the difference in treatment is written in this Article here that for permanent secretaries and other accounting officers, they should be handled this way and political leaders should be handled differently. So, the difference in treatment is actually a constitutional matter and not a figment of anybody’s imagination. 

The motion refers to referring the public officers to the head of the Public Service and again Article 173(1)(a) of the constitution talks about the head of the Public Service that: “There shall be a head of the public service who shall be appointed by the President acting on the advice of the Public Service Commission.” Article 173(2)(a), “The functions of the head of the public service are as follows:
a)	Tendering advice to the president on matters relating to the public service;
b)	Coordination of the activities of permanent secretaries; 
c)	Supervision of the work of permanent secretaries;
d)	Serving as a link between the Executive and the Public Service;
e)	Serving as a link between the service commissions; 
f)	Ensuring the implementation of Cabinet and other Government decisions; and 
g)	Any other duties assigned to him or her from time to time by the President.”

There is co-ordination of activities of permanent secretaries, supervision of the work of permanent secretaries, presumably including the sub-supervision of people or officers under the permanent secretary. Therefore, I find it regular that Parliament offers an opportunity to officers who cannot stand here and talk about what they have done, that they explain to this very senior – by the way, Article 173(a) was introduced in 2005, it was not there originally and it gave a special constitutional status to the head of the Public Service. I do not see any irregularity in Parliament saying that these other public officers can explain to the satisfaction of the head of the Public Service.

Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to go into one matter, which is that this picture has been created that the hosting of CHOGM was a loss to Uganda and I am very happy that the motion is that Parliament goes on record to appreciate and commend the NRM Government for hosting CHOGM successfully. CHOGM has become a catchword particularly to use as a basis for condemning the NRM Government for having done the right thing at the right time. This meeting involves heads of Commonwealth countries which are 54, it is held once every two years and it is rotational. Therefore, it was held in 2007 in Uganda and Uganda will have to wait for another 108 years before CHOGM comes here again. So, I wonder whether there is a grateful nation out there that the Queen and 53 other heads of Government came and went away peacefully without any adverse incident -(Interruptions)– no, I will accept them later. 

In line with that reasoning, allow me to table the final acts of CHOGM which are not mentioned anywhere in this debate. 
a)	Final Communiqué; Commonwealth Youth Forum 6 Uganda; Breaking Barriers: Unleashing Young People’s Potential for Development. 14th to 21st November 2007 Entebbe Uganda.
b)	Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting Kampala, Uganda, 23rd to 25th November 2007, Munyonyo. Statement on Respect and Understanding. 

Allow me to table Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting Kampala Uganda 23rd to 25th November, 2007 Munyonyo declaration on transforming societies to achieve political, economic and human development.

Finally, CHOGM Kampala 23rd to 25th November 2007, the Kampala Communiqué - I will read only three paragraphs from this:

“Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Uganda from 23-25th November 2007. Of the 48 countries that attended the meeting, 36 were represented by their heads of state. 

The opening ceremony of the meeting included an address by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, head of the Commonwealth.

Heads of Government conveyed their sincere appreciation to the Government and people of Uganda for the warm hospitality extended to them and for the excellent arrangements made for the meeting.

They also congratulated President Museveni for his leadership in chairing the meeting.” 

And they go on up to paragraph 96.

Mr Speaker, these are final acts of CHOGM 2007 here in Kampala. The world took Uganda seriously because we successfully hosted CHOGM and people are now free to stand up and invalidate this achievement.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, you raised the issue of Article 21 of the Constitution about equal treatment before the law. What has been done by the Attorney-General shows that the Constitution provides different channels through which justice is done! There is nothing wrong about referring the issue of public servants to head of Public Service. I suggest that we should not use the term “exonerate.” I think private companies and individuals adversely mentioned in the report should be handled by concerned Government agencies. These appropriate agencies could be courts and others.

MS KIBOIJANA: As a member of the PAC, we come out strongly in our report to tell this House that CHOGM was a great success. I would like to get clarification on whether we have exonerated political leaders or whether they will be handled by the appropriate Government organs to take appropriate action?

THE SPEAKER: I think it is for me to interpret what you have done and I said that you just rejected the recommendations by the committee. There is nothing about exoneration or acquittal and that leaves other Government agencies to follow up the matter.
 
MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have rightly guided but I wish that we do not use the words “if they so wish” let us use “strongly recommend.”

THE SPEAKER: We use “if they so wish” because these are independent agencies. I am not the supervisor of the IGG to direct him. They can use their mandate to do what is supposed to be done.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I do not doubt the Attorney-General’s guidance but what I am pointing out is that whereas private companies and Government officials appeared together before the committee, ministers have been given a second opportunity before the House. I would like to advise hon. Masiko to remove all the amendments and remain with one of referring all those mentioned to appropriate Government agencies because that is the spirit of the motion. We should forward the report to appropriate Government agencies.

THE SPEAKER: Should we forward or avail?

MR SSEKIKUBO: We should forward because that means that Parliament has considered it and we are now giving it to those who may find anything of interest to them.

THE SPEAKER: Are we prompting these agencies to act?  “Availing” leaves it to them to decide.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I think that formulation can be harmonised. I want to say that CHOGM was a success but should not be a license to sweep some matters under the carpet. Let us proceed and end the matter.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I appreciate the motion and I want to note three things. The first one is that as we approach the end of our term, it is very important for us to conclude those matters that have been before us for this long and one of these matters is this CHOGM 2007. This is 2011. 

You do not need to be an economist. If you really compute the opportunity cost of what else this Parliament would have been doing if we were not bogged down by this report, it is a tremendous loss. 

Consequently, I concur with you that the motion moved by hon. Masiko and seconded by hon. Kalule Sebunya that, “The report of the PAC on the Special Audit Report of the Auditor-General on CHOGM 2007 be adopted by this Parliament with the suggested amendments,” be passed. On that basis, I move that the question be put. (Members rose)
                                                     
THE SPEAKER: No, I put the question.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Not these amendments, Mr Speaker. We are not agreeable to these amendments.

THE SPEAKER: I want to put the question to the amendments which were read out by hon. Masiko and - 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, formulate so that we know what we are voting on because at the end of the day, we have this voting whereas some things are not clear. Can we have it reformulated?

THE SPEAKER: Have you not followed? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: No.

THE SPEAKER: I want to put the question. Do you have any amendment?

MR SSEKIKUBO: By having - I really listen, hon. Members, but you too may not be observant that you want the vote when you do not have quorum. You are proceeding when you do not a quorum.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to hon. Masiko’s motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted, with amendments.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much for the business that we have conducted. I must explain that this has been a long business. The report was tabled in May but that was the time when Parliament was being prorogued and, therefore, during prorogation, we would not consider this report. 

When we resumed, we had constitutional schedules namely; the State of Nation Address by the President and then the Budget which we had to consider for a number of weeks or months – that is why we could not immediately deal with something that was tabled in May although we attached importance to this report and as soon as we were free from elections, we were able to handle this report which we have concluded today.

We have not thrown away the report but have adopted the report subject to the adjustments that you have made. We have not closed the door to other agencies of Government to do their work and carry out their mandate. With this, I mean the CID, IGG and other agencies that may be interested in contents of the report of the affairs of CHOGM. 

So, I thank you very much for the patience and contributions that you made towards resolving things that were in that report. I thank you very much. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Mr Serapio Rukundo): The Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry will make a statement on the pre-shipment inspection of goods.

Pre-shipment inspection is very important for the protection of the Ugandan consumer. It is also extremely important for protecting our economy but it has a cost to the Ugandan importer. The minister, therefore, has been caucusing with the Association of Uganda Importers especially KACITA on the harmonisation of the costs.

Then recently, there was also inspection of the goods from Japan which our agency, Uganda National Bureau of Standards, is preparing to handle. This harmonisation should be concluded and a comprehensive statement made on the 19th of this month which is a Tuesday. I beg for your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I thank you. 

(Whereupon Members of the Opposition returned to the Chamber)

THE SPEAKER: Lord Mayor, you are welcome. (Laughter)

4.13
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you will recall that I made a short statement yesterday about the incident that happened on the 11 April 2011. I promised that I would be able to give out copies of that statement today. 

The other copies to the honourable members are coming and will be distributed to you in due course. But meanwhile, I can read and then as it comes, the people will share and indeed they are going to debate.

It is common knowledge that some political leaders in Uganda have -(Interjections)- this is not –(Mr Katuntu rose)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us get hon. Katuntu’s point.

MR KATUNTU: The Rules of Procedure of this House are very clear, including our usual practice. The Minister cannot make a statement without Members having a copy because eventually we are going to respond to his statement.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you will make your statement tomorrow. Let us go to the next item, because the copies are not there and members want them. So, make it tomorrow. Hon. Kivejinja, tomorrow ensure that you get sufficient copies for all the members.

PETITION OF THE TRADERS OF MUKONO SEEKING THE INTERVENTION OF PARLIAMENT TO REVIEW THE TRADE (LICENSING) (AMENDMENT OF SCHEDULE) INSTRUMENTS NO. 1 AND 2 OF 2011 AND PROBE INTO THE PROPRIETY AND/OR LEGALITY OF THE TRADE LICENSE FEES LEVIED  BY MUKONO CENTRAL DIVISION (FORMERLY MUKONO TOWN COUNCIL) AND MUKONO DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION PRIOR TO THE ENACTMENT OF THE SAID INSTRUMENT

4.16
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I came walking –(Laughter)- and that is why I am late and I seek for your indulgence. I stand here to present to this august House a petition by the traders of Mukono seeking for the intervention of Parliament to review the Trade (Licensing) (Amendment Schedule) instruments No.1 and 2 of 2011 and to probe into the legality of the trade licence fees levied by Mukono Central Division formerly Mukono Town Council and Mukono District Administration prior to the enactment of the said instrument. I am presenting this petition under rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure.

“The humble petition by the traders of Mukono showeth that:

The petitioners are shop owners and/or traders who carry out their business within Mukono;

The petitioners do pay the bulk of taxes provided for under various legal and statutory instruments which inter-alia include, import duties, Value Added Tax, Income Tax, Withholding Tax, property rates, trade licences, Local Service Tax, et cetera;

The subject matter of this petition is the general structure of the Trade Licence, which the business community find quite repressive and retrogressive in nature;

The humble petitioners believe that this august House takes note of the Trade (Licensing) Act Cap. 101 of the Laws of Uganda 2000, which was enacted in 1969 in the volumes published by the Uganda Law Reform Commission in the year 2000;

Part A of the Schedule to the said Act provides for the trade licensing fees for the different types and groups of business or trade in Mukono and the line Minister was enjoined under Section 30 of the Act to issue a statutory instrument amending the Schedule as and when necessary.

The foregoing notwithstanding, Mukono Local Administration has been assessing and indeed imposing on the traders, quite exorbitant trade licence fees not sanctioned by the said legislation or any statutory instrument. For instance, the licence fee for the wholesale trade provided for in part A of the Schedule was supposed to be Shs 2,500 and Shs 1,500 for grade I and II respectively and retail business was supposed to Shs 1,500 and Shs 1,000 for grades I and II respectively. Copies of the said instrument have been attached.

However, all along, Mukono Town Council has been charging Shs 234,000 for wholesale and Shs 130,000 for the retail shops. The same council has been charging up to Shs 780,000 for super markets and Shs 520,000 for what they termed as extra large shops in total disregard of the Trade (Licensing) Act. Meanwhile, Mukono District Administration has been charging between Shs 35,000 and Shs 150,000 in the sub-counties of Goma, Nama and Kyampisi of Mukono North; 

Whereas the Constitution of Uganda, under Article 152(1) stipulates that no tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament, under the disguise of granting trading licences to businesses, Mukono has been collecting taxes from businesses that are not supposed to be licensed by the local authorities. For example, Mukono Town Council (now Mukono Central Division) has been charging Shs 650,000 from petrol stations as licence fees annually;

Whereas the petitioners are not opposed to pay trade licence fees, they are extremely aggrieved to note that for quite a number of years they have been compelled to pay a higher amount of tax over and above the statutory limits, which constitutes a glaring violation of their economic rights;

In an apparent attempt to address the aforesaid legal anomalies, the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry amended the schedule by issuing instruments 1 and 2 and in particular included Section 25 in Instrument No. 1 which unexplainably increased the rates payable by Mukono traders from Shs 2,500 to Shs 320,000 for the Grade I and from Shs 1,500 to Shs 150,000 for Grade II. He has also introduced new licence fees which until now have been non-existent. For example apartment (mizigo) licences on tenants’ houses which are also required to pay property rates. This amounts to double taxation. (See copy attached hereto as Annexture “B” and “C”);

The said statutory instrument has instead aggravated the situation as the figures provided therein are quite excessive, unrealistic and contradictory to growth and development. Besides, the instrument was made without any form of consultation with the affected business community;

It is a constitutional requirement under Article 152(2) that where a law enacted by Parliament confers powers on any person or authority to waive or vary a tax imposed by an Act of Parliament, that person or authority shall report to Parliament periodically on the exercise of those powers;

The petitioners have been following the manner in which the Minister of Trade and Tourism has been conducting the issue of amending the Schedule to the Trading (Licensing) Act and at no one time did he report to Parliament about these changes thereby denying the representatives of the petitioners an opportunity to debate the various statutory instruments he has been issuing;

Your humble petitioners raised their concern with the administration of Mukono through their Member of Parliament and held several unfruitful meetings. (See letters attached and annexed “D”). Mukono Municipal Council authorities do agree with your petitioners that this instrument is defective as expressed in the acting Town Clerk’s letter to the permanent secretary which is attached to this petition as annex “D”, but even then, the tax collectors have moved to enforce the new instrument this time more ruthlessly than ever before;

The petitioners are aware that as traders in Mukono, they do not do business in isolation of other traders in the country and high taxes in other localities affect them directly. Statutory Instrument 1 and 2 affect the whole country from Abim to Zombo if you are to arrange districts alphabetically. It is worth noting that Kampala is equally affected yet it is where the traders of Mukono purchase goods for their stock.

The petitioners are further aggrieved that despite the high taxes the traders pay to the local administration, they do not receive most of the expected services like toilet facilities, garbage collection or street lighting. Instead, they have to pay private service providers for the services that the local authorities should be obliged to provide.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament intervenes in this matter by:

1.	Reviewing or causing the review of the Trading (Licensing) (Amendment of Schedule) Instruments 1 and 2 of 2011;
2.	Probing the propriety or legality of the trading licence fees levied by Mukono Local Administration prior to the enactment of the said instrument; and 
3.	Deal with any matter in connection therewith.

We do so pray.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this petition on the Table and also to note that this petition concerns a very important matter, which touches the livelihood of our people because at the moment they are being forced to pay these taxes and those who cannot afford to pay these taxes have had their businesses closed. We, therefore, pray that this matter be considered expeditiously having been signed by 320 traders of Mukono. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the relevant committee, which is the Committee on Trade, undertake the study of the petition and then report to the House as soon as possible.  

MR WADRI: In light of the fact that this is a very important petition served to us by the business community members who are suffering under heavy taxes; and also knowing very well that the lifespan of the Eighth Parliament to which this petition has been served is too short for us - to transact business by way of first referring it to the committee and the committee inviting witnesses, then the committee writing a report and bringing it to us in the House to debate. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, on whether it is possible for this important petition to be saved. If we are not able to accomplish it within the one month or so left for this Parliament, let the next Parliament take it up as a matter of urgency.

THE SPEAKER: At an appropriate time, a decision will be made. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition to the concern raised by my boss here, I take cognisance of the fact that the instrument is being enforced as we talk now and time is running very fast. By the time we come up with a decision, we may find ourselves in a quagmire where so many people will have suffered under the yoke of this instrument. Is it possible for this Parliament to give some temporary relief by way of staying the enforcement pending investigation and determination of the matter?

THE SPEAKER: That will be after the committee to which this assignment has been given has studied the situation. It can make an interim report and recommendations, which we shall consider. But at the moment we have no basis because it has just been read. But the committee can make that recommendation and we shall consider it.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 108/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.30
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, this morning I had an interaction with the Shadow Minister for Finance who had other duties to do and he feared he may not be here on time and he requested me just in case he is not here to read out the question. 

THE SPEAKER: But doesn’t he need the answer himself? We can save it so that it is taken on another day so that he benefits from the answer. 

DR EPETAIT: He gave me the mandate to ask his question. 

THE SPEAKER: It is alright, you can go on.

DR EPETAIT: “In the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2008/09, the minister promised to bring to Parliament Bills: The Microfinance Bill by September 2008; the SACCO Regulation Authority Bill, by December 2008; the Anti-Money Laundering Bill by March 2009; and the Accountants Bill by March 2009.

Would the minister inform the House why the above important Bills have not been presented to Parliament as promised?”

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I thank my colleague, hon. Albert Oduman Okello, for his question. 

In the ministerial policy statement of 2008/09, which I have, the Minister of Finance –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, Members, our AC is not working and that is why you are feeling a bit hot and that is why we have opened all the doors so that you can at least get the natural refreshment from outside. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, in the ministerial policy statement of the Financial Year 2008/09, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development promised to have a draft Bill and regulations on SACCOs finalised by 2008 – (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I appreciate this is a question for oral answer, but at least there ought to be a few copies for Members to follow what the minister is responding to. Could we have a copy of her response?

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the question has been on the Order Paper for quite some time. I prepared my response and I forwarded copies. I do not know why colleagues do not have copies; otherwise, I have been ready for two weeks. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, if the Members want their copies, we shall have this answered next week.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 109/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.33
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): “Could the minister explain why in the structure of accounts of Government, the closing cash and bank balances of the current accounting year are not reflected as opening balances in accounts of the succeeding accounting year?”

THE SPEAKER: I thought he is asking question 109?

MR EUKU: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker, question 110/1/08.

THE SPEAKER: But this is the question which hon. Dr Epetait asked. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I think there is a mix up here; there are actually three sets of questions to the same minister. The ones which hon. Oduman Okello asked me to present were two; we have just handled 108/1/08 and deferred it. Now question 109/1/08 –

THE SPEAKER: That is exactly what I was saying, 109/1/08 was not his question. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 109/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.34
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): (i) “Having prematurely abandoned the famous vision 2025, when does Government intend to finalise the proposed new Vision 2035?

ii)	Would the minister explain why the five year national development plan was not launched by October 2008 as promised in the ministry’s policy statement for the year 2008/2009?

iii)	What steps has the ministry so far taken towards the development of a macro-economic forecasting model?

iv)	Would the minister inform the House about the findings of a study it promised to undertake concerning employment and public expenditure efficiency?”

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, the question that has been put - of course the wording: “Having prematurely abandoned the famous Vision 2025” is somehow cynical. It was not abandoned prematurely. This Vision 2025 – I have a copy here - was prepared and the initial draft of its revision was circulated for Government’s comments and other stakeholders and as a result of that review, the Vision 2025, taking into consideration the intervening events was revised. Substantial responses were received from the stakeholders and this demanded overhauling of the document conceptually and methodologically. This greatly impacted on the speed at which a new one would be prepared. 

At the same time, there was need to produce a five year national development plan to fill the gap created by the then expired Poverty Eradication Action Plan. Technical efforts and concentration was moved towards the production of the national development plan. I am sure Members have approved this plan on the Floor of this House. For the moment, the technical team is putting great effort on helping the sectors and the ministries align their plans and budgets to the national development plan. 

This is meant to ensure that the national development plan is financed and implemented. Efforts are going on to ensure that the new 30 year vision - because this 30 year vision - but the plans are five year development plans – therefore, about six development plans will be done. 

So, the replacement of 2025 is to be finalised and the process and the eventual product will address the gaps identified in the vision which was in the first draft of 2025.

Basically, the answer is, we did not prematurely abandon this plan. Simply, this plan did not have an implementation strategy. Events come in and we had a Poverty Eradication Action Plan; now we have a five year development plan to take this country to the year 2015 and 2016. Thank you very much.

Part two of the question was, “Would the minister explain why the five year national development plan was not launched by October 2008 as promised in the ministry’s policy statement for the fiscal year 2008/2009?”

Again, the first draft of the national development plan had been ready by October 2008. At that time, it was realised that more work needed to be done to ensure a firm, conceptual and methodological foundation, which required further evidence-based analysis of the macro-economic projections that later formed the foundation of the national development plan. With the new draft, more extensive consultations with parliaments, with cabinets, with the sectors, local governments, private sector, civil society and other stakeholders had to be undertaken. As a result of these processes of consultation, the above challenges and the PEAP was extended to provide the policy guidance for the period the national development plan was under formulation.

The third part of the question was; “What steps has the ministry so far taken towards the development of macro-economic forecasting model?” 

The response is that the procurement of the consultant to help the Government in developing the macro-economic model has been concluded. The consultants are already in the country to work with the ministry’s technical staff and preparatory work towards the development of the model has already started. 

We want to thank colleagues for your active participation, especially in the formulation of the National Development Plan and for your subsequent approval and adoption of this plan by Parliament last November, 2010.

The National Development Plan is the guiding policy framework for the country. Its implementation has already started and we strongly believe that with the vision, which is a transformed Ugandan society from a peasant to modern and prosperous country within 30 years, the country is poised for economic take-off. 

The last component of the question was, “Would the minister inform the House about the findings of a study it promised to undertake concerning employment and public expenditure efficiency?” 

The answer to this is that the ministry, in conjunction with its partners, the World Bank and the Economic Policy Research Centre at Makerere University, have taken a series of studies on public expenditure tracking. The study on improving efficiency and effectiveness in public spending and budget monitoring and accountability are all being undertaken. We wish to inform the House that indeed, these studies are being put into consideration as we begin to implement the budgets of 2010/2011-2011/2012.

Recommendations that are emerging out of this are to limit expenditure on consumptive items, limit expenditure on public administration, increase budget allocation to frontline services to minimise supplementary expenditure and improve cash planning and linking cash planning to work plans and procurement plans. Once again, Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.43
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): I would like to thank the Minister for the response he has given. Hon. Members, you will appreciate that this question was raised in 2008. It has finally found its way to this House in the year of our Lord 2011. But even then, my observation is that the Minister is talking about developing a vision and it is still incomplete. We are talking of a 30-year vision. It is also not complete. The 30-year vision is to be completed by December, 2011 and you want to call it Vision 2035? When are you starting the counting of your year? If you complete your vision by 2011 and it is for 30 years; do you still go ahead to name it Vision 2035? I still want to insist that the manner in which the Vision 2025 –

THE SPEAKER: No doctor, would you like to make a supplementary question? 

DR EPETAIT: The supplementary question is: having realised that there were gaps in Vision 2025, shouldn’t the Minister have come to inform Parliament that, “Hon. Members, we are sorry, Vision 2025 had so many gaps and we are going to have it reviewed?” That is why we used the words “premature abandonment” because it is only today that we are told there were so many gaps. We do not know how many gaps because the development of that vision required wider consultations. I bet there may be a number of gaps again in the 2035 vision as well. 

The minister has told us in the last part of the question whose answer he did not provide in print that the ministry is still studying the employment and public expenditure efficiency. Since 2008, when this question was asked, I imagine you started a study. May we know from the Minister when he hopes to finish this study and assure Ugandans that this is the roadmap towards attaining efficiency in employment and public expenditure?

4.47
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the Minister aware that the document he presented to us this afternoon is an illegal document? The NDP was launched before it was approved by this House. As required by the NPA Act, you are supposed to have brought the NDP here for parliamentary approval. Consultations with the committees do not amount to parliamentary approval. Are you, therefore, aware that the NDP as of now is an illegal document?

Two, the question that my shadow minister raised about the macro-economic forecasting model is a very serious one. To this date, the honourable minister is informing this House that they have procured the consultants and the consultants are in this country. Have you got these consultants from outside this country? We have very beautiful economists in this country. We have the EPRC - it is seated there; it would have done this forecasting ages ago. Can the Minister inform us whether these economists are being flown in from elsewhere or we are using our domestic economists?

And finally, it is very absurd that after the expiry of the PEAP, we just extended it. Mr Minister, what guided your extension of the PEAP? Because you are aware that from PEAP you wanted to achieve your PEAP objectives through the PMA. All those expired. There was the Rural Development Strategy. What happened along the way? Can you inform Ugandans on what is going on in your ministry? You do not have a macro-economic forecasting model, you launched an illegitimate document and you are hoping that we are operating normally. Thank you.

4.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just keep wondering what the Ministry of Finance is doing when I read the response to question 3 regarding the macro-economic forecasting model. Professor is an economist just like I am. We have so many economists in the Ministry of Finance - monetary economists. We have economists in Bank of Uganda. We have the Economic Policy Research Centre at Makerere University. This is part of the thing they do. These are some of the things, Professor, you taught us. How can we waste resources yet we have people we employ to do this modelling work in the ministry, in Bank of Uganda, in the Economic Policy Research Centre? Makerere University can do this for you. We have economists there. 

We have economists like Dr Balihuta an econometrician. Yeah! We have Dr Baguma Adam. These are people who are highly educated. How do we go ahead to this level now? 

I think the professor is just massaging -(Laughter)- that is an economics word - massaging data - we learned it in econometrics. So, he is just massaging information for us here. You tell us that you have failed or you have not directed someone to do this. Otherwise, you have disappointed us. I can help him to do this work. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the supplementary question?

MR OKUPA: My supplementary question is why we have not used our own economists in Bank of Uganda, Economic Policy Research Centre at Makerere and at the ministry. Even the Minister himself can do this. He is a professor of economics. So, that is why I am saying he is massaging information.

THE SPEAKER: Please, answer.

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me begin with the question raised by hon. Epetait. Vision 2025 and the gaps that were identified: a vision is a dream of what you would want to happen. So, Ugandans’ dream is a paradigm shift from a predominantly peasant society into a modern and prosperous one. And this will take, according to our estimation, the transformation of the economy to reach that stage, the vision we have, within 30 years. Now, that is a dream - but this dream, if we do everything without diversions, can be achieved in less than 30 years. 

In fact our forecast, hon. Okupa, is that right now with the discovery of oil, the election victory which ensures continuity of stability -(Interjections)- the economic take off of this country -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I need to be protected from hon. Wadri Kassiano because - anyway the point I am mentioning to these Members is that given the stability, this country can achieve economic take off by the year 2017. 

In the preparation -(Ms Christine Bako rose_) Mr Speaker, I know hon. Bako has a research assistant as a roommate [HON. MEMBERS: “Order!”] but sometimes they confuse -(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, Prof. Kamuntu is a person of age, a former UPC member, an ambassador of Obote’s regime and a man whom we really hold in high regard. But a few minutes back, he sort of diverted from the respectable cause for which we regard him in high esteem and he went ahead even to attack the privacy of an honourable member referring to her and saying that she has got a roommate who is her research assistant - referring to hon. Christine Abia, the Woman MP of Arua and my MP and a lady from Terego County. (Laughter) Is Prof. Kamuntu in order to divert us from discussing serious issues of a national nature for the development of this country to the private bedroom of a female colleague? Is he in order? Because he seems to impute the fact that he even knows where the honourable member stays and he knows the bedroom and the rest of it. Is the hon. Member in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, a session for questions should exactly be that - a session for questions. It should not be a session for debate or diverting here and there. Either you have a question to ask or a response to make – that is what we should restrict ourselves to. But once you start making preambles and the like, it becomes a problem. Let us restrict ourselves to questions and supplementary questions.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It was just a friendly comment, knowing that hon. Bako clearly has a very competent partner who does a lot of research. This is the competence I am referring to – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us concentrate on only answering questions and asking them. Let us not go to conversations and blah, blah! 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We would like to ask the honourable minister to simply withdraw that statement to have peace with us because the insinuation is dangerous. He has to explain to hon. Bako’s husband who the roommate is if it stays on the Hansard. He has to explain to all of us the women his insinuation that we cannot think on our own unless a private researcher who shares with us a room helps us to think. The easiest thing is that the Minister withdraws his statement and we have peace because in terms of gender relations, that statement amounts to sexual harassment, which we do not want on the Floor of this House.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I was answering the question by hon. Epetait. The question was put –

THE SPEAKER: No, they are claiming that you said something, although I did not hear it myself. Are you withdrawing the offensive part of your statement?

PROF. KAMUNTU: If my statements had some offensive element, I had no intention to offend anybody, Mr Speaker. Therefore, I withdraw it because I have no intention to offend colleagues. I was at a point of answering hon. Epetait’s question that this question was put in 2008. I thought the answer I provided was this Vision 2025 – 

THE SPEAKER: But the hon. Members have insisted that these questions should be answered within not more than three or at most five minutes. But now we have taken over 10 or even more minutes. Let us restrict ourselves to that timing. Just give a straight answer and that is it.

PROF. KAMUNTU: If it is a straight answer, the gaps that were identified in the Vision 2025 were correctly addressed by producing the National Development Plan 2005.

Coming to hon. Bako’s question, this National Development Plan was tabled before this Parliament and it was approved. Therefore, it is not an illegal document.

Answering the question by hon. Okupa, the macro-economic forecasting model is being undertaken and incidentally by procuring a consultant, there is nowhere I mentioned in my answer that it was a foreign consultant. The only point I should emphasise, in addition to civil servant macro-economic professional technicians, we always sometimes use economists from outside. Thank you very much for the questions and I hope I have provided satisfactory answers.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 110/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

5.01
MR ROSS EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): “Could the minister explain why in the structure of accounts of Government the closing cash and bank balances of the current accounting year are not reflected as opening balances in the accounts of the succeeding accounting year?”

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the Public Finance and Accountability Act, there is a schedule which defines statements to be made regarding public expenditure. I have checked and the consolidated accounts of government comprise the statements spelt out in the Third Schedule of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. 

Among those statements, there is a statement of financial position, balance and cashflow. I have checked in these annual reports and the findings are that all the statements – financial position as well as cash flow statements – indicate opening cash balances and specifically the cash flow statement has a section on the reconciliation of movement of cash during the year, which clearly indicates the opening balances. It is, therefore, not true that the closing cash and bank balances of the current accounting year are not reflected. I can share it with you because I have the document right here. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we come to the end of today’s business – 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity when we are about to adjourn the House. I am aware that the Minister of Internal Affairs has assured us that he will give a statement tomorrow, which statement will be of benefit to us, Members of the Opposition who were affected by the actions of the police last Monday. But before we go, I would like to inform the Minister that we are in a period of lent and as Christians, we are expected to do three important things in life. Lent is a period for prayer, fasting and alms giving, in which case, we members of the Opposition feel that as part of our responsibility as believers, we must share the sorrow with the rest of Ugandans. And we shall fast what is dear to us, for example, moving in a vehicle which demands fuel. We want to forego that luxury of driving when we have got many Ugandans out there who are unable to provide food for their families. 

At the same time, as we identify with the rest of Ugandans who walk to work, I would like to inform the Minister that tomorrow, Thursday, we will still carry out that noble duty of walking, associating with the poor and we will walk to this House to receive the report he is going to present. I hope he will not be overzealous and deploy to the extent that we have ourselves arrested and we will not be able to receive his report. I want you to know that tomorrow we are going to walk because it is part of our Christian belief. 

Good enough, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Matia Kasaija, is a very good Catholic. So, please, tomorrow as we walk, allow us to walk to Parliament and do not have your police officers interfere with our trekking to Parliament. 

I also want to specifically appeal to hon. Matia Kasaija – he is a Catholic and I know he knows these important activities that a Christian must perform during the lent period - can you kindly join us tomorrow, hon. Matia Kasaija, because when we are together with you, those police officers will not harass us?

THE SPEAKER: We have come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.06 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 April 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)


