Wednesday, 16 April 2003 

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Stranger’s Gallery today, we have a group of six students from Manjansi High School in Tororo District, who are members of the debating club. You are most welcome! They have come to see how you debate national issues. But I think we should thank hon. Dorothy Hyuha, Member for Tororo District, who sponsored their visit. (Applause). Also, we have students and lecturers and non-teaching staff from the Institute of Special Education, Kyambogo, who are also welcome. (Applause).

Honourable members, I have been informed by the Chairperson of the Committee on the Economy that there exists two vacancies on that Committee. Therefore, I appeal to Members who are interested to join this Committee to take the necessary steps leading to your being appointed on that Committee.

Honourable members, as you remember, we made a decision that we set up a select committee to deal with the problem that arose in respect of the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2002. Following that decision, I have identified these honourable members, and I believe they will serve on this committee. I believe their serving the committee will not be a question for their own interest, but to do something that will be convincing. Their work should produce a compromise so that we dispose of this matter.  These are the 15 Members I feel will be able to serve on that select committee:

    1. Hon. Aachilla John Roberts
    2. Hon. Loyce Bwambale
    3. Hon. Abdu Katuntu
    4. Hon. Augustine Ruzindana
    5. Hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo
    6. Hon. Fred Ruhindi
    7. Hon. Dora Byamukama
    8. Hon. Betty Amongi
    9. Hon. Yusuf Nsubuga Nsambu
    10.  Hon. Alex Onzima
    11.  Hon. Rosemary Seninde
    12.  Hon. Kabakumba Masiko
    13.  Hon. Rev. Hamlet Mbabazi Kabushenga
    14.  Hon. Mary Amajo
    15.  Hon. Namuyangu 

I appoint hon. Fred Ruhindi to chair this select committee, and I believe you agree with this team.

There is also one other issue we have to dispose of - the terms of reference for this Committee. Yesterday I appealed to you to think about these terms of reference. I have only got one proposal from hon. Col. Katirima, but I believe others are thinking about these terms. Maybe later, we shall decide on these terms of reference.  

Also, tomorrow there will be a workshop for the Convention on the Rights of Disabled Persons. I believe it will be in Grand Imperial Hotel, starting at 9 a.m. You are invited to participate.

MR KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKOMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday the Minister for Internal Affairs read a ministerial statement and one of the bits she mentioned was about the arming of the LDUs of Kapchorwa District, so that they can control the rampant cross-border raids. She said that the remaining 157 LDUs were being given their arms and uniforms yesterday and then they would be deployed.

I am reliably told, through the Residence District Commissioner, that by mid-day yesterday, the Third Division Commander, Col. Ssula Semakula, had already changed his mind and he was not going to arm those LDUs. Instead he chased away the vehicles which had gone to collect the LDUs. In any case, that is not serving the purpose, which was to be performed.  Eventually, some of these young men have run back on foot to Kapchorwa and possibly to their destinations within the district. That means that place is still prone to another massacre. 

I talked to him at around 2 p.m. this afternoon, and he actually remained adamant. He was asking me, “Who told you that these LDUs were supposed to be armed?” I told him it was in a ministerial statement read by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. He said he is not answerable to the Minister of Internal Affairs, and that his task, directed by higher authorities, was to provide security to the area, which was struck by cattle rustlers. So I said, was it a lie that we were told about this? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But in any case, the statement was rejected. 

MR KAPKWOMU: So, leaving that apart, I do not know what we should actually do to this insecure situation at the moment.  Anyway some young men from Makerere University are preparing to go and pay homage and sympathies to the families of those who lost their relatives. By so doing, they are actually appealing to Members of Parliament here, whoever has an old rag of cloth to dispose of, they are ready to carry it to those people who have lost all their property. They also intend to have some transport. In case a Member is kind enough to donate, a piece of paper will be going round, and we see how we can enable these young men to go and pay homage.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine arises from your communication. You have mentioned that there are two vacancies existing on the Standing Committee on the National Economy, but you remember we had some other committees like the Equal Opportunities, HIV/AIDS, Science and Technology, and members from other former existing Standing Committees shifted to those. I would wish, if it were possible, to have them streamlined. For instance, like for Sembabule, our representative on the Appointments Committee moved to HIV/AIDS, and I think other committees were equally affected. I thought if it would be streamlined, that would be better. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance as regards an alarming situation in my constituency. In the 6th Parliament, this House passed a resolution that Special Revenue Protection Unit activity be suspended and streamlined in line with the URA. As I speak now, over eight vehicles were arrested last week; over seventy-five bicycles have been collected from the local community that engage in cross-boarder trade.  

The local community whose property was got have been visiting URA headquarters and President’s Office at Okello House to rescue their properties. Some of them have made more than six trips, and they are really frustrated. I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker, as regards the Minister of Finance failing to implement a resolution of this House. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to be guided. In the New Vision of Monday, 14 April 2003, there was a sub-headline of people who were arrested as illegal immigrants and – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I do not want to interrupt you but the point is that, as you can see on the front bench, other than the honourable Minister of Finance, others are not here, because I understand they have a Cabinet meeting. So, if you raise matters that would require a response from the ministers who are not here, you may not get assistance from me because I do not answer for the Executive, I only answer for Parliament.  Therefore, I would advise that if you have anything for which you want a response - unless the Minister of Finance is going to respond to it, but I do not think it will be fair, and he is not a Leader of Government Business. He is just a Minister of Finance. I would rather think that you should reserve your queries until tomorrow when the ministers will be here so that you get the response. Otherwise, you will be frustrated because there will be no answer.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wanted just to request for your indulgence because there are some specific issues of national importance, which would have required the presence of the ministers to respond to. So, is it possible that in the course of our deliberations today they could come in? And I wanted to request for your indulgence that when such a time comes, that you may allow us to make specific inquiries. I will give an example. 

When you read and watch the international media, there has been a lot reported about this virus called SARS, and there is a lot of movement, both trade and non-trade. 

Actually right now, the Chairperson of our Committee has travelled to North Korea, and these are the regions in which this virus has been terrorising people. But the Ministry of Health has not come up with any specific guidelines, any specific information on how best we can protect and defend ourselves. Actually in West Africa, the other day, some plane was diverted and refused landing rights because their respective ministries of health had not streamlined certain issues.  

Mr Speaker, I wanted to ask for your indulgence that if the Minister of Health comes in, we might put a specific question so that he may either respond immediately or make appropriate time when he should respond. But I thought this is something which is urgent and can affect us as a nation and a Parliament together. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: I think that has never been a problem if there is something urgent. I always allow Members to raise such issues, and I will.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish on behalf of Government to tender our unreserved apologies for the apparent emptiness of the front bench. As the Speaker has already pointed out, there is a very important and special Cabinet meeting somewhere outside Kampala. That Cabinet meeting has necessitated almost all the ministers and ministers of state to attend. I am here because I am handling this important bill. So, I call upon Members with any matters to raise regarding specific ministries, to hold their fire, maybe until tomorrow when the ministers will be available. I thank you.

MR AGGREY AWORI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am actually seeking your guidance on the matter that occurred yesterday, that is, when the House unanimously rejected a statement from a minister. What are the legal and legislative implications when a House rejects a statement from a minister and it is a Government position? What are the implications? Does it mean that the Government should resign or the minister should resign?

THE SPEAKER: You see, it was the choice of the minister to make a statement. It was not mandatory that she had to make a statement. She made a statement with which you were not satisfied. Maybe next time she will turn up with a statement which – other wise, it cannot be a cause for the Government to resign.

MR HILARY ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday I made a statement to the effect that a sub-county was over-run by the LRA. The details are that one of the displaced people’s camps accommodating about 10,000 people at a place called Apyata in Ogir sub-county of Lamwo County, was overrun the day before yesterday by the LRA.  They killed four men who were trying to resist, abducted a few people, collected all the women to carry the loot from the villages and burnt down all the grass-thatched houses in that camp. They had ample time because the UPDF’s presence is no longer there in that camp, because they moved away to other areas. Generally, the situation in Lamwo County is worrying because the entire countryside is really in the hands of the LRA basically, except for the centres where there are a few LDUs keeping the place.

Our concern is to the Government. How are we being treated, we from Kitgum, we from Gulu area, when there is an emergency and yet there is a battle going on in that area?  When there is an emergency of any form, soldiers are moved away and we are left exposed! Actually, our feelings are that maybe our lives do not matter to other people. We are extremely upset about this, and we feel that this discriminative approach towards the security of our people cannot be tolerated further. 

We have been peace-loving people. Kitgum has been one of those districts which are peace-loving. Many of our constituencies and I myself campaigned for this Government, and now we are getting a slap in our face, and we are not happy about what is going on!

It is unfortunate the frontbenchers are not here; we would have wished them to give an explanation to this effect. Lamwo is on fire, people are dying, and we are very frustrated and disappointed.  That is all, Mr Speaker, for now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, sometimes some of these issues are better served if the Member can approach the minister concerned and present his problem. I think you can get a quicker solution to your problem then, because now the minister is not here. I would rather advise that apart from you making the statement here, you should also approach the minister concerned and give him more details. I think you may get a quicker solution to the problem but otherwise, we can only sympathise with the people that have been affected by what you have told us.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, this is the first time in the history of the 7th Parliament that Members of Parliament are meeting in the presence of only one minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, my duty is to preside over Parliament. I am not concerned with who is there and who is not there. As long as I have the quorum, I will proceed with the work. (Applause).

MR KIDEGA: Mr Speaker, mine is a very small one related to the Order Paper. The Business Committee came up with a schedule of business and on the 17th it is supposed to be the amendment bill for the Youth Statute, 1993, but on the notification of business to follow, I have not seen it. So, I am just seeking for a small clarification if the – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Do not worry. It is true that the Business Committee programmed the work to come, but as you know, sometimes the work spills over from the date earmarked for it, and that is the cause. We have interrupted the schedule but definitely, we shall accommodate that business some time in future.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW EURO 40 MILLION FROM THE EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK FOR THE APEX III PROJECT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a resolution of Parliament be made to authorise Government to borrow from the European Investment Bank for Apex Private Sector Global Loan III Facility, and that the resolution should be in the following words:

“WHEREAS a credit agreement for 40 million Euro is to be concluded between the European Investment Bank and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing Apex Private Sector Global Loan III Facility; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159 (2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for the approval and authorisation;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government of Uganda is hereby authorised to secure the said loan from European Investment Bank for Apex Private Sector Global Loan III Facility, upon the terms and conditions therein stated.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is seconded. So it is properly before us.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you very, Mr Speaker.  As everybody knows, Apex money is money borrowed by Government for purposes of lending to the private sector in its bid to stimulate private sector investment. It is not in controversy, and I think everybody agrees with me that if we are to develop, we should encourage the private sector to take a leading role.  

So, in a bid to encourage the private sector, Government borrows money to on-lend private companies to carry out their activities.

Mr Speaker, this is the third phase of the Apex funds. Phase I of the Apex scheme was 15 million Euros and it started in 1995. This phase financed 33 projects. It was very successful and on completion, we embarked on Apex II. Apex II was for 25 million Euros and this was started in 1997.  This phase has just ended, and I am glad to report that it has also been very, very successful.  It financed 52 private projects.  

We are now launching Apex Phase III, and the amount required is 40 million Euros. It is envisaged that this time round, more initiatives will benefit under this phase.

Mr Speaker, the terms of the loan are very good.  The loans are for periods ranging from five to 10 years. They include a period of grace of about one to two years and the repayment rate is very low. The repayment rate is between 10 and 12 percent.

The total volume of investment towards which the scheme’s funds contributed is estimated to be about 88 million Euros. Of these funds, 45 per cent went to projects with entirely, or substantially, foreign exchange earning potential; and everybody knows how important it is for this country to earn foreign exchange. 

Eighty five per cent of the funds went to improving existing businesses either by expansion, modernization or diversification.  Fifteen per cent went entirely to new projects. 24 per cent went to investment in rehabilitating and modernizing companies, which had been privatised by Government under its divestiture programme. 

This project created about 2,800 jobs, of which about 1,500 was for women. Thirty five per cent of the amounts disbursed went to projects located outside Kampala, especially in the rural agricultural zones, for activities such as tea and price processing. 

It is the intention of Government to keep on with that spirit, to make sure that funds are made available to the private sector, both in the towns and in the rural areas, in its bid to encourage investment.  

Mr Speaker, the loan terms were submitted to the Committee and were scrutinized. Since everybody appreciates the need for financing, I beg that members support this borrowing and pass this resolution. I beg to move.

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on the National Economy on the loan request for financing the Apex private sector global loan III facility, that is Apex III.  

Mr Speaker, the loan request for Apex III was committed to the Committee on National Economy for a detailed analysis, and for the Committee to report to this House its findings and recommendations. The loan offer is from the European Investment Bank and is worth Euro 40 million. 

This credit facility is in line with the Cotonou Agreement that was signed in June 2002 between the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) group of nations on one hand, and the European Union on the other. It will be channelled through the European Investment Bank.  

The above bank has in the past, successfully extended lines of credit through Apex schemes. As you have already heard, Apex I was given in 1995, totalling to 15 million Euros. Apex II came in 1997 with 25 million Euros.  

I will go through the methods which we used very fast. The Committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and his technical team. We also held meetings with the Central Bank. The Central Bank is the one that is going to manage this loan. It will act as an implementing agency for this programme. The following documents were also reviewed:

    • A brief from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    • The participation letter for the approved financial institutions.
    • Previous resolutions on Apex I, and Apex II.
    • The legal opinion of the Attorney General on previous Apex I, and II.
    • The finance contract between the Government of Uganda and the European Investment Bank (EIB).
    • The performance of Apex I, and II, including the tax performance of the firms that benefited.

The objectives of this Apex facility are basically four. The Committee was informed that this facility would help the Government of Uganda to realize the following:

    • Support the development of a long-term capital market to benefit and promote the private sector as an engine for growth.
    • Ensuring that the private enterprises have access to finance on competitive terms.
    • Encouraging and facilitating new investment and growth in very productive sectors of the economy.
    • Lastly, it is intended to support the development of small and medium-scale, and especially, “start-up” ventures in the economy.

The Committee was further informed that the projects on this programme, or those projects which are eligible, are in the following sectors:

    1. Agro-processing industry
    2. Manufacturing
    3. Horticultural projects
    4. Mining
    5. Tourism and related services
    6. Education
    7. Health.

Terms and Conditions of the Credit:
The total amount requested is 40 million Euros. It has an interest rate of one per cent and a maturity period of 12 years, including a grace period of five years. 

The Central Bank will administer this credit facility through the approved financial institutions mechanism. The procedure is appended as Annex I, if you look at your reports - how do you become one of those if you are interested?

Observations: 
    • The total number of firms, which benefited from Apex I was 35 and the loan amount was 15 million Euros. And the Apex II loan was 25 million Euros, with 55 firms.  

    • The above firms are spread all over the country though a big number are in Kampala, as the capital of the nation. 

    • The firms were engaged in tourism, service, manufacturing, agro-industries, horticulture and floriculture.

    • The committee was informed that the loan recovery during Apex I, and II, was satisfactory. However, some firms have been liquidated or declared bankrupt. 
 
    • The interest charged by the approved financial institutions is between 9.6 percent and 17.9 percent, per annum, while Bank of Uganda charges approved financial institutions three to four percent. Given the rate of interest of one percent from European Investment Bank, members observed that charging 17.9 percent is inequitable for the end user of this credit.
 
    • Apex III was widened to include facilitating the health and education sectors, which were not covered under Apex I and II. 

    • The agreements between the approved financial institutions and the Central Bank are in form of a participation letter, which gives details on how much will be made available, and under what circumstances or under what conditions. 

    • This credit facility covers a wide range of activities, and it is countrywide in coverage.  

Our recommendations are as follows:

    • Government should define the new role and revamp the restructured Uganda Development Bank to handle long-term financing for long-term projects in the country. 

We were informed that Uganda Development Bank is under restructuring, so it cannot administer this loan. We are saying, Government should do that, and finalize and revamp so that it plays its rightful role in our economy.

    • The discrepancy between the interest rates charged by the lender - remember it was one percent - and the rate paid by the final user, of about 17.9 percent, should be harmonized and equitable in order to realize the benefit of such arrangements by the majority, especially start-up ventures.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, this credit facility will promote the private sector, which is crucial to the development of our economy. 

The committee is very grateful to the Minister of Finance, the Central Bank officials and all those who appeared before it, for the cooperation during the meetings we held. The committee begs the House to adopt the report and pass the resolution for the loan request. I thank you and I beg to move.

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. I stand to support this motion for a resolution to borrow money from the European Investment Bank.  

Mr Speaker, I stand to support this motion because when I look at the programmes to benefit from this loan, they include the social services sector. As we have heard from the chairperson who has just read the report, Apex I and Apex II excluded the social services sector. 

Honourable members, the private sector in this country greatly contributes to social service delivery. When you look at university education, out of the 10 universities we have in this country, private investors operate six, and Government operates only four. So, that means the private investor contributes 60 per cent of university education, without analysing the statistics of the student enrolment.  

Also on the side of secondary school education, we note that on average, 50 percent of those who provide secondary school education are private investors. 

On the other hand, when we look at the health sector, we also have quite a number of non-governmental hospitals, those that are termed private and not for profit. But also, there are quite a number of private clinics and nursing homes, which are offering services to our people in this country. 

It is on this note, Mr Speaker, that I was overwhelmed, and I stood up to support this motion. However, after listening from the committee, my concern is the interest charged by the approved financial institutions. 

The interest rate, which we are told will be between 9.6 and 17.9 per year, I feel is too high. It is too high, given that some of these institutions are not for profit, and yet they need some support to deliver services to this country. 

Some of these institutions do not charge high fees, but on the other hand, Ministry of Finance, through Revenue Authority, tends to overcharge these institutions on income tax. They are making little profit, but they are subjected to paying high income tax. So, when you look at such scenarios, I believe that there is need to have a second thought on this. It could be determined by the market price, but I think some subsidy should be considered. 

My second concern is; I want to hear from the minister how long it takes for Government to access this money, and for this money to enter the Medium-Term Budget Framework, given the example of certain loans. We have passed resolutions for loans on this Floor, but when we analyse the budgets, we do not see where that money enters. 

I have a concrete example, Mr Speaker, and I want to hear from the minister on this. We passed the Islamic Development Bank loan, which was supposed to assist us construct 16 polytechnics. Last year, I stood here to ask the minister about it. Even when we were analysing the budgets of Ministry of Education last Financial Year, that money had not yet entered the Medium-Term Budget Framework. So, I want to get assurance from the minister that when we pass this, we shall see it. 

I could go to Tororo and excite my voters, the private investors, that now this is their chance - “let us go in for this money; we have passed a loan of 40 million Euros”, and yet it will take three or four years for this money to enter the Medium-Term Budget Framework, or to be accessed.  So, I want to know how long it takes after have passed a resolution here on the Floor. When does Government, or when do the beneficiaries, access such money?  

With those few comments, Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee and I support the motion.

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (Sheema North, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion, but with some reservations. 

My first point is, access to information. As we have been told, most of the beneficiaries, or 80 percent who get this money are located in Kampala. We have also been told women will benefit, most likely women also in Kampala. When will women and men in Sheema North learn of this information? How can we increase access such that the private entrepreneurs at up-country stations can also be able to access such money?  

The second issue is what has been mentioned, concerning interest rates. Why should we charge long-term investment a rate of 17 per cent, and then we get worried, or we get concerned, about companies which took up these loans and have been liquidated?

Mr Speaker, I feel that we should be able to be examples. If Bank of Uganda is going to get money at a very low interest and charge other banks a high interest, and those banks also charge other people a very high interest, it encourages other banks to continue putting their interest rates high. An example, Mr Speaker, is Housing Finance. I have been reliably informed that the interest rates charged by Housing Finance are going to increase, from 1st August, from 14 percent to 16 percent. 

When you ask for a loan of one per cent and you charge the beneficiary 17 per cent, it is like encouraging these other banks also to continue increasing interest rates! Therefore, they become inefficient, the cost of operation goes up and the interest rates also go up!

The final comment concerns health, and I am particularly interested in that area. You find that most of the private clinics have to buy very expensive equipment at a very high interest. And you find that most of the people up-country cannot be able to afford the services. 

I therefore appeal to you that, in addition to including health, you should also look at the interest rates charged to most of these social services. Of course, the same goes for schools. Eventually it will be the client, the patient, or a parent of a student, who will have to pay in case the charges go up. Thank you.

MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion in a special way because today is my birthday, and the birthday of three other Members of Parliament here present. It is just a special birthday in that I become a centenarian.  So, I am standing up to support this motion as a centenarian.

Mr Speaker, the borrowing started in 1995, then in 1997, and now again in 2003, about six years’ difference. Is it because there were difficulties in using the first and the second Apex, or what was the reason?

The second issue, Mr Speaker, we borrowed 15 million Euros and then 25, and now 40. The importance of a loan facility like this, with very small interest rates, to an economy like Uganda, cannot be over emphasised. So, we are now moving up to Euro 40,000,000.  Could we have gone beyond that, or do we have a problem with the absorptive capacity? Could we have gone to 80? Mr Speaker, to what extent is Government encouraging offshore borrowing by private enterprises or individuals, with a view to positively impacting on the economy of Uganda? To what extent can the Government, therefore, move away from trying to access borrowing on behalf of its citizenry?

Mr Speaker, the interest rate being charged by the European Investment Bank is only one per cent, and this is being channelled through the central bank. The central bank is selecting the commercial banks, or the financial institutions that have got to participate in the dissemination of these loans. 

The committee has reported that some of the administering banks are charging interest rates as high as 18 per cent. Doesn’t the Ministry of Finance or the Bank of Uganda have the capacity and competence to control the interest rate chargeable on this? 

We are borrowing at one percent and Bank of Uganda is passing it on at three or four percent. Is there no way that Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance can approve a spread of interest beyond which the administering financial institution should not go? 

Mr Speaker, I am emphasising this because the report of the committee indicates very clearly that some of the projects that were funded under Apex I and under Apex II went into limbo. They were liquidated, or they became bankrupt. This, Mr Speaker, impacts very negatively on this economy.

Mr Speaker, I am glad that Apex III is talking about sectoral lending. As it stands now, a number of commercial banks and other banks do give loans, but they give these loans only in areas where they are sure that the economic gains, the profitability of those ventures, will be highest. They take least cognisance of the importance of a sector in promoting other economic activities of this country. For instance, most of the lending is to trade and commerce, to the detriment of agriculture in this country. Mr Speaker as you are aware, 82 per cent of the economy is agriculture based.  

So I am grateful that this is coming out. And to what extent can the Ministry of Finance, through Bank of Uganda, ensure that there is sectoral allocation to the areas, which are most important on the priorities of the economic outlook of this nation, other than just merely emphasizing on where it should go on geographical basis? Because, it is the sectoral areas, which are in the doldrums, which should be emphasized through soft loans like this one we are approving today!

Mr Speaker, I was told that a centenarian is 100 years. So, if I am 50, that means I still have another 50 to go. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I support the motion.

MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Ministry of Finance and the Committee on the National Economy for bringing this proposal to this House. 

As I read through the objectives of this loan, I think it is a very good programme for this country, especially in support of private sector growth in order to boost development in this country. But, Mr Speaker, I have a few observations to make. 

First of all, much as the areas for this intervention are listed here, the categories of the investors have not been stipulated. Who is eligible to get this loan? Much as you say that something is attached here, I just see a procedure that is followed in administration of the loan scheme. But who is eligible to get this loan? And, at what level of private sector development should this person, organisation or cooperation be? It is not indicated here. 

I say this because, as the committee has analysed, in Apex I, and II, it was mainly the people from the centre, especially Kampala, who benefited. What about the people from the rural areas? The categories should be clear, so that we also have a national outlook for the development of this country, as far as loans are concerned. 

Most times when loans are approved and effected, many areas do not benefit from the loans because of their distance to the capital city, or because of the level of development in those areas. In some areas, there is even no electricity. How would people apply for loans for agro-processing, manufacturing, mining and the rest when there is no electricity? So, we find that sometimes these kinds of loans also increase disparities in development because of what exists on the ground. 

The Government should have deliberate intervention for all the areas of this country, so that all of us also develop equally. I do not know how far the programme for rural electrification has reached? We have been told in this House that there is a programme for rural electrification. We have been told that it is going to help areas that do not have electricity to get electricity, so that small industries can come up. Perhaps that is when our people can benefit from such loans. 

I do not know what will be put in place for areas where there are conflicts and wars. Many times people do not even want to risk investing in such areas. So, will these loans also benefit people from areas that have conflicts? And will the Government have particular interventions for these areas, so that the activities that people borrow this money for have enough security?

Mr Speaker, the committee has observed that the loan recovery during Apex I and II was satisfactory, but it has also observed that there were some firms that were liquidated, and were declared bankrupt. And these loans were not recovered. But they have not given us examples here. 

What kind of areas were these firms involved in, so that much more care is taken in Apex III loan distribution, or approval? Maybe the relevant institutions have mechanisms of analysing what kind of investments this money will be lent to. But I think the committee would have done better if they gave us examples of those areas where there were problems, and why those firms were liquidated, or became bankrupt.

Mr Speaker, I want to add my voice to those who said that the interest rate charged for recovery of these loans is too high, compared to the interest that the lenders have given us, of one percent. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much, and I want to add my voice in support of the loan.  Thank you.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA CHARLES (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think before this House approves this borrowing for Apex III, the Minister of State for Finance - in charge of borrowing - has to satisfy the House on the following:

One, what impact did the funds of Apex I, and Apex II create on the growth of this economy? We need to know that before we borrow for Apex III.

Two, the Minister of Finance should provide us with a list of private companies which benefited from Apex I and Apex II: what they are involved in and where they are located. It is very important. Which sectors?

Three, the committee says that there are some private companies which benefited from Apex I and Apex II, and they were liquidated or were declared bankrupt. Let us know, because the money we are borrowing has an impact on our future generation. 

What steps have been taken by Ministry of Finance or Bank of Uganda to recover this money from these companies that were declared bankrupt? Who is going to recover this money? Before we approve more money, we need to know.

Four, you are borrowing at one percent, giving the European Investment Bank at three to four per cent, and they are giving the loan to these companies at 17.9 per cent. We want this rate reduced first before we can approve this loan, because more money is going to be lost through this borrowing.

Five, why should Government continue to guarantee loans to private companies? And what measures has it put in place, bearing in mind that we already guaranteed loans for these companies that ran bankrupt? 

The companies have been liquidated, they are not paying, but Government is continuing to guarantee more companies and yet we privatised most of these companies because we did not want Government to continue subsidizing our companies. But now we are guaranteeing them! Why should we continue guaranteeing companies and yet we privatised them because we were making losses?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, since most of the firms in Apex I and II are located in Kampala, can the Minister assure this House that Appendix 3 will benefit upcountry projects this time?

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I stand to be clarified by the Member holding the Floor -(Interjections). Protect me, Mr Speaker.  The Member holding the Floor is stating that the government, for that matter, should give us the impact of Apex I and II on the economy. May I be clarified as to how the objectives of Apex III, in terms of encouraging new investments and growth in the productive sectors of this economy, are to take place, in view of lack of anti-dumping policies, which has led South Africa to stamp on our economy?

THE SPEAKER: But how will the speaker on the Floor clarify you on that?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, the one who gave me clarification is actually requesting the Minister of Finance to give us this impact because he is saying, they are in the private sector, which is earning this economy some foreign exchange. What amount of foreign exchange have we benefited from Apex I and II?

Lastly, you know, honourable members, this money we are borrowing has an impact on the future generations. Some of us will expire, but our children and our grandchildren have to repay this money. Why should we approve borrowing of the money which they are dumping in some private sector, which is being recreated, and they are guaranteed by Government, which government is going to pay the loan? 

Mr Speaker, I think we should not approve this loan before the minister confirms this.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that private sectors should not be assisted?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, they can be assisted if there is a guarantee that this money is going to be got.

THE SPEAKER: Then who can assist the private sector? The private sector belongs to us; and you say they should not be assisted?

MR OGWEL LOOTE (Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I also take this opportunity to join those who are querying the approval of this loan. First of all, I would like also to add on these flat statements that Apex I and II performed and benefited the people mostly around urban areas. He says it was across the country, and yet he says again it was concentrated within the urban areas. 

I thought that when you are analysing performance of any investment, you should analyse the impact on the economy, and also the progress of the business. My question is, how does the business improve and how does it contribute to the economy of our country, and how does it spread to the wanainchi? 

I think these statements are rather flat. They do not give how this loan will boost the economy. That is the clarification I want to know from the Minister.

Secondly, as a person who comes from one of these areas of focus, especially the mining industry, and you know this is one of the most marginalised and neglected areas in our country, quite often it is also underrated and yet it is one of the potential areas that we can invest in, and our economy can benefit from it. 

It says, "support to develop small and medium scale, especially start-up capital". I would like to know from the minister; what volume of mining could this support be given to? There are small-scale miners in that region who are struggling with the limestone, marble, and gold.  

I do not know whether through this sector, these small Karimojong who are struggling to look for a start-up capital can benefit from this, so that this one can be spread to other parts of Uganda also, instead of concentrating on booming the business society within the urban areas.  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would also like to know, in the case of this mining sector, can this loan also benefit these people to get the equipment support? Can’t it also be given on equipment support for the area of mining? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NASANI NABETA (Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My colleague talked about the private sector and I agree that the private sector needs help. The problem with the Apex programme is that you go to the bank, say Bank of Uganda approves some banks like Barclays Bank and Standard Chartered. Well, some of the banks were approved. You go to one of these banks and you say you want to access some of the Apex money. From there, it ceases to be this Apex Programme; it becomes a bank loan. You have to access this as a normal bank loan.  So, personally, I do not see a difference between the Apex Programme and the regular bank loan.

One of the problems with these loans is that actually they give it to you in dollars or Euros or pounds, the currency you choose, but it is one of the exchange rates abroad. Let us take an example of the US dollar. Last year in March, it was Shs 1,500; today it is almost Shs2000.  If you borrow this money from the Apex Programme, you actually have to pay it in dollars! So, if you take their interest rates, the lowest is 9.6, according to the report here. If you take that, you put in the exchange rate loss that you are actually incurring by paying in dollars, you are actually going to have to go beyond 20 per cent. If you pay this loan in, let us say five or more years, you will pay a lot more money. 

An example of that is Lugazi Mehta Sugar; they borrowed about 24 million; they have already paid 54 million but they actually have 14 million more to pay!  So, the problem is that, yes, it is a good idea, it helps the private sector, but it does not really address the issues that we really need to address. 

Yes, it is a good idea to have, maybe the banks do not have enough money and it will be nice to inject more of this capital into the banks, but the local man in Iganga will not have access to this money because when you go to the bank, they say, “Do you have any security?” The security you need is actually a house around Kampala. How many people outside of Kampala who want loans actually have houses in Kampala? So, in terms of security that is required for this loan, most of the people do not have access to the securities they need.  

So, my request to the honourable minister is this. It is okay to have this loan, it is okay to have the money in the banks, but we need something that will help the local people actually to access some of this money without the stringent requirements of accessing a loan in a regular bank. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
 
MR KADDUNABBI LUBEGA  (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this resolution for Government to borrow this money, but I am concerned about the interest rate which is being charged by the approved financial institutions. The rates are almost the commercial rates, and to me, the intention of borrowing this money would be to develop our nation, or the various sectors. I find it improper for the approved financial institutions to charge such a high rate, yet they get this money at a much lower rate of 1 per cent. 

I think Government has the intended beneficiaries of this money. If there are intentions for people or organisations to benefit from this money, has it been achieved? Because, approved financial institutions end up having stringent restrictions, which many of our local people do not benefit from. This money ends up going to foreign investors and foreign companies. In essence, our people do not benefit.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague from Butambala for giving way. Part of the information I wanted to give is that the reason why many of the financial institutions ask for collateral in Kampala is that actually those financial institutions are based in Kampala and they do not have a branch network. As we talk today, Uganda Commercial bank is not one of the approved financial institutions because allegedly it was being reorganised. Therefore, these financial institutions which are not based in Kampala have no supervisory capacity in the rural areas. Part of the reason why the interest rates are high is that they have to charge highly in order to traverse the country to supervise small, small business enterprises that have taken the loan. Maybe the hon. minister might want to tell the House when  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you have talked about collateral, don’t you think you need to explain why there is need for collateral? Do you think the value of collateral in Kampala is the same collateral a hundred miles from here? Must not this money which is borrowed be protected by substantial collateral so that on failure then they will be able to recover by selling the collateral? But if you have mailo land full of Bibanjas, will it be good collateral? I think these are reasons that cause the people in Kampala, because they have substantial collateral, to go and borrow and the bank will be secure in lending the money to these people, because eventually, if there is a failure, then they can recover something. It is not a question of not having branches. Definitely the bank will lend somebody in Fort Portal with good collateral.

MR KADDUNABBI LUBEGA: Thank you, my colleague, for that information and, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. But all of us will appreciate that though good collateral are in towns like Kampala, but I think the intention of this money would be to develop the whole of Uganda in various ways. Even those people who do not have good collateral should be safeguarded and secured by Government. So, I think the minister should find a way of how people in the rural areas should benefit from these huge amounts of money we are approving, because they will be called upon or their grandsons will be called upon in payment. 

Mr Speaker, I would also urge Government to have a deliberate policy to distribute this money equally in all parts of Uganda. Also I want to know from the minister whether APEX III takes care of investors who want to build hostels. I had a colleague who was interested in building a hostel and he wanted to apply in APEX II, but he could not get the money because the money could be approved for building schools. But as you all know, there is a high need for hostels almost around all universities we have established in various places of this world. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS RUTH TUMA  (Woman Representative, Jinja): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to support this very important resolution. I was very excited when I read the objectives of this resolution, especially the last point on objectives. “Support the development of small and medium scale -and especially start-up ventures in the economy.” This excites me. The private education sector has suffered. 

The previous speaker was mentioning something concerning building hostels upcountry, but in upcountry districts we have not had an opportunity of accessing money in the Bank of Uganda, especially those connected with education. It is my desire that the ministry may direct the Bank of Uganda at least to make sure that some investors in the upcountry districts access this money. 

Of late, the government has not thought about the private sector. They need assistance, they are helping us, especially now with UPE, and by the end of this year we shall have an influx of children who would have finished PLE and we will not have places to fix them in present schools. So I beg the minister to urge the bank to have a special consideration for upcountry areas so that we can have good schools like those in Kampala. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we all agree that credit is very essential in a developing economy, and more so in an economy that is advancing to capitalism. In fact, I sometimes wonder why people think of corruption and think in terms of religious morality without thinking about the availability of investable capital. Capitalism relies on capital accumulation. So if you have no money to invest, you cannot run a capitalist system. So, I welcome this idea of borrowing money and helping the private sector, especially when we are talking of a private sector driven development.  But I want to ask a number of questions. The first one is actually to the committee itself. 

The committee of this House tells us in the report that they met the Central Bank. If you met the Central Bank and the minister and his technical team, what explanation did they give you?  Because I do not see it is the report as to why the Bank of Uganda charges three to four per cent. Why does it charge that figure? What is the justification? This is an input which increases the rate of interest at the end of the day.  

So I think we should ask the Bank of Uganda why they need that percentage as a charge instead of actually handling it as a matter of course in the day to day running of work.  They are paid for it. Why should they charge that interest?  I should be told why that is the case.

Secondly, a couple of members of this House have talked about the location of these loans and they have insisted that these loans should be in their areas. But I think sometimes we overlook the fact that we are trying a capitalist system. You are not going to say I am going to give this loan to somebody in Mayuge for the sake of it – (Interjections) – yes! it must be somebody who has entrepreneurship (Interjection). I withdraw Mayuge, sorry about that, in Igara West because  – (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: I want to give information.

PROF KABWEGYERE: You like talking. When somebody wants to talk, you interrupt. I hate you for that.

THE SPEAKER: It is his right whether to allow you or not.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: What I was saying - this is not a scandalous statement, you cannot go and borrow money from a bank anywhere in the world and you are hoping to pay it and you do not show grounds for being able to pay it! You must have the right enterprise to borrow money. If we are talking populism here, let us talk populism for the sake of it, but not capitalism.  

Mr Speaker, it is true we would like investment in all corners of Uganda, but the way to get there is not by allocating this money to every corner of Uganda. Because this money is applied for, there is a procedure. There is no way I am going to encourage people in Igara West beyond their capacity to come and get this loan. Besides, Mr Speaker, 40 million Euros is actually small money. Only that some of us who are not used to big monies think 40 million is a lot. It is very small money, if you are talking of a mining project and you are buying equipment for it. How much money are you talking about? 

So really, we are talking of small projects, which even at the end of the day do not make sense. Sometimes they fail not because of anything else but because they are too small to make sense. Because a project of US$ 40 million - if it was one project, then you would understand. But if you hear of 55 of them, 35 of them and perhaps no mechanism of helping those people who get this money to improve on their skills, no wonder many of them fail. 

So we are really talking of a very bad situation and we need to address that bad situation better rather than demanding that the enterprise should be declared equally distributed throughout the country. 

Mr Speaker, investment in the private sector; how big is our private sector?  When the other day we were discussing Uganda Commercial Bank, we discovered that we only have 1,050,000 bank accounts in the whole of Uganda. Now assuming that those are – (Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Prof. Kabwegyere, for giving way. I just want to seek information from the Professor. Arising out of your argument, I do agree that 40 million Euros should not be big money to make big investments, more so when you talk about 55 or 35 of them.  But if you look at the objectives of this Apex, the last objective is to support the development of small and medium scale, and especially the start-up. You are now saying you cannot encourage or support people of Igara East or West, who have no capacity to utilise such good money. How are you going to achieve this objective?

PROF KABWEGYERE: Hon. Bakkabulindi, to start up projects – (Interruption)

DR TUMWESIGYE: I would like to inform Prof. Kabwegyere that one of the recipients of the former Apex is from Igara West. So even members from Igara West, Sheema North can also be able to compete for this money. But what we are talking about is for more people to know about these facilities. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you very much. If what the hon. member has just said will help many more people to know about the fund and apply – I know that some of this money goes to some of these institutions that are located in rural areas. But what I was trying to point out was: 
(1) We are dealing with small money. 
(2) The projects that finally get this loan are very small and they end up suffering from small size 
(3) The people who apply cannot be distributed equally or logically throughout the whole of Uganda because entrepreneurship does not just grow geographically in equal distribution. 

The idea of start-up projects; I wish that the Committee and the ministry would tell us what these start-up projects are, because it may be a good term which may end up only in its goodness as a term. What I have called – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When they brought this entandikwa, it was really to start you up.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: My Friend here is saying it is a business term. I do not know business, he knows better. But what I am saying is that if you are talking of, as the meaning is, “start up”, to start you up, then it must be located effectively in the right place. Do we really have that location so that we could identify those? This is where the Committee, which said in the report that the performance of Appendix I and II, including the tax performance of the firms that benefited, was brought to their attention. The Committee should have told us a bit more about this because they were exposed to it, so that we know that these start-up projects have actually helped the economy to generate more energy in a significant way.

Lastly, about borrowing to give money and Government being a guarantor. We must look at this very seriously. In normal economies, Government does not borrow to give to the private sector; the private sector borrows from within the private sector. But we are in an unusual situation. Government is borrowing but even when it does, a Member of Parliament has said it should still act as guarantor to those who take this money. In case they lose it, Government will pay. 

Surely, this is on the one hand encouraging inefficiency, and on the other it is actually a negation of capital accumulation. That is why, much as we are burdened with this problem, in the end the money must go to people who can reproduce it. Whether we like it or not, we shall share at the end of the day, but when we are restarting this economy, and if we are going to distribute inefficiency all over the place, we shall never move forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, really do you not think we have covered everything? The issue of interest rates, or areas locating the loans – everybody has talked about this. Should we not dispose of this then move on to other business?

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank members for their genuine concerns, contributions and clarifications.  

I will leave the issue of interest rates to the Minister to explain, because as you have seen, the Committee also raised it as a concern. However, the basic thing they told us that is making the interest rates high is the cost of handling those loans. That is the administrative costs, the foreign exchange risks and others but according to our suggestion, we still believe the interest rates are too high. 

About the spread of beneficiaries, I told you this is countrywide. If you followed the discussions, this loan or facility is demand-driven. If somebody does not apply for it, he/she will not get it. So, you may find that some districts may miss out because they have not applied. But even when they apply, it is not automatic that they will get it. They will have to be assessed and eventually if they go through, they are given these loans.  

There are a few of you asking for the companies which were liquidated. I would perhaps not hold it wholly that they were liquidated because they took this loan, but we have companies like A&M Products. This one, its promoters died, so we believe they could not service the loan, and they were liquidated. Court View is another, but we did not go into the details of analysing whether it was liquidated as a result of taking this loan.

The list of beneficiaries is available and I could lay it on the Table, Mr Speaker, for members to see through, because they gave it to us as Appendix I, II and III. Appendix III includes those who are going to benefit, but do not lose hope. Some have already been assessed and approved but not to the indicated tune. If you agree to this, they will receive it, and I hope you will approve this. 

Nothing has been disbursed yet. This is the proposal and it is from all over Uganda. The list is here, Mr Speaker, I will lay it on the Table -(Interruption).

MR SABIITI: Thank you, madam chairperson for giving way. I want to give this information so that when a decision is taken, you bear in mind the repercussions of these loans. 

In 1999, Shs 974,000,000,000 was given to a number of companies in the private sector, and was supposed to earn Shs 28,000,000,000. Out of that, only Shs 104,000,000,000 was paid, and these companies are well documented in these papers.

In 1999, the Japanese Government gave a grant to the Uganda Government of Shs 7.7 billion, and this money was extended to the private sector. It was given to different companies and government corporations, but this money has never been paid back. Now that we are guaranteeing this money, I think the Minister of Finance should give a detailed submission to confirm to us that this money will be paid back. Some of these companies have wound up. So, about one trillion shillings is now lost. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MRS KABAKUMBA: I request that I wind up, Mr Speaker, because the information he has given is what I was going to say. The last point I wanted to comment about is exactly what hon. Sabiiti has brought up: guaranteeing this loan. 

Government is not guaranteeing this loan. Bank of Uganda will pass on this loan, at an interest rate, to commercial banks. It is up to the commercial banks to ensure that they recover this money. If they do not, that cost will be met by the commercial banks, not the Government of Uganda. Government of Uganda is only facilitating the process of making available these funds. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank honourable members for the overwhelming support they have given this resolution. I will respond to a few queries that have been raised.

The first one is the interest rates. I wish to say that interest rates used to be based on time deposit rates of over twelve months, but now instead of basing it on the Treasury Bills, the rates have come down. They range between 6–12 percent of the Uganda Shilling, and between 3–7 percent of foreign currency. So, much as it is true that previously the rates were high, I am glad to say that they are lower now and we expect that they will keep on going down.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, could I seek a fundamental clarification? This may also help the minister when he is explaining the last questions.  

THE SPEAKER: Do you accept? You know it is not up to me but to the person holding the Floor to give way.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and the honourable minister for giving way. Arising out of what the chairperson has just told us, those who will benefit from Apex III are already identified. He also needs to clear the rumours that they are not the same characters that benefited from Apex I and II. Looking at this statement, the sectors that are going to be covered are about seven, that is, from agro-processing to health, could you throw more light on those? What criteria did you use and how did you come to select them when some of us, even after –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The loan has not been approved. This is just preliminary.

MR BAKABULINDI: No, this is what the gentleman has said –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson has said this is in anticipation that the loan may come. People have started applying and they have been assessed. They have not received any money yet. 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I believe the Minister is aware that the prime-lending rate is in the region of 15 percent to 16.5 percent. This money is going to be passed over to commercial banks by the Bank of Uganda. Bank of Uganda is going to charge them between three and four percent. If you take four percent from the rate that the commercial banks will be expected to lend this money at, of 17 percent, you will remain with an interest rate of about 14 to 13 percent. Does the Minister seriously expect these banks to be interested in lending this money when they know that they could lend their own money at the prime-lending rate of between 15 and 16.5 percent? And if it is not a prime-lending rate, it could go up to 23 percent! 

I am raising this issue because there have been a lot of monies that the Bank of Uganda has been presiding over, which do not interest commercial banks, because of the unattractive terms of using them. Unless a commercial bank has no liquidity, they would not go to Bank of Uganda to borrow that money. So we sit here, pass this money, it will not be used and at the end of the day, Government will be paying interest on loans that are not interesting to commercial banks. Therefore, at the end of the day we shall be losing. Could the Minister explain this?

THE SPEAKER: I think you should go further and give a solution. What should be the solution, not to take the money or not?

MR MWANDHA: The solution, Sir - I wish I had the opportunity to contribute - is that Government is making a mistake. This money should be for long-term lending. Long-term loans actually have a lower interest rate. If they had organised to get this money lent out to institutions like Uganda Development Bank, as the committee was saying, it would be interesting for people to go and borrow this money at a much lower rate than the 17 percent they are talking about. To give this money to commercial banks –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Many people who borrowed from UDB failed to repay and these loans are with NPART!

MR MWANDHA: Well, Mr Speaker, that is a different matter. I am only telling the House what the reality of the situation is. The situation on the ground is that if these are development funds, the rates of interest the Minister is proposing are not going to be interesting to commercial banks, because commercial banks do short-term lending. They are not interested in lending to people for so many years. 

Already, one of our colleagues has mentioned that if these people are going to borrow this money in foreign currency, they at end of the day are going to suffer the foreign exchange loss. So, there are many issues.

THE SPEAKER: So, your solution is that they should use development banks?

MR MWANDHA: Well, Mr Speaker, by the time the Minister comes here to present a loan request, he has considered many things. He has failed to do what I believe should have been the right thing - to use this money through a development bank. The rates would have been much lower then, as to get development funds to be lent on commercial rates is terrible. 

It is going to cause a lot of problems for people who are going to borrow this money, and I am disappointed with the committee. There are lots of questions that members have raised here. These are the questions the committee should have got answers to, and we would have got a much better deal than borrowing this money that is going to cause more problems. I am sorry, I was just giving information. I wish I had the opportunity to contribute. Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: The interest rates the honourable member is talking about are in respect of short-term commercial purposes. But we are talking about long-term investment lending. The fear he is talking about, these funds have come, they have been utilised and nobody has complained. So, it is expected that even with Apex III the funds will be taken and as the chairperson noted, people have already applied - (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Minister, I thank you for yielding the Floor. Are you not withholding key information? Repeatedly, honourable colleagues have requested that you to give a list of the previous beneficiaries. Why am I repeating that question? The following are the reasons, Mr Speaker.  

Number one, the majority of those companies that benefited from this particular loan system are foreign owned. We are not benefiting from it.  

Number two, some of the companies that are benefiting from this particular loan are not really in the listed categories. I can give you one example. On your list, if you check, Mr Minister, among the beneficiaries you will find a company called Golf Course Apartments. It has put up flats, real estate, not hotels. It has put up a supermarket complex. Is that listed here?

THE SPEAKER: No, we are going back to square one. We are no longer debating. The chairperson says that is the list; lay it on the Table and we proceed.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, we are not withholding any information. The list of the companies that benefited is hereby layed on the Table.

Secondly, it is not true that the majority of those companies are foreign companies. You will discover from the list that so many companies benefited. 

Thirdly, in respect of Golf Course Apartments, there is no evidence that the flats that have been put up by Golf Course Apartments were put up with the funds that were raised through Apex. That could have been separate funding altogether. Actually, for –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Minister, it is on your list. Check on your list, it is there.

MR RUKUTANA: Yes, it is there but the funds that were borrowed by Golf Course Apartments were utilized for purposes of tourism, and in particular for construction of a hotel.

THE SPEAKER: The apartments are used by people who come here for a few days and go away.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, there has been concern about the equitable distribution of these funds nationwide. I am glad to say that the moment this resolution is passed, sensitization and education about the fund will start countrywide, to educate wanainchi on the fund and how to access it. 

Government realizes that initially the wanainchi did not know about these funds and perhaps that could have prohibited or restricted their access to the funds. 

I am not going to deal with every issue that has been raised by honourable members. I have the answers but it will take time however, one important question was “What impact has it had?” As I said, there has been employment; 2,800 jobs were created. That is a big improvement in the economy and as everybody knows, our economy has been steadily growing. That has been partly a result of this money. But you must take into consideration the fact that these monies have been very small. The only thing we have to do is to approve this one so that we can gradually get a bigger figure so as to impact on the economy more.  

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to ridicule this House by saying he cannot answer each and every question; as if honourable members have been just raising rubbish - something that is not related to what he was talking about? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: He is just expressing his inability to answer all the questions. Honourable minister, would you proceed? (Laughter).

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, in view of the fact –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, you just do not stand up and speak. This has happened many times. You just do not get up and start talking. It has been repeated so many times, and I think it should stop. Any time you want you immediately stand up and speak? It is not the way to do things.

MR RUKUTANA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. On this issue of interest rates, we all know that our financial system is liberalized. We are not going to dictate rates to commercial banks. But everybody will know that since we started reforming the financial sector, interest rates have been going down. 

Commercial banks have to charge interests to cover their risks. When this money goes to a commercial bank, it is money belonging to them, because it is the bank to assess the risk. So, it is up to the bank to determine at what rate to give it out. Borrowers are at liberty to choose which banks to negotiate with and see whether they could benefit from good interest rates. 

The justification for Bank of Uganda charging three to four percent; of course the Bank of Uganda incurs some administrative costs. There are foreign exchange risks involved, there are management costs over this money, and it cannot just give it out without charging any interest. You remember it pays one percent, so charging three to four percent to cover the administration and other risks it goes through is not out of the normal.  

Honourable members, the cry for improving accessibility upcountry, that one, as I said, has been covered. The question of how long Government will take to access this money, I am glad to say that immediately this resolution is passed, the money will come into the Treasury. All we are waiting for is this resolution. 

The money for community based polytechnics, yes there was some delay, but I am glad to say that last week the matter was resolved and the money is coming. There were some technical problems which have been resolved. 

The question of whether we could have gone beyond 40,000 Euros was raised by hon. Omach. To arrive at a figure, the Government negotiates with the lenders and considers so many aspects before the figure is agreed upon. One of the important considerations is how the first lot of money has been utilized. From the records we have presented before you, you can see that we have been gradually increasing the amount. Now it is 40 million Euros, but if we utilize the money properly, we expect that we shall get more and more for the benefit of the economy. 

As to who is eligible to borrow this money; any person who qualifies under the criteria set out in the schedule attached to the report will benefit from the money. There are criteria, the money is not restricted to foreign firms as somebody suggested. Any person who qualifies under those provisions will be at liberty to access the money. 

Honourable members, the issue of the money going to foreign companies really should not be of great concern. Money has no colour, and investments have no colour. Whether it is by a foreigner or a local person, as long as it benefits this country, I think we should not be particularly perturbed. As I said, considering that the money is open to every person, then that issue should not be a big problem. With those few remarks, I beg honourable members to support the resolution.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have got the list here; it is going to be distributed so that each of you gets a copy to see the details.  Details are here; directors are there and the amount.  You will be able to see it. 

Now, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorize Government to borrow Euro 40 million from European Investment Bank for Apex III.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2002

THE SPEAKER: Now yesterday we concluded the general debate; it is now for the chairperson and the minister to wind up by answering queries.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development held a meeting this morning to respond to and evaluate the key issues that were raised on the floor of the House, yesterday, in the course of the debate of the bill.  The Minister of State for Finance and the Chairman of the parliamentary Committee on Local Government Accounts attended the meeting.  

We debated most of the issues which you raised on the floor of the House ranging from why should Government guarantee private loans to the question of auditing classified accounts, and penalties to offending officers reconciling financial accounting instructions in the local accounts Acts. After a detailed debate, we agreed to bring to the House appropriate amendments in response to the questions that were raised in the House. These amendments will be tabled during the course of the debate.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, it is true we have gone through all the issues that members raised and it is our hope that as we debate clause by clause, every issue that was raised yesterday will be catered for. 

On why Government is providing guarantees for private sector loans, I want to say that under this bill there is no provision for Government to guarantee private sector loans.  Section 25 of the bill clearly provides for loans Government will guarantee and those loans definitely do not include private sector loans.  

About classified expenditure, yes, we appreciate the importance of having classified expenditure audited.  We are in the process of making regulations that will enable the Auditor General to audit classified expenditure. There is hon. Okulo Epak’s amendment in this bill, which has the effect of opening up classified expenditure for audit in the usual manner.  

As for penalties, we have thoroughly gone through the amendments which provide for penalties in case of errant officials with the Committee.

On the issue of the need to have the National Planning Authority in place, I wish to state that Cabinet had passed the board.  The names of the members have been submitted to the President to be forwarded to this House for approval.  Most likely before we are prorogued, the names will be before this House, and the authority will be in place.  

As for capacity of local governments, yes, the issue of lack of capacity in local governments to audit and do proper accounting is being addressed.  Government has planned training and sensitisation. There is training in progress, of about 1000 staff of both the central and local government officials in the areas of accounting and auditing. 

There is also the Decentralization Support Program, which will go a long way into creating capacity at local government level. As for financial implications, members were concerned about the certificate for implication indicating nil amounts for development budget.  As honourable members may know, the post of Accountant General is a re-designation of the existing post of Director of Accounts.  So, all the facilities that were for the office of Director of Accounts will go to Accountant General.  So we do not need anything for development.  

Recurrent budget has been provided for. As for covering Local Government regulations, we have agreed with the Committee on a number of provisions to cover the concerns of honourable members.  

As for the rationale of creating a new post of Accountant General, we are doing this, as the Vice President pointed out yesterday, to harmonise with the existing offices since we have the Solicitor General; we have the Auditor General, we are now putting in place an Accountant General.  In any event, we are giving the new office new responsibilities to ensure transparency and accountability, which responsibilities were not in the old law.  With those few observations, I beg that we proceed with the bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion was to have the bill read a Second Time.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE.

THE PUBLIC FINANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2002

Clause 1:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Clause 1, which is: “This Act may be cited as the Public Finance Accountability Act, 2002”.  That was last year, now that it is this year, we amend 2002 to be 2003 and the rest becomes a consequential amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 1 as amended agreed to.)

Clause 2:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Clause 2, Mr Chairman, we add on page 5 of the Bill before the word "Government", we add a new definition by inserting “information to include accounts”.  This will be very clear as we go through the requirement of submitting information to various officers.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2 as amended agreed to.)

(Clause 3 agreed to.)

(Clause 4 agreed to.)

Clause 5:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, Clause 5(1): We propose deletion of the words “make regulations”. The justification is that the regulations and instruction or directives covered under this section should not be limited to Clause 5.  I beg to move.  

Clause 5(1) is amended and the justification is given.  There are no amendments on Clause 5.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 5 as amended agreed to.)

Clause 6:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, clause 6(3): substitute the phrase “sub-section (1) of section 5” with “this Act”. The justification is that there are other regulations, instructions or directives covered under different sections and this should not be limited to Clause 6.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, there are many amendments, let me read all of them. Clause 6 (3), clause 6(4)(a) and clause 6(6). Some of the amendments proposed are consequential amendments as we amend clause 6(3) by substituting subsection (1) of section 5 with “this Act” and subsection 4(a) becomes a consequential amendment and clause 6(6) also becomes a consequential amendment.  I beg to move.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 6 as amended agreed to.)

Clause 7:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Amendment, Mr Chairman. Clause 7 subsection (3)(a) and clause 7(3)(g): In 3(a) we insert the words “local government” immediately after the word “fund” in the second line.  The justification is that local governments are some of the major recipients of public funds, and they should be covered by the operation of the Auditor General to ensure proper accountability and transparency.  Similarly, in use 7(3)(g) there is a typing error. Substitute “so” with “as” in the first line.  That should be corrected so that the typing error is omitted.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 7 as amended agreed to.)

Clause 8:

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I see in clause 8(2) that local governments are not specifically mentioned, and I know that the Secretary to the Treasury normally designates an accounting officer for local governments. It seems the Committee introduced local governments earlier on.  I think it would be appropriate to insert local governments after department.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean the Secretary to the Treasury used to appoint accounting officers for local government?  Do they?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, if you read clause 8 (1): "The Secretary to the Treasury shall, with prior approval of the Minister, designate an accounting officer by name and in writing”.  So, if the Secretary to the Treasury designates an accounting officer, he will have known where this accounting officer is going to be operating.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you satisfied?

PROF. LATIGO: No Sir. Mr Chairman, if we disregard that, (2) says: ”An accounting officer shall control and be personally accountable to Parliament for the regularity and propriety of the expenditure of money applied by an expenditure vote or any other provision of any Ministry, department, Fund, agency or other entity funded wholly through the Consolidated Fund.”  I was saying that since we introduced local governments as a specific entity, it does no harm but it clearly points out that local governments are funded through the Consolidated Fund.

DR OKULO:  Mr Chairman, I think there is a misunderstanding.  The Constitution makes Chief Accounting Officers the Chief Executive and Accounting Officer of the district. The Constitution has already made them accounting officers.  Rule 8 of the Local Governments Financial Regulations also takes that into consideration, so does the Local Governments Act.  You cannot appoint somebody who is already by constitution and subsidiary laws, an accounting officer.  

I raised this question earlier, Sir, to the Minister of Finance, and the response I got is that although previously the Secretary to the Treasury was appointing Chief Administrative Officers and accounting officers, it was irregular.  So, I think the ministry has taken note of this and they are not going to do it.  If there is any confusion in this bill, then it should be cleared now so that after somebody is constitutionally appointed accounting officer, nobody else can extinguish that appointment or even try to ratify it otherwise.  

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean that the Constitution is the superior authority in as far as this is concerned, and there is no need - I think it is clear Professor Latigo?

PROF. LATIGO: Actually what he mentioned was in reference to my reference to (1).

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but he is saying  –

PROF. LATIGO: I agree with him on that explanation entirely.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

PROF. LATIGO: But reporting to Parliament must include the local governments, and that is what I am saying that local governments should also be included.

LT KINOBE: Mr Speaker, what hon. Okulo Epak is saying is actually true because the Constitution and the Local Governments Act outlines very clearly that: “The Chief Administrative Officer shall be the accounting officer of the District”.  But for purposes of the funds that are sent from the centre, the Secretary to the Treasury goes ahead to designate by a letter and outlines the particular activities and functions to remind him that he should be accountable to Parliament.  

Now, what Professor Latigo was trying to improve is actually in consistency with what we have provided for in 7, that you have already specifically added local governments and agencies.  So, when you add local governments here, for purposes of being more specific, it does not reduce any value in line with what hon. Ekulo Epak has said, but it creates more certainty that you are talking about that institution which also receives money from the consolidated fund.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you mean that in 8(2) after "ministry" - 

LT KINOBE: Yes, after "ministry", we insert "local government" and also insert it at the end just to emphasise what we have already provided for under Clause 7(3)(a).

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, do you have any problem?

MR RUKUTANA: I am satisfied that sub-section (2) is independent of sub-section (1) and considering the amendments we have made; I think it does no harm.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, so you suggest that after the term “department” we put "local government"?  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8 as amended agreed to.

Clause 9:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, in Clause 9(8) we propose an amendment by inserting the words “under the provisions of Article 96 of the Constitution” after the word “dissolved.”  This is simply to be absolutely clear.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9 as amended agreed to.

Clause 10:

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose two amendments to Clause 10.  The first amendment is in sub-section (2), and I would like to include, after "expenditure" “and a copy of such warrant shall be laid.”

THE CHAIRMAN: But have you not seen three?

PROF. LATIGO: Yes, but sub-section (3) is slightly different. I will justify this proposal: “Shall be laid before Parliament at its next sitting.” I am saying this because what is provided for in sub-section (3) actually comes when the funds have already been used. And since in our circumstance the word "emergency" is not clearly defined and, therefore, could be over stressed, and to ensure that the funds that are being derived from the contingency funds are actually being directed to what the country perceives as real emergency, it will only be prudent that Parliament gets to know what that fund is for.  Therefore, we should add that, “a copy of such warrant shall be laid before Parliament at its next sitting”. It will only help to inform Parliament that these funds have been used.

THE CHAIRMAN: But what does it add? Because where an advance is made under subsection (2), a supplementary is a more authoritative document. Supplementary estimates will be for your approval.  This is an emergency; definitely if it is and you agree it is, then the question of immediately doing so may not arise.  But you will see in subsection (3) that once it is done, the supplementary estimates will be prepared for your approval.

PROF. LATIGO: Yes, but the supplementary estimate is only being laid to put back what already has been used!

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, exactly that is the use of contingency; it is for emergency.  Because in emergency, there is no way of coming to approve first.  Even if they did it, it would be by supplementary because you had already formed a budget.

PROF. LATIGO: Okay, maybe we stay over that amendment and we propose the next one that will cover it.

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, under the law that has been repealed, there was a ceiling as to how much could be allocated to finance this contingency fund. But I notice that in this section, the law is silent. Can I be clarified as to how much or what proportion –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We have not repealed the Budget Act, the Budget Act is also putting a ceiling; this one has not affected it. The Budget Act puts a ceiling for supplementary funding. So, you have to read this one in conjunction with the Budget Act, which puts a ceiling.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, the issue of a contingency fund is very separate from a supplementary.

THE CHAIRMAN: But eventually it is treated as a supplementary.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Yes, eventually, but it is not routinely. It is a separate fund, and unless there is an emergency, it is not touched.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but once it is, it becomes supplementary, and it is formed in a supplementary under 10(3).

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we want to thank you very much for guiding the House on this issue. By definition, a contingency is something unforeseen; it is not determinable. Therefore, it is not like a supplementary, which is subject to a ceiling because a supplementary is foreseen. You are simply saying, from the budget it needs to be supplemented. It would be very difficult to provide a ceiling within a contingency, which by definition, you cannot know what it is.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I think that is an explanation.  Can we proceed? I put the question that Clause 10 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11 agreed to.

Clause 12:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, in Clause 12, the word “through” is replaced with the words “with the advice of.” And the justification is that this is better drafting. So, it would read, “The Auditor General shall, from time to time, and on the requisition of the minister, with the advice of the Accountant General….” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12 as amended agreed to.

Clause 13 agreed to.

Clause 14:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, Clause 14 - this is on Page 20 of the bill, just to guide the House. We propose an amendment to insert the words “or her” after the word “him”. The justification is of course, gender sensitivity.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, this is a matter of policy.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14 as amended agreed to.

Clause 15:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment on Clause 15 (2) by inserting the words “under the provisions of Article 98 of the Constitution” after the word “resolved”.  The justification is that this, again, is a consequential amendment from Clause 9 (8).

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15 as amended agreed to.

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment on Clause 17(1).  It is a consequential amendment. We propose to substitute the words “Public Accounts” with “appropriate”. The justification is that there are other committees of Parliament, which scrutinize expenditure of the various government bodies and units, including the Local Governments Accounts Committee as well.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17 as amended agreed to.

Clause 18:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we propose the redrafting of Clause 18(1) to make it more logical and more clear, and the proposed redrafting reads as follows:

“Where the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not or has not come into operation by the beginning of any financial year, the President may, by warrant under his or her hand addressed to the minister, authorize the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year, or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is earlier.”

Mr Chairman, we also propose an amendment on Clause 18 (2) to read: “Any sum issued in any financial year from the Consolidated Fund account under sub section (1) in respect of the service of Government, shall not exceed the amount shown as required on the account in respect of that service in the Vote-on-Account approved by Parliament by resolution for that financial year; and shall be set off against the amount provided in respect of that service in the Appropriation Act for that financial year when that law comes into operation.”  

The justification is that this is to be in harmony with the provisions of the Constitution and avoid ambiguities in subsequent Acts. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is clear. This is a Vote-on-Account, something like that. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18 as amended agreed to.

Clause 19:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, we addressed hon. Okulo Epak’s amendments in the committee and we discussed them and we want to submit to the House that we agreed as follows:

Clause 19(1) remains as drafted in the bill –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there Clause 19(1)?

PROF. KAMUNTU: We make 19(1) and the formulation remains as it is in the bill. Then we put 19(2) to read as follows: “The requirements under sub section (1) shall not apply to unconditional and equalization grants to local governments under Article 193 of the Constitution.” 

The Justification after discussion was, the unconditional grants and equalization grants, once given since they were grants and equalization is like affirmative action, they should not be returned to the ministry when they are not spent. We should make a distinction between those conditional grants, which must be disbursed under certain conditions. If they are not disbursed under those conditions, they will have failed, and therefore, returning them to the Consolidated Fund is justified. But those which are unconditional and equalization should be allowed to be retained by the local governments once they have been disbursed. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now clear? I put the question on the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we propose the following amendment on Clause 20 by merging 20(2)(b) and 20(2)(d) to read as follows: 
(b) “Treasury and monetary policy management purposes”

We delete also (d) in 20(3), and the justification is to avoid ambiguity, and to make the drafting of the law very clear and coherent. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20 as amended agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25 agreed to.

Clause 26 agreed to.

Clause 27 agreed to.


Clause 28:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, in the meeting this morning, after reviewing the new amendments we have made, it was felt that although we had proposed an amendment on Clause 28, this amendment be dropped because the rest makes it very clear.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 28 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29 agreed to.

Clause 30 agreed to.


Clause 31:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, on Clause 31, we propose minor amendments to be consistent with the practice. We propose to substitute “five” in line four with “four”. That is Clause 31(1)(a). This is simply to make this law consistent with what is currently the practice. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendments?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we read again hon. Okulo Epak’s amendment and we want to propose after looking at his amendment that in Clause 31, we insert the following new sub clauses after sub clause (1) to read as follows: “The accounts referred to in subsection (1) and the Third Schedule to this Act, shall include the accounts of all classified expenditure.”
  
Then we put a new sub section (3), “The Minister shall, by statutory instrument, provide regulations subjecting classified expenditure to confidentiality and in particular-

    (a) limiting accessibility to information and reporting regarding classified expenditure;
    (b) handling and reporting by the Auditor General; and
    (c) consideration by Parliament of the report of the Auditor General concerning classified expenditure.”

The justification, after debate, was to address the concern, which you raised in the House that classified expenditure has often been abused, and some accounts have been opened, and without any scrutiny. And this has remained a constant concern to Parliament. Therefore, the justification for this is that you could have classified information audited by classified people, but at least there should be some scrutiny on how this so-called classified information is expended. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31 as amended agreed to.

Clause 32:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, in Clause 32, we insert a new clause to read as follows: “Parliament or the minister may, at any time request the Auditor General to make a special report on any matter.”

The justification is providing for the above institutions to use the services of the autonomous office of the Auditor General in reference to any particular issue of concern.

Then, delete Clause 32(4). The justification is that Members of Parliament represent the public and parliamentary records are open to public scrutiny. I beg to move for these amendments that have been proposed.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Chairman, the Constitution says the Auditor General shall not be directed in his duties by any person or authority. I wonder what the implication of giving the minister that power would mean to this particular provision in the Constitution?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the situation, as I see it, is that the Auditor General might have not audited certain accounts for one reason or another, and if found necessary, it is a question of writing “please would you…” to assist people to know what has happened. It is not a command as to how he does his job, but it is a request. That is what I think, and there is no contravention really here.

DR OKULO EPAK: This is what we have been suffering from the provisions of the Bank of Uganda law. Now that the spirit has been started here, we believe the ministry might as well come with an appropriate provision regarding the Bank of Uganda law in order to overcome that obstacle.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think this is a liberal interpretation of independence. Some people think that by saying independent, it means that you do not interact at all, you do not get information. Because you are not God, you may not know but somebody else who might be outside may say but - that will not be directing you but it will be assisting you. Can you finish one because if there are several amendments as they are coming – (Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: I thank you, Mr Chairman, for your guidance on this. In fact, if you look at Clause 33 (2), in the report we are proposing precisely what Dr. Okulo Epak is referring to. “The Auditor General in performing his or her functions shall not be under the direction or control of any person or authority.” We want to bring it into this Act. But the explanation you have given is absolutely proper that we are saying a minister can request, it is not a directive.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we dispose of that, then we come to other amendments - (Lt Kinobe rose_)- unless it is connected with this.

LT KINOBE: Mr Chairman, it is connected to that; it is very minor. I wanted to propose that we delete the word “report.” Because the nature of reporting to Parliament or to the minister by the Auditor General is supposed to be an audit report. I wanted us to delete the word “report” and substitute it with “audit”, "to make a special audit", because definitely after the special audit, naturally he submits a report. The request is to make a special audit on any matter. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I think the word “report” is more general. If you say “audit” then you are limiting the ambit of the clause. A report can be on any matter, whether an audit or any other thing.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is an umbrella term.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, the function of the Auditor General is to audit, and whatever opinion he gives thereof is part of the audit report. So, I do not envisage a situation where the Auditor General will report about the trees, the scenery, which might not be quite relevant to the audit function.

THE CHAIRMAN: What harm does it cause if we use the layman’s language to include other technical aspects of the report?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, the Auditor General is only legally required to present an audit report.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then they are using "audit report" and it is a report. Therefore, it will be understood that it is an audit report. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32 as amended agreed to.

Clause 33:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment in 33 (2) to replace that section with the provision of the Constitution Article 163(6), to make it more consistent and more in harmony with the superior law. It should read: “The Auditor General in performing his or her functions shall not be under the direction or control of any person or authority.” This is just to be very specific and to be consistent with the Constitution. I beg to move.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, I would like to move a further amendment consequent to the amendments made in the Section 31. That we include classified expenditure centres as one of the sources of the work for the Auditor General for consistency because under Section 7, we have given powers of the Accountant General to give classification of accounts. We have now talked of auditing classified accounts. But when we are specifying here, the sources of the accounts we should be more specific to avoid any vagueness and of course, to strengthen the legal backing for the creation and operation and auditing of classified accounts.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is your amendment independent of this particular one? Because this particular one, which the Chairperson has read, is about independence in carrying out its functions including classified, what not. But are you making another additional amendment?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, my amendment is under 33 (1) and it would be (d). You will see that: 

33(1) The Auditor General shall, on behalf of Parliament, examine, inquire into and audit the accounts of- 
    (a) the Accountant General 
    (b) all accounting officers; and 
    (c) all persons entrusted with collection, receipt, custody… 

And I am moving that we add, "classified expenditure centres".

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the Committee’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33 as amended agreed to.

Clause 34:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment on Clause 34(1)(a) by inserting the words “within a period of three months” after the words “public officer” so that the clause reads: “Require a public officer within a period of three months to give any explanation or information….” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question – (Interjection) - Prof. Latigo says - (Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: I would have no objection; it is just a matter of emphasis – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Within three months?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes.

(Question put and agreed to.)

LT KINOBE: This is a consequential amendment to Clause 34(2), the paragraph after (d). In the last sentence you have “Public Accounts Committee.” We delete “Public Accounts Committee” and put “appropriate committee of Parliament” as we moved earlier on; and then also in (3) and in subsequent areas where “Public Accounts Committee” appears.  

Clause 34(2), the paragraph after (d), the last part reads: “…to the Deputy Speaker who shall refer the report to the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament”. I move that we delete the words “Public Accounts Committee” and insert “appropriate committee of Parliament”.

Then in (3), delete “Public Accounts Committee” and insert “appropriate committee”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear, honourable members?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, the first “appropriate” is okay. When you come to (3), you are referring to that committee already. So, you do not need to repeat “appropriate”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is because we have two public accounts committees here. So, when you use “appropriate”, we know where it goes. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34 as amended agreed to.

Clause 35 agreed to.

Clause 36 agreed to.

Clause 37 agreed to.

Clause 38:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we have two amendments on Clause 38. One is to substitute the word “six months” with “four months” in clause 38(1). So it will read as follows: “Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any law in force, a public organisation shall, within four months…”  

The justification is simply to be consistent.

We also propose a further amendment on 38(2) by shifting the marginal note. If you look at sub-clause (2), that marginal note should be shifted to the next clause. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 38 as amended agreed to.

Clause 39:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, a couple of amendments on Clause 39.

THE CHAIRMAN: Unfortunately I do not have them in writing, and when I do not have them in writing, it causes problems.

PROF. KAMUNTU: The trouble is, some of these amendments were made in this morning’s meeting.   And we just came out of the meeting and came to the House.

The marginal note, which was in 38(2), is now moved to Clause 39, for obvious reasons. Then in Clause 39(7)(c), we insert the word “public” before the word “body”. So the sentence reads, “any public body which has in any of its financial year received more than half its income…”  

The justification was that you raised concern about guaranteeing money to private bodies. By putting this word, you have made it very clear that only public bodies can receive government guarantees in financial transactions. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 39 as amended agreed to.

Clause 40:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, in Clause 40 there is a spelling mistake. The spelling of "deficiencies" is wrong; it needs to be corrected, and we have done so. You can see the word "deficiencies" on page 37 of the bill, Clause 40(1). Towards the end, it reads, “…losses of or desficiencies – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the question was, the word deficiencies as in the text. There are two instances, which one are you talking about? I think that was the question.

PROF. KAMUNTU: The one after (e). Mr Chairman, I thought that is fairly obvious. But this is proposed to correct the typing error. We also want Clause 40 to become 41, for logical sequencing, and 41 becomes 40, so that the structure flows. I beg to move.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40 as amended agreed to.

Clause 41 as amended agreed to.

Clause 42:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, in Clause 42 we make the following amendments:  Clause 42(b) presently reads “without reasonable excuse, fails to provide any information that the Secretary to the Treasury…” We add the word “Auditor-General” after “Secretary to the Treasury”. 

And we further amend paragraph (f), which reads: “without reasonable excuse and contrary to paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section 34, fails to provide the Auditor-General or a person authorised by him or her with any explanations and information…” 

We propose an amendment by adding after “information” the words, “including accounts within three months after”. We have added a new clause to it. After “information” you insert “including accounts within three months after”.

MR RUKUTANA: The intention was to include accounts here, but when we agreed that information should include accounts, then this one should not be tampered with. We have said information should include accounts, so in effect, there is no need for that amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR MWANDHA: I think, Mr Chairman, what we said is that it stays as it is provided. The word “information” is defined to include accounts, therefore -(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, I apologize. On the definition clause, we defined information to include accounts, and in my notes this should have been reflected. Once information is defined to include accounts, it covers the amendments we had proposed in this.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

LT KINOBE: Mr Chairman, in the amendment in (b), the chairman has omitted section 31 at the end.  When we added “Auditor-General”, we imported the section that refers to the Auditor-General, section 31. Therefore, when you read paragraph (b), after “…sub-section (5) of section (6)”, you add “section 31” because we amended that paragraph to insert the Auditor-General. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, add section 31. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 42 as amended agreed to.

LT KINOBE: There were amendments we had agreed the chairman would present, but he has not presented.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, it is true in clause 42 there are a series of amendments, which were proposed, including a new sub-section (h) after (g), which reads as follows: “being an accounting officer, without reasonable excuse fails to comply with any financial regulations or instructions under any law, or fails to execute duties and functions imposed on him or her under this Act or any other law.”

This was a new amendment intended to make the offences under section 42 more focussed on the accounting officers.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 42 as amended agreed to.

Clause 43:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we redraft clause 43 to read as follows: 
“(1) Any person who commits an offence under section 42 of this Act shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding a fine of 250 currency points, or a term of imprisonment not exceeding three years.”  This is better drafting. 

“(2)	Where-
(a)	a loss or deficiency in public money or other money occurs that has been advanced to or was under the control of a public officer; or 

(b)	a loss or deficiency of or damage to public property or other property occurs while the property was in the care of a public officer, and the minister is satisfied after due enquiry, that the negligence or misconduct of the public officer caused or contributed to the loss or deficiency -
    (a) the amount of the loss or deficiency;
    (b) the value of the property lost or destroyed;
    (c) the cost of replacing or repairing the damage to that property as the case may be, shall be a debt due to the Government, and may be deducted from the salary or any other amounts due by the government to the public officer.  

(3)	Where the negligence or misconduct of the public officer is not the sole cause of any loss, deficiency or destruction resulting in an action under sub-section (2), the amount recoverable from the public officer may be restricted to only the cost of replacing or repairing loss, deficiency, damage or destruction that the minister considers, after due enquiry, to be just and equitable, having regard to the contribution made by the public officer to that loss, deficiency, damage or destruction.

(4) In this section, reference to a public officer includes the person who has been a public officer.”  

The justification for this amendment is that it is better drafting. The making of regulations by the minister should not be part of the law. So, this is brought out more forcefully by redrafting what was originally there. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, I am just seeking clarification. In the proposed amendment there are very vital words which seem to have been left out. Those words are, “may be recovered from the public officer in a court of competent jurisdiction”. It would appear that the chairman now is trying to exclude “a court of competent jurisdiction”, which I think is a very cardinal element in execution of justice. Could I be clarified on that?

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, I think he is asking you about enforcement. Is the court going to play a part? He says you omitted these words and yet they were there.

PROF. KAMUNTU: There is no way you can exclude the recourse to courts of law for somebody who is wronged.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, put it there. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Well, if he has made an amendment, let him put it there.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not an amendment. He is pointing out an omission.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, the re-drafting of this does not exclude the courts of law. Courts of competent jurisdiction must be included in the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then read the amendment so as to include it there, so that we understand. At the top of page 40, the first paragraph says, “as the case may be, shall be a debt due to the Government and may be recovered from the public officer in a court of competent jurisdiction, and may be deducted from any salary or any other amount due by the Government to the public officer.”

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I think the omission was deliberate. Because, when you say, “may be recovered from a public officer in a court of competent jurisdiction”, you are sort of limiting the scope. If one has to recover, he has to go to court. But by omitting it, this will not stop the Government from going to court, if it has to. So, the omission, according to me, does not in any way occasion any injustice.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you want the minister to enforce this law without resorting to court? This is the question. Initially, when you drafted this bill, I think you wanted the court to play a part.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether the intention later changed, but I think there was a debate on whether “court” should be put in the clause or should be left out. As I said, when you say, “in a court of competent jurisdiction” then you are tying the hands of that person recovering. So, we would wish to see a situation whereby other methods, other than court, are used.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you are saying the minister becomes the accuser, the judge and the enforcer!  

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, I think the intention here is that if complaints are raised about an officer, and the minister investigates and confronts the officer with the fact that losses were made, and the officer accepts that losses were made and agrees to recover, that would be the first stage. Then after, the money is recovered. 

But should it not be possible to do it administratively, obviously then the Minister will go to court. But if you say, as was originally said, then it means that the only process by which that recovery must take place is to go to court.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  When an officer causes a loss to Government as a result of willful negligence or whatever, and he is confronted with the facts and you invoke the provisions of this Act, if the officer is dissatisfied, clearly he can go to court. This law does not exclude that possibility.

THE CHAIRMAN: How will a person who has caused a loss move to court? Do you mean to challenge?

MR KAMUNTU: Yes, to challenge that he did not cause the loss. But if he accepts that he has caused the loss, then he should pay. This is the understanding. Clearly, the courts should remain open. Anybody dissatisfied with this should go to court. But where the facts are glaring, the minister, or whoever is responsible, should indeed execute the provisions of this Act. But definitely room should remain for –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But why don’t you leave the formulation as it is in the bill? Because now I see you have a problem. Why don’t you leave it as it is in the bill? Because I see you are causing more problems by attempting to disturb the formulation in the bill. What was wrong with the formulation in the bill, which you tried to cure? Try to clear this.

MR RUKUTANA: As I said earlier, leaving the words “court of competent jurisdiction” ties the hands of the person enforcing. Not in all circumstances –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But what do you fear? The court is a public institution. Its function is exactly to do that. What do you fear?  

MR RUKUTANA: But even when it is an obvious case, and it is not in this field?

THE CHAIRMAN: Of course, if it is obvious, the man will just pay you, or he will say, “okay deduct it from my salary”. But definitely, if you are going to try him and so on, why don’t you use the organs of state that are there to arbitrate, to find negligence and take measures?

MR NSHIMYE: Mr Chairman, I wanted to propose that it reads as follows: “as the case may be, shall be a debt due to the Government and in the last resort may, by order of court, be deducted from any salary or any other amounts due by the Government to the public officer.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you say it becomes a debt recoverable by lawful means? Then you know either the man says, “Well, I do not have money but you can deduct it from my salary”, or if he refuses and he has no salary or he has nothing, then the court can find a way of enforcing it. Since you have said you have constituted it into a debt, then there is debt recovery.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, I think the problem here is that you are dealing with two things: One, that something has happened. The officer has caused a loss for which some parallel disciplinary activity would be imposed. You do not want at this stage to say going to court overrides some disciplinary - because the court could find the guy guilty and even recommend that he be expelled. Yet, a careful analysis or the cause of that loss would have required that it be handled administratively.  Maybe what we could do is to start, instead of courts of law, start with salaries, et cetera, and then add, “where necessary, through courts of law”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we cannot resolve this now as I see –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, the application of this sub-section in its original form does not in anyway abrogate the right of Government to apply the processes under the Public Service Standing Orders. The Standing Orders are in force, the Public Service Act is still in force, and definitely, this provides for avenues to recover moneys from offending officers beyond their salaries. Because if you only utilise the administrative measures you can never recover beyond a fraction of the salary. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I suggest we skip this for the time being and we proceed with the other and then we shall see what to do with this one. It may need sometime to think about it. Can we proceed with another Clause?

Clause 44 agreed to.

Clause 45:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, in Clause 45 we propose an amendment by inserting the Third Schedule so that the sentence reads: “The Minister may amend the First and the Third Schedules by Statutory Instrument.” This is more encompassing and it brings out the omission of the Third Schedule, which is also affected. I beg to move.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, amending the value of the currency point is a matter that has spread across a number of legislation. I do not envisage a situation where the value of the currency point under this law would be different from the value of a currency point in another law. So, the giving of the minister power by Statutory Instrument to amend this, in my view, is superfluous.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what we have done with others; we have dealt with currency points and we envisage a situation when there will be need to change it and we have left if to the minister to do it.  So, it is not the first time this provision is in the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35 as amended agreed to.

Clause 46 agreed to.

Clause 47 agreed to.

Clause 48 agreed to.

Clause 49:

PROF. KAMUNTU: We propose an amendment to Clause 49 by redrafting the clause to read as follows: 

“This Act shall take precedent over all other existing Acts related to public finance and any Act in contradiction with this Act is modified to conform with the provisions of this Act.”  This justification is simply to be consistent, and for matters relating to public finance, this should be a guiding law. I beg to move.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, maybe, it is my lack of legal knowledge which disturbs me, but by simply stating that any provision is modified, do you modify them?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is, you will actually amend so that it is saying differently from what – you have to read it in conformity with this one. This is to subject previous laws that may be provided in different measures to the command of this one. Well, if really you cannot reconcile the other, it will be null and void because this is a subsequent legislation. It is supposed to amend the one, which is contradicting it by implication but now this is express.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, this modification we are talking about, will it not to be in a written form?

THE CHAIRMAN: In what?

MR ARUMADRI: Written form.

THE CHAIRMAN: In which sense?

MR ARUMADRI: You said that this Act and the other one, which is not in conformity with the Act, would have to be read together. Is that where it ends?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, because I think what they had - maybe there was a lot of legislation on this matter, which they could not lay hands on, but they want the policy in regard to public funds to be controlled by this one. So in anticipation that there could be another law that could contradict this one, they do not want this one to be contradicted. They want this one to be a superior law over the others.

DR OKULO: Mr Chairman, would it not be even simpler for some of us to understand if you just say it shall be null and avoid to the extent of the inconsistency with this law? Because to say modified, to me, well I am not a lawyer, but it sounds too ordinary.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think what we are trying to say is that the provisions of this law will prevail over the others, which tend to contradict. Can we get a better formulation, honourable members? They have said that this Act takes precedence over all other existing Acts, and any Act in contradiction with this Act is modified to the extent of the two contradictions, so that you amend it to fit in with this one. I think that is what they are saying. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49 as amended agreed to.

The First Schedule agreed to.

The Second Schedule:

PROF. KAMUNTU: In the Second Schedule, we propose an amendment in the heading to include the word “terms and” before the words “conditions for raising of loans”. This also applies to the following subsection (1) so that it also reads as follows: “The following terms and conditions shall apply to any loan raised under section 22 of this Act.”  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Second Schedule as amended agreed to.

The Third Schedule:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr. Chairman, in the Third Schedule, we have minor amendments to make. We propose the following amendment in paragraphs 1(b) and (d), by substituting the words “source and application of funds” with the words “cash flow” so that the sentence reads, “A consolidated statement of the cash flow of funds for all public funds” and the rest flows as written. This is a better technical word applied to what is implied in the provision. I beg to move.

MR KIZIGE: Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the amendment because the two phrases are quite different in accounting. A cash flow statement is quite different from a source and application of funds. Cash flow statements refer specifically to transactions related to cash. Non cash transactions are not reflected in the cash flow statements. You might have some intra-account transactions and these appear in a statement, which is bigger than a cash flow statement, which is called a funds flow statement.  

But, Mr Chairman, while accounting in not for profit organisations like Government, you do not use the phrase cash flow statement or fund flow statement.  So, the proper word for the fund flow statement is actually a source and application of funds statements.  So, this amendment really needs not be used. I wish to oppose it on technical grounds.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, this is a technical position.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I concur with hon. Kizige.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do we not leave it? (-Mr Rukutana rose_) This is your Bill. Do you want to change your bill?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, the new international standards now use the formulation as is it is in the amendment and not what the honourable Member is proposing.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, the minister who is the owner of the bill is accepting the amendment and he has consulted his technical people. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, honourable members, we had a problem.  I think we need to sit and take some few minutes -(Interjection)- Have you agreed now?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, I am now coming up with a new formulation, which would combine the two and page 40. As the case may be, shall be, “debt due to the Government and may be recovered from the public officer either administratively or through a court of competent jurisdiction.” I think that is a compromised situation.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43 as amended agreed to.

The Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Public Finance and Accountability Bill, 2002” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Public Finance and Accountability Bill, 2002” be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The bill is passed. Congratulations. Now honourable members, there was business which we were supposed to have transacted, namely, the setting up of terms of reference for hon. Ruhundi's Select Committee.  But I think this can be done tomorrow. So think about these terms, so that when we come tomorrow, we first dispose of this subject and then proceed. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.16 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 17 April 2003 at 2 p.m.)











