Tuesday, 13th April, 1999.

The Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. at Parliamentary Building, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I think the week before, the Order Paper had been containing The Political Organisations Bill as the next business on the Order Paper.  Today, I am not seeing it, last week on Thursday also I did not see it.  Mr. Speaker, I am a Member of the Committee which looked at this Bill and I know we have already circulated the Report of the Committee.  I am just seeking guidance from the Speaker, what has happened and when do you expect the House to debate this Report?  Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: It is quite true that The Political Organisations Bill has been on the Order Paper as business expected, and I am sure when the hon. Minister is ready, he should be able to give us an indication.  

MR. OMARA ATUBO: But Mr. Speaker, if what we are hearing from  corridors that we may go for the long recess on Thursday is true,  are you saying that the Minister may be ready before Thursday or we may actually debate this Report after recess?  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think if the Bill is for Second Reading, it is the Minister to move the Motion, and I have told you, as soon as he is ready, he will let us know.  Supposing he comes tomorrow to do just that? I think your worry can also be allayed because it is possible to save such a Bill or any business that will not have been concluded by the time the House is prorogued.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DRAFT TREATY FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL CORPORATION) (Mr. Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As hon. Members are aware, the three states of East Africa - Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda are in the process of consulting the general public and other sectors of society to seek their views on the Draft Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community.  

This process is aimed at culminating into the signing of this Treaty by the 30th July, 1999.  In between, it was agreed by the three countries that a number of activities be carried out in order to get views of the various stake holders to be ready for submission to the Secretariat for East African Cooperation by the 31st of April, 1999.   We have given ourselves 31st April, 1999.  There is a timetable of activities leading to the signing of this Treaty by 30th July, and one of the activities is to carry out public sensitization and get responses to the Draft Treaty from each of the three countries by 31st April, 1999, so that, should there be need to redraft it, that redrafting is done before an East African Forum is held in May to finally give the public input to this Treaty.

In Uganda, a Task Force was established under the chairmanship of Prof. Turyamuhika and the hon. Dr. Okulo Epak as his deputy, to facilitate this work.  Accordingly, the Task Force felt it necessary that the political leadership of this country should play its rightful role in expressing its views on the Draft Treaty.  A decision was, therefore, taken to involve all the Members of Parliament and to seek their views on this Treaty.  

Hon. Members will recall that the First Deputy Prime Minister wrote a letter to each one of you, dated 29th March, 1999, inviting you for a seminar today, 13th April, 1999, at 9.00 a.m. at the International Conference Centre.  Unfortunately, today's seminar did not take place because of inadequate attendance or possibly due to lack of interest in the Draft Treaty.  I should like, however, Mr. Speaker, to assume the former is the cause.  

Hon. Members may wish to know that the idea of publicising this Draft Treaty for public reaction and input arose out of the recognition that the revived Community would be people centred and people driven.  The Treaty should, therefore, reflect the desires and aspirations of the peoples of East Africa.  As representatives of the people, there is no doubt, you have a crucial role to play in this exercise.

In light of what I have just said, I would like to inform hon. Members of Parliament that another seminar has been organised for Thursday, 15th, beginning at 8.30 a.m. to consider the Draft Treaty.  It is imperative that if we are to look at the institutions of the community that we are going to establish come end of July, if we are to look at the question of imbalance in our economic development, if we are to look at the issue of achieving a zero tariff rate for East Africa by the end of July, these are very, very important decisions that affect our ordinary people, that affect our country in terms of revenue generation and so on.  So, it is very imperative that the leadership of this country should participate in finalising this Treaty to ensure that our interests are well catered for.  

I would like to further propose, Mr. Speaker, that hon. Members of Parliament do take the advantage of the recess which is hopefully soon coming, to consult with their constituencies on the Draft Treaty and to submit their input to the Task Force before the 30th April, deadline. Thank you.

MR. OKULO EPAK: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for the brief he has given to this august House and his urging us, as political leaders of this country, to provide an input to this Draft Treaty.  

It is a pity, Mr. Speaker, that it has taken this long to get Parliament to be involved in this exercise but I still think that this is a very important stage in the sense that we are about to go for recess and this will give us the opportunity to consult with our electorate and to sensitize them and interest them in the affairs of the East African Community or Unity for that matter.  

Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek clarification on one or two points.  The hon. Minister has said the meeting has aborted today, and I think it is basically because there was a very low attendance and he is now suggesting Thursday, and then he is also suggesting, and I think this was the original idea, that Members should go back and discuss with their electorates. I heard him say the views we collect from the electorate would be submitted to the Task Force.  I am looking at it this way: First, would it not be better, since the Draft Treaty has been distributed to Members, to allow them to go out, consult with the electorate and then call Members back on a special arrangement, and then we can debate the Draft Treaty with the hindsight of our consultations with the public and then the question of getting the views of our people we represent will be handled in a forum rather than as an individual submission?  
In this regard, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. Minister and all of us are aware that Members definitely will have some difficulties in the way of consultation.  Could the hon. Minister suggest or say whether there would be any facilitation for Members of Parliament to carry out these consultations and to come back and hold a special meeting to discuss the Draft Treaty?  The alternative would be, we meet on Thursday, Members are briefed about the Task Force and told specifically what to focus on.  That will be a brief meeting, and then they go back and consult.  I do not know which way, but I can see the time is very short and we are hard pressed to get the input from the political leaders.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker and the hon. Minister.  

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am also seeking clarification from the hon. Minister on a fundamental issue on this matter of the East African Corporation.  Mr. Speaker, about a month ago, there was a statement in the press which was not quite clear that the three East African leaders had admitted two other neighbours into the cooperation namely, Rwanda and Burundi.  I am just wondering, under what authority are they inviting, accepting and admitting these neighbours that have a lot of encumbrances politically?

The East African Cooperation is not just a political creation, it has a long history.  It was only interrupted by the madness of one soldier who never took orders from his Commander in Chief and thereafter, disrupted the political arrangement.  Mr. Speaker, we would like to revive this old cooperation but the way I see it now, especially from the three East African leaders, they take it as if it is an association of the three leaders.  It should be a cooperation of working together, living together of the three countries.  Now, if they start accepting and inviting applications from neighbours who did not know that well before, and who have certain serious encumbrances that you do not want to be introduced at the material time in the community, I am just wondering!  

Could the hon. Minister elaborate whether this statement has any substance to it or it was misinformation or it was properly reported in the press?  I really want to know. Rwanda and Burundi, are they Members, have they been admitted, has somebody encouraged them to apply for membership or what?  Right now, we have serious problems in the West where we are already carrying a very heavy burden in supporting these two countries.  So when they come in, I do not know who is going to carry the burden.  So, I would like to be clarified.

Two, Mr. Speaker, I am glad the hon. Minister himself has put it very bluntly that this morning, the attendance was almost zero.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to put it also very bluntly to the two or three Ministers in charge of this matter, that is, Foreign Affairs, that they have not done enough and, especially one Minister totally lacks interest in this matter of the cooperation. As a matter of fact, at one time we were even thinking of how to use 118 to bring to his attention that we were not happy with the way he is conducting the East African Cooperation matters.  He is either incompetent or lacks interest or something. It has even affected our Embassy!  I am getting worried that unless the hon. Minister, on the Floor this afternoon with his Colleague puts a lot more effort and zest in the matter, he is a none starter.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to put it to the hon. Minister that this matter of reviving  the East African Cooperation now only should it come from the grassroots level, but should be a matter of this august House to look at it from the legal stand point legislatively because we just do not want  these people meeting wherever they want - Nairobi, Arusha, Kampala and issue statements or communiques at the end or close of meetings. No! I hope in these seminars you are talking about, Mr. Minister, these are the issues you are going to address.  We want a serious cooperation, not just an association of three Presidents having a glass of juice or water and they issue communiques on our behalf. Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate that I would like to know the status of Rwanda and Burundi in this arrangement.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have been listening to the Minister's briefing about this Treaty of East Africa.  When we recall the history of the East African Community which was so glorious but which was miserably ended, it draws our attention to something very important. I am seeking clarification on the following aspects: One, in my view, with regard to the people I represent in Lubaga South, it means a lot for us to be committed to a Treaty which is so binding.  I have had an opportunity to look at the volume with reference and I got worried.  Where did Uganda get the moral authority to commit Ugandans to that extend?  That is one of my points of clarification. Two, what is attracting us to that Unity in a situation where there are so many social, economic and political calamities? I would have thought that Ugandans would have cleaned their House first before getting committed to such a big and fundamental goal!  We would like to know where our President secured that moral authority to commit us to a thinking of such a unique nature.

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Members for showing keen interest in matters of the East African Community. Of course the hon. Okulo Epak was there this morning, I am sure that hon. Awori will be there on Thursday, in light of the immense interest he has shown this afternoon and hon. Lukyamuzi too.  

The hon. Okulo Epak wondered whether it would not be better to allow the Members of Parliament to go and consult first so that they come fully equipped with the views of their constituents.  I think this is a good idea. Maybe what it calls for is for two seminars because this seminar is to equip the MPs with sufficient information to enable them to have full and comprehensive consultation with their constituents. And what this  seminar will do is, it will give a background - you know, we now have an arrangement called the East African Cooperation, it is going to give a background to that. It is going to give what the new treaty seeks to add to the current status of the partnership of the three countries and it also raises some issues that other people like the civic institutions have raised. They have been looking at these. 

We have had seminars of East Africans and the business community.  We would like you the leaders of this country to be fully equipped with the arguments that have been presented, everything that has come up so far so that when you go to consult, really you do not start at the level of those that have been doing so for the last one year.  Therefore, I accept the idea which is implicit in hon. Okulo Epak's  proposal that we hold a seminar after the consultations by Members of Parliament.  Obviously, what we had intended was hopefully to receive written reports but it may be better to have a seminar so that we can have some kind of cross fertilization of ideas countrywide.  

The second query was, would there be any facilitation?  Mr. Speaker, I together with the task force have been trying to look for funds to enable you, the Members of Parliament, to carry out this consultation in your constituencies. I am afraid I do not have a definite answer now. I can not tell you that there will be facilitation or not because I have not received clear answers on this question yet.  I hope there will be but I would like to urge you that even if we fail to raise facilitation, as of course Members of Parliament are going for recess, in the process of consulting your constituents, please do consult them on the East African Community that is proposed in the draft treaty.

Hon. Aggrey Awori wanted to know whether Rwanda and Burundi have been admitted into the East African Community. Mr. Speaker, my simple but clear answer to that is that, there is no East African Community yet because we have not signed the treaty. We are in the process of going through a draft leading to the signing of that treaty.  What we have received in East Africa now is an application by Rwanda and Burundi, once that community has been established, to be admitted. And it has been indicated - in fact you will see in the draft treaty there is a proposal that there should be a possibility for non members to be admitted later and the qualifications for admission are clearly stated out.  So, what I would like to ask hon. Awori to do is to study that provision very carefully and come up with a proposal either to amend or whatever, in order to meet his standards.

Is the East African Cooperation an association of the three leaders?  Of course not! and any one who really has interest in what has been happening would know that this is not the case because we have been holding meetings; we have what we call the Permanent Tripartite Commission of the East Africa which is composed of the three countries. Various ministries are represented; ministries of Finance, ministries of Trade, ministries of Works and Transport, ministries of Environment and, of course, Foreign Affairs.  

We have all been involved in this  process:  We have been holding meetings at officials level, we have been holding meetings at ministerial level and we have been having civic education as everyone knows. And if surely someone followed what had been happening, one would not conclude that this is a matter just for the three men who happen to be leaders of the three East African countries.  This is an arrangement for the East Africans and I would like to assure this House that according to our assessment, it enjoys almost maximum support in the three territories of East Africa, including hon. Awori's constituency - (Interruption).  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I thought he is still clarifying, he is giving the clarification you sought.

MR.  AWORI  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  I am asking you a question.  My understanding is that you sought clarification from the hon. Minister and he was still continuing to clarify.

MR. AWORI: Instead he is just piling more issues and avoiding the real issues I was looking for. 

THE SPEAKER:  Why do you not let him finish the clarification then you can seek further clarification.

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just responding to hon. Awori's question whether the East African Cooperation is an association of the three leaders and I was making the point that I know for certain that this idea of the East African Cooperation and Community enjoys maximum and certain  impressive support in East Africa as a whole, and I know for sure that Hon. Awori's constituency does support the idea of the cooperation because it will overcome certain impediments in his life style that - (Interjections)  

The other questions raised by hon. Awori are, I think, questions that certainly are going to be discussed and answered at the seminar and as I said, it appears that hon. Awori has sufficient interest to attend on Thursday. I believe he will find answers.  On the question of how Parliament gets involved in the question of legal framework and all the other questions that he raised, will be discussed at this seminar.  This indeed is the purpose of the seminar.

I am afraid that hon. Lukyamuzi raised a question that I did not get very clearly.  He asked something like "where did Uganda get the moral authority to enter this arrangement"?  Well, we have not yet - Hon. Lukyamuzi, may I repeat that - we intend, we plan, if you so agree as a country to sign this draft treaty, to create a community for East Africa at the end of July.  So, this gives you the opportunity to raise these questions so that all of them can be answered.  The question of moral authority, the question of economic gain, all these are questions that are going to be discussed at this seminar.  

I would like to end, Mr. Speaker, by once again appealing to Colleagues in Parliament to play their rightful role by attending this seminar so that they are fully equipped to be able to comprehensively consult with their constituency. Thank you.

	PERSONAL EXPLANATION.

COL. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE:  Mr. Speaker, allow me to take this opportunity to make a personal statement over issues that have appeared in The New Vision newspaper recently.  Mr. Speaker, this is an explanation and not an apologia pro vita mia.  It is not an apology for my life. 

Recently, newspaper reporters of the said paper sought me out at my country residence and begged for an interview which I willingly granted.  Mr. Speaker, I want to make it categorically clear - I repeat, categorically clear - that the only political office I have ever sought for and obtained in my life is the Ruhinda Parliamentary seat - (Applause). Whatever other responsibility I have been assigned has been at the pleasure of the appointing authority.  I am, therefore, surprised to read what has been attributed to me in The New Vision.   
When I talked to the Orumuri who actually reported what I said correctly in their latest publication, I never said I would make trouble because of the loss of office.  It can not be a quote because I have never said it, it can not be a misquote because I never alluded to it,  it can not even be a reading of my mind because I have never contemplated it.  I have been out of Cabinet before, and I am used to the back-bench.  In any case, Mr. Speaker, I am not the alfa and omega of Ugandan politics.  Uganda was there before me, it is there with me, it will exist long after I have gone.  I have served my time, and I am glad new people have been given an opportunity to try their best and I wish them luck.  

I implore, therefore, the Editor in Chief of The New Vision to correct the fake impression created that I am hunkering over office and tender a deserved apology before I seek legal redress.  After all, his reporter came and recorded everything I said.  His reporter came with a tape recorder and took everything I said on tape.

To my colleagues in the struggle, I would like to say, keep heart, I am  still the same original Otafiire I used to be in spirit and I am one of you. To my Brother Tinyefuza, I have received your message, and I hope you have been quoted correctly. The motives of mankind are less transparent than the emotions they produce. Neither the glamour of high office, nor its material reward will ever alter the philosophy of my life.  Sorry Brother, I am too old to change, and too tired to care.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I thank you. (Applause).

DEBATE ON THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE SWITZERLAND INTERNATIONAL PROCUREMENT COMPANY CONTRACT WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, by the time we adjourned consideration of the report on SWIPCO as refined by an addendum, I had a number of people who had wanted to speak. In fact I named them. I do not know whether they are here to contribute.  I have on my list hon. Wambede, there is hon. Musumba, and I also have hon. Ikote added later on. She is there.  Hon. Ikote, if you are ready I will give you the Floor.  I understand you are not ready. Can we have hon. Zziwa.

MRS. MARGARET ZZIWA(Woman Representative, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I just wanted to find out whether I was also on the list because I thought I caught your eye.  

THE SPEAKER: Now you have caught my eye.

MRS. ZZIWA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Public Accounts Committee for the two reports, specifically the main report which was very informative and the addendum.  

I rise to support the principle of third party procurement monitoring and I want to say that it has been ably highlighted in the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee  specifically, reflected in the addendum as point number 5 and, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this because when I looked at several documents which were circulated when this issue of SWIPCO started, there was a lot of information, some of which were very perturbing.  

Specifically, it was observed by the world Bank report that over 90 percent of the complaints received by the IGG are procurement related, and I think this is disturbing.  Secondly, I also observed - and I think it is also very perturbing - that, almost 100 million shillings every year is lost by this Government through misrepresentations or bad representation of procurement contracts.  In fact, after seeing that, I realised that Government had taken a very good step, first and foremost to seek to get a third party procurement monitoring consultant. I even went ahead to see, with due respect, how all this saga started and I can see in one of the letters specifically written to SWIPCO that there are very good reasons which I would call "objectives" which, maybe, were aired by the then Minister of Finance so that they would call upon this third party procurement firm to come and act in an advisory and consultative capacity to the Central Tender Board in carrying out service related to procurement for the Government of Uganda and secondly, to assist Ministries and entities in the preparations of tender documents for the procurement of goods and services;  thirdly, to plan and implement the administrative process of tenders, including printing of these tenders and documents and invitations to bids, advertisements to tenders, maintaining all the required correspondences and communications etc, and of course, perform technical analysis of the offers received. Finally, to ensure that the professional capacity of the Central Tender Board is strengthened and extended. and I believe this was a very good basis on which the Ministry of Finance or the Government of Uganda put across the invitation to SWIPCO among others. 

I would like to go ahead to say, Mr. Speaker, that with due respect, the Public Accounts Committee has done a commendable job because they have been able to come out with an objective way forward. Maybe this is what I may call a reconciliation of what at one time looked as ridiculous positions and I can say that I support the recommendations, especially the position of re-negotiation because this one is going to give an opportunity to  review the concerns which have been highlighted by several Members on this Floor, particularly the issue of price. 

Many Members have a feeling that the price quoted by SWIPCO is quite high, and that maybe we could get a better price and maybe this could feature ably and be brought down so that it is a better deal for both the Government and maybe SWIPCO.  I want also to say that, maybe in the process of re-negotiation, a better procedure or a proper procedure could be followed. For instance, it may be easier to call on the Committee of Central Tender Board and not a sub-committee of Finance, to be the one to deal with. I know when SWIPCO is recalled or asked to bid again for another contract when, for instance, SWIPCO's contract ends, a better deal can be achieved with other firms.  

I want also to say that, in this whole process of re-negotiation, even other issues will be looked at. Several mistakes which may have been made by the Ministry of Finance which may not have been deliberate - I am not trying to put a defence for SWIPCO  but I am looking at a situation whereby they went out with good intentions but maybe because the negotiating parties were not very experienced, and having looked at this one as being one of the first of such contracts, they may have made mistakes. For example, the one which was seen in one of the documents which they circulated around of taking on Crown Agents as one of the firms which would have bidden which, in actual fact should not have qualified but they went ahead to give them an opportunity to bid; and many others. 

I also want to support the recommendation of SWIPCO being paid at least for two years because; one, they have done the work with due respect and I would add that even for the third year which looks like is in contest, it should be looked at very, very, critically because, for instance, they have already gone into the third or fourth month of the third year. What is going to be the situation right now?  So, I want the Ministry to also look at that area very closely.  And  want also to say that for the legitimacy of the contract, we have got a very good answer from the Central Tender Board which came out in retrospect and just confirms or adds that this one will save this country a very big embarrassment which this country may undergo in case we go into asking, first and foremost whether this was a legal process which was started ending up in signing of an illegal contract as it is termed.  

I just want to finally implore the Ministry of Finance - because I think they are the most responsible body in this particular respect - to come out very, very, clearly and study the whole scenario again and be in a position to rectify it. And because of this situation, I will soon be seconding a Motion which will be Tabled by hon. Musumba to be able to further give a way forward to this report, to enable the House request the Minister of Finance to go back and reassess and restudy and later on, renegotiate this whole contract of SWIPCO, give it a direction and later on, we can see how we end it and later on, if the process of biding is to come, we start on a clear and good footing.  

I would, therefore, like to call upon the Ministry of Finance to systematically  and clearly rectify the situation. I would say that I believe they have been a little bit on the defensive this time but they should come out openly to be able to put these clarifications a little bit more effectively rather than the Public Accounts Committee being the one in the forefront to look at this aspect. I want to end there. I will come in later to support the amendment as it will be Tabled.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. ROSE IKOTE (Woman Representative Pallisa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to begin by commending the Public Accounts Committee for the good job they have so far done in monitoring the expenditure of all public funds by handling the Auditor General's Reports, and in particular, today for this special work which they have done of investigating the contract of procurement services between the Government of Uganda and SWIPCO.  I note that the Committee has made far-reaching observations and recommendations on the said contract. It is only unfortunate that something that could have been discussed in 1996 is threatening to spill over into the new millennium.  There is an English proverb that says "A stitch in time saves nine". However, it may not entirely be the fault of the Committee for having failed to press for the inclusion of this item on earlier agenda.  We are about to end the Third Session but there may be a need for Parliament to re-examine its entire methods of work.  

Many speakers before me have already determined the importance and value of third party procurement services to this country. It is estimated that at least 30 percent of the funds put aside for procurement for this country end up in people's personal pockets and, therefore, in the case of SWIPCO, I think it is just logical that spending 2.1 percent to save the haemorrhage of 30 percent makes common sense.  

The report keeps referring to SWIPCO as a "procurement agent", a "procurement firm" or a "procurement company" and maybe this is why the impression has been created that SWIPCO was intended to take over the role of Central Tender Board and Government Central Purchasing.  My understanding is that SWIPCO was meant to provide consultancy services to Government which would enhance the work of Central Tender Board and Government Central Purchasing Corporation but not to take over their roles.  

The Committee report is a chronology of events leading to the award of the tender and each one can ascertain for themselves and take their position on whether it was transparent; whether CTB and GCPC were contacted or consulted; how the bids were processed and whether the Attorney General's Office was consulted in drawing up the contract.  Also, what role did pressure from high offices play in influencing the allocation of this tender?  But, all these things considered undone, finally a contract was signed and SWIPCO went on to set up office in IPS building and contracted staff to start work.  The Minister of Finance in charge of General Duties, then hon. Basoga Nsahdu, went on to issue a circular to tell Government procurement officers to effect that work of 5000 Dollars and above should be handled through SWIPCO and that is when Parliament, through PAC, came in to investigate the award.  

At this time, the correct procedure then would have been to put an injunction on the operations of SWIPCO until this matter was resolved.  However, what actually happened is that Government procurement officials went on and used the fact of Parliament investigations and press reports to ignore SWIPCO. Hardly any work came SWIPCO's way and the little that did is what enabled the Minister of Finance, hon. Ssendawula, to give evidence of actual savings to Government through the use of SWIPCO.  Somebody asked; "what was the percentage of savings to Government?"  I am also requesting for this information. I would like to request the hon. Minister of Finance to compile the percentage savings to Government so that we can have a clear view of what actually took place.  

For two years, this non compliance continued and meanwhile, SWIPCO continued to pay rent and staff for two years after which it got out its contract and put in its invoice.  Mr. Speaker -(Interjection)- Mr. Speaker, I request him to wait and have his opportunity to contribute.  SWIPCO, after two years, got out its contract and put in an invoice to Ministry of Finance. But you have done no work we all know, how can you bill us for no work?  

I would like to give an example: If you contract somebody to build a road and you undertake to pay compensation to all those along the road reserve or in the way of the road and that you will also pay the workers, that is your part of the contract.  Then, Mr. Speaker, the contractor signs the contract with you and brings his equipment to start work and after two years, you have failed to comply, you have not compensated the people in the road reserve, they are still there; you are not paying the workers and the contractor puts in his invoice, I do not see how you can turn around and say, "but where is the road?"  when it is you who have failed to fulfil your part of the contract!  

Two and half years down the road, we are here debating whether SWIPCO held hon. Mayanja Nkangi's hand and made him write letters and sign letters of inviting bids and whether the figure of the minimum of 200 million shillings worth of procurement work was smuggled into the contract instead of 20 million dollars.  Mr. Speaker, in my view, it is totally unacceptable to sign a contract with someone and then fail to comply and two years down the road, you turn around and call him a thief and a crook!  What is really confusing me in all this is the constitutional roles of the different departments of Government involved in resolving all of these. And my consternation is shared equally with the Attorney General as per the letter we had here by hon. Dick Nyai to the President.  

On page 3 - allow me to quote: "For the business of Government to run, there must be one final authority that gives legal advise to the Government. Constitutionally and per Government standing orders, that authority is the Attorney General." And it goes on to say further down the page: "Although the IGG may give a legal opinion as a lawyer where he is one, he cannot competently overrule the legal opinion of the Attorney General made in the exercise of his constitutional functions and Article 119 of the constitution.  The Attorney General is free to accept the opinion of the IGG and review his own where it is sound in law."  Mr. Speaker, who has the ultimate responsibility of giving legal advise to Government?  Because to me, Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, is hon. Ikote in order to bore us defending SWIPCO on a contract in this Parliament when we should be making laws of how to fight corruption? Really, SWIPCO's case can be taken to the court and really we should not be wasting - is she really in order to keep boring us with defending SWIPCO, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Member is making a contribution on a matter on the Floor namely; a matter touching on a contract between Government and SWIPCO.  She is, therefore, in order.  But I would request the hon. Member to come to her concluding remarks because that letter was referred to. It was read here in details and you are reading extracts from there.  I think that is what the hon. Member is referring to as a bore.

MRS. IKOTE:  Thanks, Mr. Speaker, for that ruling.  I am winding up and I beg hon. Gagawala to bear with me.  So, I was saying that to me, the contract with SWIPCO is a fait accompli.  Government signed an agreement with SWIPCO.  So, our quarrel is not whether there is a contract or not, but the interpretation, Mr. Speaker.  

I am asking, finally, that let each office of Government be allowed to do its work. One, if the IGG has found any anomaly by Government officers in the award of the tender to SWIPCO, then he should start instituting proceedings immediately. Two, if the Attorney General finds that we cannot wriggle out of the contract, then he should say so decisively and conclusively. Three, if he does so, then hon. Gerald Sendawula should prepare payments to SWIPCO and we move on. Four - but, Mr. Speaker, two and half years to resolve this issue - two and a half years - is an indication of something wrong in the way Government machinery is running this country.  I thank you.

MR. MUSUMBA I (Buzaaya County, Kamuli):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Last Thursday, when you indicated that I had caught your eye, I intended to make a substantive contribution to the debate but since I have evaluated and listened to various contributions, Mr. Speaker, I wish to propose to this House that I move a motion as a way forward for further evaluation and debate on the matters before us. 

I wish to move a motion in the following terms: I move that the report of the Public Accounts Committee on SWIPCO be adopted with the following amendments:-
1.  That in order to avoid further litigation, Government should      negotiate with SWIPCO and thereafter pay them the agreed dues.
2.  That SWIPCPO's contract with Government should be re-           negotiated and submitted to an appropriate Committee of         Parliament.
3.  That third party procurement monitoring is a vital activity      that should constitute an integral part of our national         procurement policy.  

I have already circulated to Members a copy of this motion, to your office, Sir, to that of the Clerk and is seconded by hon. Mrs. Margaret Zziwa, MP Kampala Central. Mr. Speaker, therefore, I do wish in support of this motion to say a few things so that I save the House and Members from being bored.  

We have seen that and evidence is on record that SWIPCO does intend to get paid for its work.  It did work in the Government or in the Republic of Uganda, hired by Government under a contract and they have hired lawyers.  Mr. Speaker, a firm of lawyers, the majority of whom are actually MPs - (Interruptions) - Yes! it is on record Sir - to ensure that this matter, if not resolved, becomes a matter subject to litigation.  Now Sir, we could, as a Government, make a decision, either to go ahead and have litigation and the attending costs or to cut our costs, sit down as a Government, negotiate with the contractor and pay the agreed dues to this contractor and Sir, for me the position is very clear. Where we can cut further costs, I would want to encourage this Government to do so. It is in the light of that I am moving that Government be allowed by this House to negotiate with the contractor and if the negotiations are successful, they go ahead and pay them.  

The second one is that SWIPCO's contract with Government should be re-negotiated and submitted to an appropriate Committee of Parliament.  Part of the problem Sir, that we are facing today is that these Government officials, time and again, enter into negotiations with companies or contractors or consultants who are not businesslike in themselves - the companies and the contractors and these Government officials of ours are not businesslike in their approach.  So, we normally have these agreements which are in our disfavour as a Government.  This agreement, I am afraid to say, is one of them in the sense that as has been said on the Floor of this House, the rates at which Government is obligated to pay for the service are not the most optimal in my view. They could have been negotiated lower.  But those are the rates we have.  Had there been an input of members of the appropriate Committee of Parliament prior to the conclusion of this agreement, we would not have landed ourselves where we are now as a country.  

It is to this effect, therefore, Sir, that I want to propose to this Committee that the contract won must be re-negotiated and regularised for the period they have been around and there are debates whether their stay and continued rendering of service is covered by an agreement or not. All these should be regularised because they have been here with our knowledge as a Government, we have given them work and they have done the work - (Interjection) - To that effect, Sir, I want to propose that this contract be re-negotiated and after that, let the appropriate committee of Parliament and this whole  House have the benefit of the terms of a contract that has far reaching implications like a contract for supervision of procurement. That is the effect of the second paragraph in this motion.

The third paragraph, third party procurement monitoring is a vital activity and it should constitute an integral part of our national procurement policy.  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Members are all aware, we do not have to repeat this point over and over again.  It is obvious, Sir, that procurement in this country of Government and Government related goods and services has been - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  I am sorry to interrupt you.  If there is any Member who is having a mobile telephone on him or her, please, will you deposit it outside?

MR. MUSUMBA:  Thank you Sir.  Mr. Speaker, I was saying that we know that procurement for Government has been a preserve of the influence holders and, to that effect, therefore, Sir, we know that many ordinary people who have attempted to get contracts to supply Government never get them but when they ever get, those are the domestic arrears you hear about. They are never paid!  The people who get these contracts and are paid are the very few people who have so much power in this country that they get paid before they supply and Sir, these are the people who supply one sized boots to the entire army - size 9 - forgetting that there are those like me, who wear a different size and there are those who wear size 10 and  we know, in this country, Sir, that procurement has been tailored to suit a particular supplier at a particular date.  

To that effect, they will requisition knowing you are the only one who can supply; they will requisition that they want 20 Pick-Up vehicles in one week, knowing very well nobody can get 20 Pick-Ups from anywhere in the manufacturing world of cars to bring them here and supply them in one week, but simply because a local dealer here has 20 Pick-Ups waiting.  They tailor the deal to suit a particular supplier. So, it is no doubt, Sir, therefore, that procurement in this country and anybody who inspects procurement cannot be a friend of all.  It is not possible!

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, can you try and move the motion? 

MR. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much, Sir.  I therefore beg to move, Sir.  Thank you, Sir.

MRS. MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala):  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I beg to second the motion on the Floor which is purposely complimenting the recommendations of the report of the PAC Committee.  Mr. Speaker, the effect of these additions will in effect legalise the policy of third party procurement. Mr. Speaker, I will make it brief because at least I think the House is almost in agreement that we need a third party procurement policy in this country; we need a consultancy service in this country and we know very well that perhaps if we had these services in this country and they were freely let to operate, many of the sagas we have got or we have experienced lately like the dam saga - if I can say - the helicopter deal, the UCB saga and many others, we would not have experienced them.  We would have got technical information to some of the technical questions, to the credibility of some of these firms and to the appropriate work done wherever it may have been done by such a firm, to be able to give us authority and mandate and better decisions in some of these contracts as they were.  

So, I want to support this motion so as to give it direction, to give it effect to be able to have these recommendations operationalised, to be able to give a chance to the Committee, before the Committee, for instance reconsiders the contract of SWIPCO vis-a-vis the Uganda Government, to have it is properly regulated or regularised so that we do not see a loss both on the part of Government and perhaps on the part of SWIPCO and, maybe, I would also want to add that the effect of bringing this back to the Committee of Parliament would give us a satisfaction as Parliament to see whether the interests of the people we represent, the interests of the people we serve have been adequately catered for.  

Several Members here gave submissions to the effect of their constituents when the dam situation was on the Floor.  People of Lwemiyaga, for instance, were saying they had never seen the dams.  So, if this one is here and such questions are be put across, we will make sure there are no loopholes whereby, for instance, people in my constituency will be cheated.  So, I want to support this motion and I beg the House to support his motion so that we can actually operationalise the third party procurement policy.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to support the motion with a minor Amendment.  The Amendment comes at the last of the third item of the motion.  In other words, Mr. Speaker, I am requesting, first of all, the Mover of the motion, the Seconder and the Speaker that we actually have a Standing Committee, first and foremost to investigate the policy and the procedure of procurement.  Mr. Speaker, I am inserting this particular Amendment because the contribution so far from Members and, particularly those who are supporting this motion, is that there has been really confusion in establishing the procedure for procurement.  Mr. Speaker, I will pick two or three instances which show that if the Government has no policy or the policy keeps varying or if they varied, they also keep varying the procedure.  

One, at one time, we were given to understand in this House, that SWIPCO was introduced in this country through the auspices of the head of State - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, sorry to interrupt you but what is the amendment? I am really looking forward to your amendment to this motion. If it is seconded, then you can give a bit of lecture on it, if you like.  What is the amendment?

MR. AWORI:  The amendment is that this House sets up a Select Committee to investigate the policy and procedure of procurement of Government.

THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded?  Hon. Okulo Epak, you caught my eye even long before the motion was moved. Then we will come to hon. Ongom and hon. Maj. Kazoora.  There is a motion on the Floor.

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac):  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As you said, Mr. Speaker, I had caught your eyes much earlier before hon. Musumba moved this motion.  Now, I will try to cover both areas. 

THE SPEAKER:  You are scaring me. You just cover the motion.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to support the motion in only one respect, that is that SWIPCO should be paid their due and we should suffer the burden of paying them because of our mistakes. That should be our punishment and we should pay them for whatever little they have done or for whatever nothing they have done so far.  

I do not support the other components of the motion, namely, the re-negotiation of the contract with SWIPCO.  My view is that SWIPCO, first of all, did not deserve to be here and the manner in which they came was full of irregularities.  Not only the manner in which the came, even the manner in which they are operating up to today is very cantankerous, to say the least.  

SWIPCO came, kept going in and out of the State House, jumping into the offices of Ministers of Finance, drafting documents for themselves  including the agreement and the terms for this consultancy. They engaged Members of Parliament to render legal services and this is really terrible.  Up to today, SWIPCO is still involving Members of Parliament in their affairs  and this is really what we may call conflict of interest.  How would these Members of Parliament who are involved in SWIPCO out there come here and say anything against SWIPCO?

The latest I have heard which is very, very interesting is that those who are now opposing SWIPCO are doing so because His Excellency the President is no longer pleased with them because they were trying to interfere with the contract for his Presidential jet.  This is ridiculous and this is how SWIPCO works.  At one time, I was discussing the SWIPCO contract in Radio One and I got an inordinate interference from those who were in the -(Interruption)- So, the manner in which SWIPCO came, the manner in which they continued to work is -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Now, I want to warn you that you do not use Order in order to abuse the Rule under which you proceeded because it did not yield.  Now, what is your Point of Order?

MR. EKANYA: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order on the fact that hon. Okulo Epak is saying that some Members in this House who are opposing the SWIPCO deal are supporting the President in his business of the Presidential jet.  If he can produce or deduce evidence to that fact, then his statement is valid, but if it is just a statement and it is left there, I think there is need to put a point of order.  I raise a point of order on that ground, Mr. Speaker.  Is he in order to just make statements which he cannot confirm with truth?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  I have found difficulties in appreciating your point of order.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, before I was rudely interrupted by the representative of the Youth in his youthful energy, I was saying that actually, the very objective of engaging the services of SWIPCO demands of them to work in a very honest, transparent and cooperative way but this is not the way SWIPCO works.  I appreciate their western style of being very businesslike and aggressive in order to survive in the business world but the way they are proceeding in Uganda is definitely unfashionable.  
I do not support the idea of a monitoring procurement service because if you read the Statute establishing the Central Tender Board, and by the very fact that it is called Central Tender Board, it was expected to carry out three functions:  First of all, to co-ordinate the activities of other procurement agencies or tender authorities in this country.  In co-ordination I would believe monitoring and evaluation would be one of those functions.  It had also the added responsibility of actually directly awarding and processing tenders.  They have concentrated only on this last one.  The latest consultancy sponsored by the World Trade Organisation has actually made very commendable recommendations in the manner of restructuring and re-organising of the Central Tender Board so that it can accomplish both of these functions.  
To establish a procurement monitoring service in this country which is going to be managed by consultancy does not, in my view, provide a permanent solution to the problem afflicting the procurement services in this country.  A more permanent, suitable and legalised arrangement would be the one which we could realise the goal by implementing the recommendations of the consultancies sponsored by WTO.  

We have had three consultancies so far in this country in the procurement field:  The first ended up in the creation of the Government Central Purchasing Corporation, the second one was by the Crown Agents which actually was attached to the Central Tender Board and did literally everything which was envisaged to be done again by SWIPCO in their terms of reference and in the job descriptions they provided for themselves.  I must say this - I am a consultant - SWIPCO's terms of reference have been defined for them by themselves and this is very unfortunate.  This is the way in which our bureaucrats are taken for a ride, Mr. Speaker.  It is very unfortunate!  

The Minister of Finance did indicate here the so-called level of savings realised by SWIPCO.  It is ridiculous!  We tried to examine them but there is no empirical way in which SWIPCO can demonstrate beyond anybody's sensible understanding how they can realise such savings.  It is impossible!  Nevertheless, since it was part of their contract that they secure savings on Government tenders and they are the sole authority and intelligence in this matter, obviously, they could come out with anything to justify that part of their responsibility.  

The Minister of Finance in his letter to the hon. Attorney General on the SWIPCO contract dated 5th January, 1999, reference C4501 states that "A Report produced by the Treasury which indicates that had all Government procurement been subjected to SWIPCO services, then the amount of fees payable to SWIPCO by Government would have been in excess of the minimal fees chargeable by SWIPCO."  This is very interesting.  Our bureaucrats, despite the assessment done by SWIPCO itself, were even going to the extent of saying that for the two years, SWIPCO actually deserved to get 18.8 million dollars. Our bureaucrats, having collected all sorts of information, arrived at the proposal that legitimately, SWIPCO should have actually claimed 18.8 million dollars instead of 7.2.  This is sad.  It is sad!  This is the Report which the hon. Minister gave here, now it has been withdrawn.  So, the hon. Minister was pleading with the Attorney General that actually, the 7.2 they are asking for is very, very small and should be paid without question.  

The same hon. Minister stood here and said SWIPCO would be eligible to pay taxes but in this letter, the hon. Minister indicates that SWIPCO will not pay taxes because SWIPCO's payment is being collected on its behalf as revenue to Government, and then Government passes it on to SWIPCO.  Whether Government passes it to SWIPCO as a charity, I do not understand,  but if Government passes it to SWIPCO as a fee, it constitutes an earning which should be subject to taxation, Mr. Speaker.  So, Mr. Speaker, the longer we keep SWIPCO here, the more we complicate the irregularities and corruption in the procurement system. They are not a remedy, they are a problem.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, we have a motion on the Floor and I would request you not to debate as if we are still engaged in the general debate.  We have now narrowed to a motion so I suggest you direct your fireworks at the motion.

MR. ABSOLOM ONGOM (Omoro County, Gulu):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will try to restrict myself to the motion, although the temptation to go out is very great. Mr. Speaker, may I say that I would have supported the motion fully, except to me  - and the Mover of the motion is engaged in conversation, he is not listening - except that the motion seems to be a very poor summary of the recommendations by the Committee.  

THE SPEAKER:  Let me remind you that it is an amendment and not a summary.  Does that change your approach now?

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for drawing my attention to the heading but it does not really change the gist of what I want to put forward.  Mr. Speaker, I would have supported a motion which would ask the House now, after the long debate, to just merely adopt the recommendations by the Committee, and if need be, and just amend specific recommendations as numbered by the Committees because if I go through the Committee's recommendations, I find that it covers really what this House should pass.  

We have very basic recommendations here: First, that SWIPCO should be paid for the services that they have rendered. That is a basic recommendation which most Members seem to agree with.  They have done sound work irrespective of whatever defaults there are in the agreement with them. Members have recognised that they have done sound work and they ought to be paid for it and that is what the Committee recommends.  The Committee also recommends a re-negotiation of the remaining part of the agreement.  We recognise that two years have passed and the original agreement was for two years.  Now, the third year they are working more or less illegally, and that is what the Committee wants re-negotiated. Then the Committee goes a long way and says, after re-negotiating the third year contract, if there are necessities for them to continue, then we have to now put the thing back to tender and that is really the gist of my argument.  

First, as hon. Okulo Epak says, really we did not need SWIPCO.  In my view, this so-called Third Party Procurement monitoring is not quite necessary.  It has became necessary because of the rampant corruption that has appeared in this country and appears to be increasing - (Interruption).  

THE SPEAKER:  Order please!  Hon. Members on my left, you are getting progressively out of order, especially those on my immediate left.  

MR. ONGOM:  If I may continue, Mr. Speaker, what I was saying is that, except for the corruption that has pervaded our society, these services would not have been necessary.  We have many institutions that should be doing the same thing.  I would agree to a consultancy to re-organise these institutions, teach them and bring sense into them.  Even these Government officials, I am told, are interfering in the services.  As soon as these services are streamlined and they can give good service, then the third party procurement monitoring company should cease to exist.  

At the moment, there is a recommendation in amendment number three.  It says that procuring is a vital activity that should constitute an integral part of our national procurement policy which means it should go on forever.  For me, I do not think it is necessary. In my view, if we need it, it should be only for a short period and when we are satisfied that the intended objective has been obtained, then it should cease.  I do not see why we should have Central Tender Board there, then we have Government Central Purchasing Corporation and then we have other organs which are supposed to look at corruption operating and we still get other institutions to come and overlook all this!  Very soon we are going to have another one to come and see whether SWIPCO is not corrupt.  From what I hear, it looks like we need just that at the moment. It looks like even the people who are supposed to protect taxpayers are themselves being compromised, judging by some of the comments I get from the Floor here - (Interruption).

MR. ONGOM:  That will be the last one.

MR. MWANDHA: Thank you very much, hon. Ongom.  Now, the hon. Member is saying you need a third party procurement monitoring agency because there is corruption and I think everybody agrees.  Now, how are you going to check corruption if you do not introduce that agency and depend on the agencies which are there, which are corrupt like Central Tender Board?  How do you expect Central Tender Board, for instance, to check the powerful fellows who have been involved in corrupt activities without an independent professional monitoring agency? I am not saying that you need to have this one but at least, in my view and from my experience in looking at the activities of parastatal bodies,  if we had an agency which could enforce order we would definitely not have lost so much money, for instance, in Uganda Posts and Telecommunication Corporation where one person actually caused 500 million loss to the corporation just because he was able to violate the procurement regulations and there was nobody to really control him.  So this in my mind is a question which bothers me and I hope that this Parliament can find a solution.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  That sounded like a contribution.  The clarification you are seeking therefore, is what?

MR. MWANDHA:  I thought I had made the point that since the hon. Member agrees that there is corruption and we do not appear to have a system which is effective in checking corruption, what other alternative other than the one we are discussing now would we put in place to check the corruption which is going on?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ongom, also think of coming towards your concluding remarks.

MR. ONGOM:  I appreciate that you also noticed, Mr. Speaker, what I noticed that the Member took opportunity to contribute, but my point of disagreement was the permanency of the system and I said we need temporarily to correct the system, not to have it permanently.  I thought I made that clear.  In any case, I have already said that you could go on and on because it already appears that any system that is set up in Uganda to correct things soon itself gets corrupted.  So, very soon you will need another system to check its corruption.  So really, there is no end to it. That is why I say, I would only really support an institution that will come and strengthen whatever exists already.


In summary, what I wanted to say was that, I wish the movers of the motion would agree with me that they withdraw their amendment and we adopt what the Committee actually has recommended.  It is more comprehensive and covers a lot of ground which actually is what this Parliament would do.  I, for instance, would not support the idea that a contract before it is signed should always be brought to Parliament. I do not know what we will be doing, except looking at contracts to vet. I think really this should not be entertained.  If we have a particular problem with a particular contract, then we should deal with that.  We do not have to ask for all the contracts or even this particular one to come to us to vet.  We should only restrict ourselves to what is constitutionally required of us to do as Parliament.

So, Mr. Speaker, I would request really that the two Friends who moved these amendments withdraw them and substitutes with a simpler one of merely adopting the Committee's recommendation.  Mr. Speaker, I would not really support the amendment but urge the House to go back to that of the Committee which is more comprehensive. As I have said, it covers a lot of ground which is left out in this amendment.  Thank you.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I will give a suggestion towards the end of my contribution, but let me make a few observations in the five minutes you have given me.

There is a saying in Ankole that "Nyineka kwabura obwengye omufimu aragurira busha" meaning, if you have a patient and you are supposed to be caring for that patient and the doctor gives you instructions and you do not follow those instructions, you are to blame for the carelessness that is put on that patient.  I am supporting some of the recommendations and some of the observations moved by hon. Musumba.

One, if SWIPCO came here and found Government officers who were supposed to do their work and they did not do that work, who is to blame?  I am, in that, saying that SWIPCO should be paid for the work they did because they were authorised by the officers according to the letters and the evidence that is put here.  

Two, you cannot blame SWIPCO for the clumsiness of Government officers.  Hon. Okulo Epak was saying here that the manner in which they operate even today, the manner in which they came - what are these officers doing?  Why are they not able to detect all this?  That is why they are there and that is why, Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to  ground two in hon. Musumba's motion that this contract should be renegotiated and submitted to an appropriate Committee of Parliament for review.  You listen to this one!  What is the Committee of Parliament supposed to do with this contract, Mr. Speaker?  This work is for the Attorney General, the Attorney General should be told to do his work!  There is the Central Tender Board which is constitutionally mandated to do these things, Mr. Speaker.  

When the Police fails to do its work, shall we be told, "let us bring this evidence before Parliament, that we go and look at the guns which the Army is using?  Is that the work of Parliament?  Are we going to be kicked here, kicked there because of some laziness and some laxity in some Government departments?  Let them go and do their work.  Probably they can keep the appropriate Committee of Parliament informed but to engage a Committee of Parliament in contracts is very unacceptable to me, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am suggesting that hon. Musumba should withdraw that. We could instead say: "SWIPCO's contract with Government should be renegotiated and keep the appropriate Parliamentary Committee  informed" - (Interjection).  

THE SPEAKER: He was making some changes, if you can follow the changes he making - I do not know whether he is making a formal amendment.

MR. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I had a discussion with the Chairman of the Committee before and when I read the recommendations of the Committee on page 10 of the Addendum - I do not know, Mr. Speaker, if hon. Musumba has problems with those recommendations as to whether the two - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let me draw your attention - not you in particular.  I think we are having a problem in appreciating the amendments by the hon. Musumba.  If you look at his amendment number (1), you will find that he is actually talking about the Committee's recommendation number (2).  Look at the Addendum.  His recommendation number (1) is talking about the Committee's recommendation which is to do with the payment of dues for work done.  So, is it a new thing?  

Two, if you look at recommendation number (2) of hon. Musumba, it seems it has to do with recommendation number (1) of the Committee and the blind recommendation down there that "SWIPCO, fraught with so many problems and irregularities should not be renewed in its present form".  Now you look at number (1), it says that "Government should therefore urgently renegotiate the contract and submit the renegotiated contract to CTB for approval".  Now, that seems to be something to do with amendment number (2) of the hon. Musumba.

If you look at amendment number (3) of hon. Musumba, you will see in the body - if you look at number (5) in particular, we are talking about procurement policy and procedures.  So, I do not know whether it is really an amendment in substance or it is merely recasting it in an appropriate form.  

MISS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, I thought the hon. Member from Kashari was on the Floor now it appears that it is Buzaaya who is on the Floor.  Maybe, Mr. Speaker, you could allow him to finish and give me the Floor.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I am sorry, it is Mr. Kazoora.  Hon. Member, thank you for reminding me. When I was giving that guidance, hon. Kazoora was still on the Floor.  

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was moving towards a negotiated settlement with hon. Musumba that really, his motion is contained in the recommendations of the Committee.  Unless he really has strong objections, I do not see what is wrong with the recommendations of the Committee.  But, this number (2) of hon. Musumba's, as I said, Mr. Speaker, is unacceptable.  I am ending by requesting hon. Musumba to synchronise his and the Committee's recommendations.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just want, for the record, to clarify that paragraph (2) of my motion was actually amended.  I read and said, "SWIPCO's contract to Government should be renegotiated and submitted to an appropriate Committee of Parliament".  I deleted the words, "for review" because later, I was informed that we should not be reviewing.  But in an economy like this one, if we are dealing with a contract for which we are going to pay four, five million dollars a year, it is only proper that - if I can be allowed by my hon. Friend, Eng. Dr. Katwiremu to continue making my submission, I would be very pleased - it is only proper that an appropriate Committee of Parliament is not excluded.  

However, Sir, the purpose of this motion which I did being aware of the existence of this is that, the motion fine-tunes the provisions in the recommendations of the Report which I appreciate but in my view, it was not precise and clear as to what we are going to do as a way forward.  There is no inconsistency and, therefore, I suppose that if the House so allows, we preserve my amendments so that I also do not go thinking that the House just refused my motion, no, because it has merits.

THE SPEAKER: The Committee moved a motion for the adoption of its Report with recommendations.  Now, hon. Musumba has come up with an amendment which you have.  I think you need to pronounce yourselves on the amendment.  I put the question that the Report of the Committee of the Public Accounts Committee on SWIPCO be adopted with the following amendments:-

1.  In order to avoid litigation, Government should negotiate       with SWIPCO and thereafter pay them the agreed dues.

2.  SWIPCO's contract with Government should be renegotiated and      submitted  to an appropriate Committee of Parliament for        review.  
3.  Third party procurement monitoring is a vital activity that      should constitute an integral part of our national              procurement policy.  

(Question put and negatived)

THE SPEAKER: Now we go to the Committee proposal.

MR. WACHA: I thought they were three amendments which were proposed in that motion.  Sorry, Sir, but I would have expected us to vote on each part of the amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wacha, let me explain further.  I guided the House, I went through the three items on the amendment to the Committee's Report and Recommendations and I said that  (1) is already found in the Committee's Recommendation, so is (2) and even (3).  So, if on the basis of that, this amendment is not necessary because what is contained here is in the Committee's Report and Recommendations, I do not see any problem.  That is what the House has pronounced itself on.  Now we go to the Report of the Committee and pronounce ourselves on the Recommendations.  Is that okay?  We can go one by one.  

I put the question that the Report of the Committee be adopted with the following recommendations:-

1.  That CTB awarded the contract to SWIPCO for two years only, the contract has therefore now lapsed. However, SWIPCO has been operating even in the third year.  Government should therefore urgently renegotiate the contract and submit the renegotiated contract to CTB for approval - (Interruption)

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I seek the indulgence of this House.  Mr. Speaker, when we make a recommendation for this House - (Interruption) - I again seek the indulgence of my Colleagues.   

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR. MUSUMBA: Sir, a recommendation does not take this form.  "The CTB awarded a contract to SWIPCO for two years only, the contract has therefore, now lapsed."  Recommendations, Sir, ordinarily according to the practice of this House, are sharp, concise and to the point.  To this effect, therefore, Sir, I beg to move an amendment to Recommendation number (1) to say: "Government should urgently renegotiate the contract with SWIPCO and submit the renegotiated contract to a relevant Committee of Parliament and thereafter to CTB."

THE SPEAKER: Let me help you.  I am merely helping you, it is your amendment.  Supposing you started by way of a preamble, for example:  "considering that CTB awarded a contract to SWIPCO for only two years and that the contract has therefore now lapsed, the Government should urgently renegotiate the contract and submit the renegotiated contract to CTB for approval - something like that.

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your guidance, but Sir, even that is an issue.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, if I understand you clearly that CTB approved the contract for only two years and therefore, the contract has now elapsed, in law it becomes impossible to renegotiate a contract which has lapsed.  It is in that light, Mr. Speaker, I was trying to catch your eye. The Attorney General is here and he is our saviour in matters of law.  I believe the Attorney General can quickly peruse through hon. Musumba's amendments and he can also look at the Committee's recommendations.  Once this time, Mr. Speaker, I  would plead with you to allow the Attorney General to come up with a formulation which will be very easy for Government to implement and which will not be very expensive for this nation.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  It is really a matter of, maybe recasting this.  Why do we not - the people who are moving - ask the chairman of the committee ? Hon. Musumba, why do you not agree on recasting the format so that we can - may be with the assistance of the Attorney General -  Is it possible?

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Speaker, the recommendation of the committee arises from a letter of the Central Tender Board giving retrospective authority to the contract with SWIPCO;  and on page 2 says, the board further resolved that we invite SWIPCO  to renegotiate the contract and submit the renegotiated contract to the board for final approval.  This is what the letter of approval is saying;  and the recommendation arises from this one.

THE SPEAKER:  What we are saying for purposes of our record to enable Parliament pronounce itself on the recommendations, we need the recommendations to be properly recast. Let us have the chairperson, hon. Musumba assisted by the Attorney General to recast this.  I suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes, then we come back and pronounce ourselves.  So, I suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes.

	(The House was suspended for 15 minutes)

(On resumption_)

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether to call it a committee but the team you appointed to re-synchronize and draft the recommendations has agreed to the following formulation:- 

1.  "Aware that the CTB awarded the contract to SWIPCO for two years only, and although SWIPCO has been operating even in the third year, the government should therefore urgently renegotiate the contract to cover the remaining contract period and submit the renegotiated contract to CTB for approval." That is number one. 

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

                  (Question put and agreed to)

MR. RUZINDANA:  (2) "SWIPCO should be paid the agreed fees in accordance with the provisions of the renegotiated contract." That is number two.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question - (Interjections).

MR. RUZINDANA:  Shall I repeat.  Number (2) says: "SWIPCO should be paid the agreed fees in accordance with the provisions of the renegotiated contract."

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

                  (Question put and agreed to)

MR. RUZINDANA:  (3)  "Government should establish the fees collected from suppliers and deposited in an account that was supposed to be opened for this purpose."

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, the procedural question is very simple.  In the proposed recommendation, the operative word is "should".  In other words, government has the option to say no.  Is that what is intended by the committee or not?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. RUZINDANA:  I omitted something.  (1) was: "Aware that CTB awarded the contract to SWIPCO..." that one has been approved.  The second one should have been: "The whole contract with SWIPCO should be renegotiated to address any anomalies or shortcomings pointed out in the PAC report."  That was number two.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

                   (Question put and agreed to)
 
MR. RUZINDANA:  Number three is the one I had read as number two that has been approved.  Number three said that - Number four now - that: "Government should establish the fees collected from suppliers and deposited in an account that was supposed to be opened for this purpose."  

THE SPEAKER:  Read again slowly.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Number four now: "Government should establish the fees collected from suppliers and deposited in an account that was supposed to be opened for this purpose" - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Recommendation Number four is not clear.

MRS. MATEMBE:  When he was reading, he said the fees that should have been collected and deposited to an account.  Now, what does it mean - should have been collected and deposited to an account?  It does not make meaning to me.  Was it collected and deposited?  Was it not collected but it was supposed to be collected and deposited?  I beg indulgence in this matter.  He will give it to me, I think. I am seeking this clarification.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Initially, there were going to be two cases:  One where SWIPCO would have been paid directly but in any case, SWIPCO would have done the work,  then the supplier would, instead of paying SWIPCO directly, have paid through government and the money would have been put on an account and this account would have been used to send the money to SWIPCO after certifying that they have done the work.  Now, in some cases, this happened and in some cases, it did not. But nevertheless, we must realize that actually, government has not yet paid any money to SWIPCO at all.  So, this is intended to say that whatever has been collected on that account should be used for the purpose that was intended in order for SWIPCO to be paid for the services that they rendered.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  You see, what seems not to be clear is the purpose.  What the hon. Minister would like to know is when you say "for the purpose", what purpose?.

MR. RUZINDANA:  I think that can be clarified in the following way, Mr. Speaker.  Government should establish fees collected from suppliers and deposited in an account that was supposed to be opened for the payment of SWIPCO fees.  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon Wacha, does that give you some comfort?

MR. WACHA:  I was just wondering whether that account is tied to payment of SWIPCO.  In other words, if that account is not there, SWIPCO is not paid?  That is what I want to know.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, when you say "supposed to have been opened" -
MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Speaker, the contract with SWIPCO was based on the fact that government would not pay any money from the Treasury as SWIPCO fees. Government was supposed to collect from suppliers the fees which was in the contract of 2.1 per cent or 1.8 per cent and that money should have been deposited on an account operated by the Ministry of Finance and that account was opened.

THE SPEAKER:  So, "supposed" is really causing problems.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, the formulation by the chairman of the committee seems to put these matters in the future tense.  We are talking of paying SWIPCO for work done in the past. We are believing that we should get our government out of a quagmire so that we can retain our good name.  So, to that extent, that does not help us forward.  In fact it detracts from the renegotiation.  I believe those payments should be part of the renegotiation. Mr. Speaker, I find that particular part a little redundant and I  hope the chairman can withdraw it.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Speaker, this Number four reads as follows:  "Government should establish the fees collected from suppliers and deposited in an account that was opened for the payment of SWIPCO fees."   The account was opened, why shouldn't the amount be established before payment is effected?  It is just to determine how much was collected, how much is on that account.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, if that is the case, let us proceed this way.  If there are other recommendations which are still pending, let us go to them and those people who are synchronizing and refining this particular one proceed with that.  Can we go to the next one.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Speaker this was synchronized -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, in the meantime, let me request hon. Manzi and the Attorney General and hon. Musumba to refine this.

MR. MANZI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think the idea of Number four really is to establish that this money does not get lost.  Because, an account was opened and PAC is saying that we want to ensure that the money is properly utilized.  We have had examples and cases in the past where accounts have been opened in the Central Bank and because of the lapse of time and lack of efficiency, they have been lost, even in the Central Bank. So, I think PAC here is saying, government should establish this money and ensure that it does not get lost and after the renegotiation, then the money will be used to pay SWIPCO.  But they are not saying that the money should now be paid directly to SWIPCO.  It is the government to establish that the account which was opened has the money  and it is actually safe.

THE SPEAKER:  Why do we not simply say, for example "any money"?  Any money which is on an account established for this should be used for doing that. As simple as that!  When you talk of government establishing an account, what you really mean is for government to find out whether there is money on that account.  It is not establishing an account. The account was already opened. What you want to know is whether there is money on the account and if there is that money there, it should be used for a,b,c,d.  Is that not the idea, hon. Members?

MRS. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I am having  problems  comprehending a situation at the conclusion of the report and at the point at which we are making recommendations, to be engaged in "if"s.  To me, it looks like the committee has not concluded on this part.  It does not know which account it is talking about and yet it had two years to do this.  So, it can not treat us to "if"s.  And because it can not establish which account and how much money - because they have the powers even to establish -  I think we should just delete this particular recommendation because it does not lead us to any conclusion, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KATUREEBE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, Mr. Speaker, in recommendation three which we have just passed, we talked of the agreed fees which means government and SWIPCO will now renegotiate and agree on the fees that should be paid to SWIPCO. This is the first one.  Now, the Number four is that under the contract which was signed, there was to be established an account and money was supposed to be collected from suppliers as fees to SWIPCO by government, and then the money deposited on that account would then be passed on to SWIPCO which the committee, in its report, referred to as government acting as a commission agent for SWIPCO, if hon. Members would remember that.  
Now, what this is trying to say is that, this account having been opened - we have been informed by the Minister for Finance the account was opened and some money has since then been deposited there.  Now, that money should now be applied to pay part of the agreed fees which has been taken care of in resolution number three.  In other words, you apply it for the purpose for which it was opened in the first place.  That is the way I understand it.

THE SPEAKER:  So, the problem is how does it go into our records - that is Number four? Hon. Okulo Epak, are helping us out of this problem?

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Yes!

THE SPEAKER:  There is some account opened, there is some money on it.  Now this money - what are we telling government to do with that money? I think that is as simple as that.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Hon. Speaker, that recommendation is entirely redundant.  The agreement obliged government to deduct money from the payment of suppliers and that is the money which was supposed to be used to pay SWIPCO and it was also conditional that SWIPCO would get paid provided it proved that it saved government some money.  Those are already in agreement, what are we recommending now?   I think it is redundant to say the least.

MR. MUSUMBA:  It falls by the way side
THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question that this recommendation be deleted.

                  (Question put and agreed to)

MR. RUZINDANA:  Now, Number five, Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWIINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to refer to Rule 74 which relates to declaration of personal interest in government contracts.  Members who were contributing here on the Floor were saying that there were some Members who are party to this contract and this rule requires that if there is a Member who has a personal interest in a contract, he or she should declare it and should not vote.  I will read it, Mr. Speaker:   "A Member who is a party to or is a partner in a firm which is a party to any contract with government shall, in any proceedings in the House relating to the contract, declare his or her interest or that of the firm in it and shall not vote on any question relating to that contract."  I wanted to be sure that Members of this House who might have interest in this company have declared their interest or they are not voting.  Is it in order that we continue voting when some Members are known to be having interest in this contract?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I had recognized you on a point of procedure but you have ended up with a point of order.  I do not know which you want me to rule on.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Speaker, I did not hear that you had recognized me on a point of procedure. Even on a point of procedure - even if that is what you heard, is it procedurally correct for us to continue voting when some Members actually signed on papers of SWIPCO representing SWIPCO as their lawyers and are continuing to vote against that rule? 

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not let us know?  Because I do not know -you are saying some members -(Interruption) 

MAJ. GEN. TUMWIINE:  Mr. Speaker, we had papers of SWIPCO circulated around with the names of hon. Wacha as one of the lawyers and I see him not only voting but participating. I wanted to be clear whether he has declared his interest or he is not violating this rule.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I received the following - hon. Ben Wacha, this is in reference to you and I think you should he interested in what I am about to say.

MR. WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I was proceeding this way in reply to the hon. Member who has raised this issue. I received a letter dated 9th of March 1999 from hon. Ben Wacha who signed his managing partner of Mutyaba, Egunyu, Mwesigye and  Company Advocates which reads as follows:
"Dear Sir,  
Re: SWIPCO Debate.
This is to inform you that our above firm was instructed by SWIPCO to pursue its payments from the Government in respect to work done for Government."  I hope this suffices his declaration of interest under our rules.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, thank you for allowing me to clarify on this.  The rule says at the end of it  "...and shall not vote on any question relating to that contract" and we have been voting on the amendment that is why I was worried whether he has declared his interest of not voting -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it is very difficult for me to know whether somebody voted or not and secondly, the rules do not say whether the person is allowed to participate in the debate but not to vote and it is very difficult to establish whether hon. Wacha voted or not.  Can we proceed.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I want the Chair to clarify to me the understanding of the Chair in respect to 74 (1). It reads: "A Member who is a party to or is a partner in a firm which is a party to any contract with Government - I emphasize - in a firm which is a party to any contract with Government shall not ..."  Sir, I want to find out whether a law firm which is representing a company which has interest in a contract with Government suffices to be called a party to any contract with government.

THE SPEAKER: My understanding of the position is that, when you refer to a party to a contract in the Law of Contract, it is the parties which are contracting parties.  It is not those other people including advocates who may be even advising on how those parties should be concluded and reach an agreement.  

MR. WACHA:  Mr. Speaker, in view of your ruling, is it in order for any Member in this House to insinuate that Ben Wacha has any interest in matter which is now before the House?

THE SPEAKER: First of all, I think when hon. Tumwiine raised the issue, that was obviously before I made a ruling and I think in that context there was no problem with his being out of order  but I would definitely say that after the ruling, any Member who begins to insinuate or make such references then will be out of order and you only need to let me know whether there is such a person.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Speaker, the final recommendation that came from the team that we selected is the following that: "At the conclusion of this contract, any future engagement of such consultancy services should be procured transparently."

THE SPEAKER:  Did you all get it?

MR. RUZINDANA:  "At the conclusion of this contract, any future engagement of such consultancy services should be procured transparently."  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR. RUZINDANA: That was the last one, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I  beg to move that the report of the Public Accounts Committee and the recommendations made therein as amended be adopted by this House.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will adjourn the House to 2.00 O'clock tomorrow.

(The House rose and adjourned to Wednesday, 14th April 1999 at 2.00 pm).



 
