Wednesday, 13th April, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Ag. Chairman, Mr. Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oath was administered to:

 Mr. Geoffrey Ogwang Oceni

MOTION TO SUSPEND THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE NRC

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the NRC suspends Rules of Procedure in order to enable the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning to move in accordance with Rule 85 of the NRC Rules of Procedure, and seeking to suspend Rule 55 to enable the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning to proceed with the Second Reading of the Non Performance Assets Recovery Trust Bill, 1994. 

As hon. Members are aware, there are a lot of problems now in, the financial sector because many business people are not having access to sufficient credit, and this is due to the compounded and accumulated problem of Uganda Commercial Bank which controls 60 per cent of commercial lending in Uganda.  

So, the Bill intends once for all to tackle the major problem that is hindering the capacity of Uganda Commercial Bank to lend money to the business agricultural, and Industrial sector, and this is urgent because wherever you go people are complaining in their business, in their trades that they do not have enough access to credit.  

Therefore, Government has taken steps to ensure that the two major Financial Institutions, Uganda Commercial Bank and Co-operative Bank are restructured, and this may mean putting in capital from the resources available now of about 80,000,000 dollars, to these Institutions to enable us create a viable financial base for people who are now eager to do productive work.  Because of this key importance to the economy, I request my fellow Members to allow us to proceed with discussing the problem of Uganda Commercial Bank to start with, and see how in its restructuring we can be able to put new blood into the Bank having taken other necessary actions, to correct whatever went wrong in the past.  So, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.  

MR. ADOKO NEKYON (Maruzi County, Apac):  Mr. Chairman, congratulations upon your appointment as the Assistant or Deputy Chairman of the House.  I am arising to oppose this Motion, for the following reasons; the issue of recovering loans from various people and institutions who have borrowed money from the Banks had nothing to do with parliament and nothing to do with the Government.  Every bank in the country is responsible for recovering whatever loans it gives to its customers. It knows how the customers got the loan it knows the security or collateral which it took from each person who took the loan.  We in Parliament cannot know how much money was given to whom on what conditions.  

We know for a fact now, that some of the loans have been given to individuals without any guarantees whatsoever.  Some took the money, shared part of the money with the Bank Managers on the spot before the money is used.  So, they failed to pay back.  We also know that much of the trouble of the businessmen in Uganda arises from the fact that the Ministry of Finance has failed to repay - I mean, to pay for services that this businessman has rendered to the Government.  Is it not a fact, Sir, that we have got today people who have supplied even ordinary posho and beans to the Government to different departments and the Government has failed to pay them, and because they borrowed money from the Bank, they have failed to pay the bank in return.  

So, the main culprit in the end will be found to be the Government.  So, may be this is the reason why the Deputy Minister for Finance is coming to persuade Parliament to take part in the collection of the recovery of the loans.  This Bill is completely irrelevant and I want the Minister to know that if the Commercial Bank, because of mismanagement - if the Co-operative Bank mismanagement has failed to continue, then what they do is to appoint firms of lawyers to liquidate those very institutions which have borrowed money.  This is not a function to Parliament.  So, Mr. Chairman, I beg to oppose.

MR. OKELLO LUWUM (Chua County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have also risen up to oppose this Motion.  I am sure hon. Members will remember that the Committee of this House, the Standing Committee on the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning did consider this matter during the last budget and we did make our recommendations.  These recommendations are there for Members to read in the report that we submitted.  But one thing which pained us so much about this government move was one, that here is a case was tax payers’ money is involved - if you read this Bill, the tax payers’ money is involved in financing a trust for which we know the real purpose. In other words, I think that the idea of setting up this trust is not so well conceived, because I hate anything which at this moment misuses the tax payers’ money; already we are always crying that there is no money -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, there are some employees of the World Bank who are already in Uganda Commercial Bank, and I am sure that they have come there as one of the conditions of getting Uganda Commercial Bank to be on the right length.  You find that this money as the previous speaker was saying was loaned to individuals and everybody is involved including Tata lorries, Mr. Chairman.  I thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member holding the Floor debating this case, in order to debate the Bill, the merits of the Bill rather than the Motion?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think hon. Members you will realise we are on the Motion.  So you must refrain from going into the substantive Bill.

MR. OKELLO LUWUM:  Mr. Chairman, to cut the whole thing short, I think the best we can do to this Motion, I think the best we do is perhaps to bring this Bill back to the Committee of Finance and Economic Planning because I think there are a lot of problems with this Bill.  Already one Member has recommended that we throw the Bill out.

MR. MWANDHA (Bugweri County, Iganga):  Mr. Chairman, I wish to support the Motion, not the Bill necessarily.  We have heard several similar Motions coming to this House and we have permitted the Government to move those Motions and we have supported them and we have progressed with the business of the House.  It will be wrong for us not to pass the Motion, but whether we permit the Bill to go ahead that is a different matter.

MR. NEKYON:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House that this Bill was distributed yesterday and in such a serious Bill that you cannot pretend that you have read it and understood it, and in now a matter of debating over night when we have so many other Bills outstanding, we have got the Education Policy Bill outstanding, which was standing on the Floor of the House when we adjourned.  Now, we are bringing another Bill of a serious matter to be deleted today.  Now, the Minister has not given us the emergency, why do we have to debate the Bill today or tomorrow?  

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, as far as I can recall, we have had similar, very serious Bill, brought to this House and this Motion has been moved to permit us to debate those various businesses, and we have discussed them.  What I would like to propose is that the Motion as it stands, we should support it.  Because we have supported previous motions, similar situations, and this would give us an opportunity to debate the Bill itself, and really do justice to the Bill.  If need be, throw it back the Committee as it has been proposed.  It is a question of procedure.  I am not saying we should debate the Bill, I am saying, let us get the Motion through and then subsequently debate the Bill.  This is my problem, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I was listening patiently with some contributions from Members on this matter.  But I think the crux of the matter is, this Motion, which is on the floor, has nothing to do with merits or demerits of the proposed Bill.  We are seeking to suspend a rule of the House, which provides for machinery of debating Bills.  We have to go through First Reading, Second Reading, must be brought out to certain laps of certain days and go to Third Reading.  These rules were not laid there in vain.  They were for a purpose to make sure that we Members get a chance to prepare and read but not to come here and bulldoze through Bills.  

I listened to the Mover of the Motion; he hardly touched on any point why we should suspend these rules.  I treat with contempt the argument that we have suspended there rules in the past and debated, so what?  We are not rubber stamps, and we are not going to be a party to passing important Bills in this House in a casual manner.  When I glanced at this Bill, which I saw today, and I understand it, it was given yesterday, it is of such a magnitude, it touches on really important issues of whether we should let culprits who have collaborated with bank officials and swindled money go free or not.  That is important, and we need to reflect on these matters very, very carefully and we cannot do it now by suspending these rules, we go to the debate, on Second Reading and we say we have done a half work.  

If we are now going to indulge in this habit of suspending rules, and we ignore the procedures, I can see us heading for danger.  This precedent, in fact, is very dangerous, why the hurry, we have had all the time, it is not yesterday that you, woke up to think about this Bill.  You have been thinking about it, why did you not give us time?  We were in recess but we had not been prolonged, so that we have this Bill in time.  If we had got this Bill before, some months back and you to move to suspend the rule, you could have an argument, but yesterday.  Are you really joking?  Mr. Chairman, the Mover should be ashamed.  I, therefore, in strongest terms oppose this Motion vehemently. 

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Chairman, I rise to support the Motion.  (Interjection)- I call upon the Chairman to protect me.  When we are in the House really we are expected to exercise our rights as Members of the House, and it is in that context that I stand up to support the Motion, and I should be listened to in all fairness, because I also accepted to listen to others.  I support the Motion on the grounds that we have rules of procedure for the House and these same rules of procedure provide for emergency business and it is under that context that this Motion has been moved, and I call upon fellow Members of the House to look at the Motion in that respect.  We may because the provision and the procedure of debating provide that you introduce the Motion and you do not debate the contents of the Motion.  The Motion is for suspension of Rule 55; and for sure these rules do not differ very much from the rules that we use to have when the hon. Butagira was the Speaker of this House.  The provision was that we stand up, move the Motion, read the content and state what particular section of the Rules that you wish to suspend, and you stop there, you are seconded and supported and then you move to debate the Motion.  

What is really happening here, is that because the Bill that is to be debated was distributed yesterday and people have seen the contents of the Bill, they are now trying to debate or go ahead to the Bill before we get there.  There are reasons for suspending, you do not just get up and start suspending Rules.  Now, this is a sort of emergency that the Ministry of Finance finds that there are certain things which were supposed to be done, like we had last week, when I called upon you here to support me, when I moved a Motion to suspend the same Rules, so that we could debate various Amendments to the Uganda Coffee Development Authority as we had to debate the Cotton Bill, so it is in that -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Minister holding the Floor that the day he is referring too, last Friday when we suspended the same Rule, the hon. Minister had reasons for it, for this time, we do not have the reasons.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I now know to speak English because I was taught English by a teacher and the teacher says in comprehension, you have to identify the subject matter - the subject matter - I would like to inform the hon. Minister that, the subject matter in the Motion, is not the mechanism for suspension, it says, the Second Reading of the Non Performing Assets Recovery Trust Bill, and that contained in that Motion, makes that Motion substantive and, therefore, it can be rejected from that stage.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to thank the hon. Members who have informed me, and I feel fairly informed.  There they are definitely reasons for moving this Motion, as I mentioned and made reference of last Friday, I continued to say that because we must agree we are a poor nation -(Interjection)- we must - Mr. Chairman, why am I not being protected over an issue which is straight forward? 

When the hon. Minister moved the Budget, he did give you a number of things that are to be done during this financial year, and among the things that were supposed to be done was the restructuring of the financial institutions and in fact went ahead here and accepted and we enacted laws for protection of the financial institutions, he went ahead also and passed the Bank of Uganda to give to the autonomy to the Central Bank.  Along with those conditions, there was also need to restructure the Commercial Banks, the financial set up of the Commercial Banks, because as we stand now, the largest Commercial Bank has problems and if we are to solve these problems, there must be a way to tackle them, just as you have financial problems in your own business and -(Interruption)

MRS. KALEMA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is hon. Omara Atubo and the others, in order to carry out a conference there when the Minister is speaking?

THE CHAIRMAN:  They are absolutely out of order; please continue.

MR. SENDAULA:  So, Mr. Chairman, we are looking at restructuring and everyone of us in the House is aware that the effort is being made to restructuring our financial institutions and if this country is to pick up economically, we have to restructure the financial institutions, and there is no way you can restructure an institution when it is carrying a lot of bad debts which are inherited over so many years of operations of this institution.  The only way we can effectively attend to these is by accepting to create an institution that will take care of these bad debts of a period and see the restructuring of the financial institution in the interest of the nation.  

I wish to appeal to you hon. Members that we must certainly accept as hon. Members of this House to have this nation’s activities fully at heart and know the intentions, whatever is being done, is done in good faith, there is nothing that is being hidden around, if only we did not want to say - what is going on, may be someone would have just heard about it, but before any activity takes place, we have brought a law before the law making body of the nation and all that we are appealing for, is to have this debated, if there are weaknesses here and there within the performance of the institution, you inform us as Government and say, there has been a weakness in the institution here and there, we are heading of this, we are smelling this, etc, etc., but before you give us any hearing, you say, please get out with your Bill, I think that is extremely unfair.  I wish to appeal to you hon. Members, let us accept to debate the Motion and during the debate of the Motion, you can advance reasons for not accepting the Bill.  I beg to support.  Thank you.

MR. KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Mr. Chairman, there is a saying that it is better to debate an issue without resolving it, than to resolve an issue without debating it.  But the Motion before us is of such tremendous importance, that we should not be rushed into debating it.  We received this Bill yesterday, I made a quick read through this Bill, and it has got tremendous implications for the development of this country.  It is, therefore, necessary that hon. Members are given sufficient time to make study of this Bill and debate it intelligently.  I want to ask hon. Members, have you studied this issue sufficiently?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Kawanga, no, no.

MR. KAWANGA:  Are you in position to debate it intelligently now?  If you are not -(Laughter)- if you are not, it is in the interest of this country that we are given time to study this Bill and then come back and debate it.  If we do not debate it to day, it does not mean that we shall not debate it at all, we can debate it next week, but surely today, if we debate it we shall have been abused -(Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform hon. Kawanga holding the floor that we Members, we are not rejecting the Bill, we are not expressing our views on the Bill, we are simply saying give us time so that we make a wonderful job.

MR. KAWANGA:  Precisely, Mr. Chairman.  So, I am asking the hon. Mover of this Motion to take more of the fact that he himself has found difficult in giving us the reasons why he thinks this matter is so urgent, but it has to be debated today.  With all the abilities that he has in debating, somehow, today, he came with no reasons whatsoever, but just a request -(Laughter)- and I think for the first time, we shall refuse this request -(Laughter)- (Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my dear Friend hon. Kawanga, that honestly, I had not thought I needed to labour that point, it is that now I am surprised because of the attitude in the House, because restructuring Uganda Commercial Bank has been the outcry of Members of this House.  (Interjection)

Please, I know we have been a bit weak, but we can still go back to the old days and start listening to each other.  Members here have approached me and they have complained that their branches are being locked up up-country and they want to know why those branches are being closed.  Some Members were saying, we go to Uganda Commercial Bank, we are farmers, our people are in a Cooperative Movement, they buy crops, and there is no money in Uganda Commercial Bank to run business.  People were telling me yesterday that after the struggle they have gone through, it seems as if there is no enough money around to keep activities going.  

So, I thought that matter which concerns the creation of liquidity avail it of resources to produce and invest, is matter of almost emergency, you cannot say we shall wait next year to get money.  Now, I am just hearing for the first time that when it comes to get money in the pockets of producers, traders and so on, we can wait.  This is what I am hearing from you, but I have said -(Interjection)- yes, because emergency, Mr. Chairman is -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Hon. Kawanga, I had told you that, today there is a possible dollar 80 million which is ready to be put in Cooperative Bank and Commercial Bank, and that Commercial Bank controls 60 per cent of the activities, but we must first address the restructuring of these institutions for that money to be put in the Bank for our people to use.  I do not see; this is not even urgent; it is wanted now.

MR. KAWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I think after hearing that very able submission, it is all the more reason why this House should consider this matter very, very carefully and I think a week or two is not long enough for that, for the good of this country.  So, really this Motion can wait, we can hear this matter next week or the other week within the times provided, there is no reason why we should hear it today.  And for those reasons, I oppose this Motion and the Bill should come next week or later on.

MR. KAYONDE (Historical Member):  Mr. Chairman, we in the National Resistance Movement, we oppose wrong and defend right.  You see - let me repeat giving voice to the Executive and the Ministers.  We have persistently said the procedures of consultations should be followed.  If this Motion were being tabled when this matter has been discussed by the structures we agreed on, I would have no objection.  

But, here we are, the matter is so important as hon. Kafumbe Mukasa has indicated, but at the sametime, the Motion is asking us to expedite, suspend the rules, now, what guarantee does this House and the nation has that this matter has been considered and there is a general conscious within the structures we set?  For instance, we have a Committee on Economy, I am a Member on that Committee, I have not seen this matter being raised there, we have a Finance Committee, a Standing Committee, in fact, if Members can remember that when we were setting up these Committees, we said, any matter that comes before this House, should be referred to the Committee first and be brought here for final endorsement.  By now, we should be receiving a report from the Chairman of the Committee supporting the Minister.  We have - this is to restructure UCB.  We have a standing Committee on Parastatals, that one, I do not know whether the Chairman is there, whether they have considered it.  So -(Interruption) 

AH HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Speaker holding the Floor of this matter although we met UCB sometime ago, this matter on restructuring of UCB in particular, this matter has not come to the Committees, so it is a surprise when we saw it.  So, the Committee on Parastatals has also not considered it.

MR. KAYONDE:  So, Mr. Chairman, really we have two options.  One is to pass this Motion and a minute later, we send this Bill to the relevant Committees to be discussed.  So, why should we waste time to pass this Motion and send it to the Select Committee?  So we can as well advise the Minister that he goes to the Committees now, discuss this matter, bring it at the stage, we can even pass this Motion, when it has been considered seriously.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, we now put this Motion to move.

(Power went off and Council adjourned until, Thursday 14th April at 2.30 p.m.)


