      
Thursday, 18 April 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairperson, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 1996

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Are there any further contributions?  I call upon the mover to wind up.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Dr Salim Bachou):  Thank you very much Madam Chairperson.  Permit me first of all to offer to you my heartiest congratulations for having been appointed.  (Applause)  

Madam Chairperson, yesterday, there was a lengthy debate on the bill which is a straightforward bill with its intentions and objectives well outlined.  I have to thank hon. Members who made contributions which I considered constructive.  Thank you very much indeed for those contributions.  There were several issues which were raised by my honourable Colleagues which I think deserve some special mention in my winding up of this debate.  I will mention in due course that some of the issues raised plus some amendments proposed, I have already circulated a list of amendments but that does not mean that anybody who has something different from what I had already put down, he should not bring it forward and I do hope that - I saw a number of amendments outside and I have not got a copy myself but they will come.  

Of the main issues which were raised yesterday, the question of location was repeated several times by my hon. Colleagues here.  Permit me to clarify on the issue of location.  First of all, in locating an institution, several factors are normally taken into account and to look at the institutions which have been established in the recent past, for example, universities of Mbale, Mbarara and our training institute in Jinja and so on.  These actually benefited from an infrastructure which was being inherited by the new institution and that warranted the mentioning of the particular location.  

With respect to this particular institution, we do not quite have the advantage although two important locational factors that have to be mentioned would benefit and will have hon. Members appreciated this particular institution in the area where we expect it to be.  First of all, by definition and for all practical purposes, these institutions have to be in the vicinity of a national park and two, it will also be of an advantage if these institutions were located in a national park which also has another training institution already established there.  For these two reasons, we are considering locating this institute at Lake Katwe which is next to Queen Elizabeth National Park.  The other underlining reason really is the fact that about 50 years ago, the European Union and the UNDP together came up with an assistance package to the Ministry of Tourism to undertake badly needed short-term training courses in wildlife conservation and management and on account of that, they provided us funds and provided money for renting at Lake Katwe self help project facilities and after that project came to an end with the money left over, we continued with this programme.  We decided to inherit what was left of this programme and so far we manage to build one dormitory block for this particular institute.  So the location now is a clear matter to my Colleagues I believe that we intend to locate this institute at Lake Katwe which is adjacent to Queen Elizabeth National Park.  

One other issue which was raised was, do we really need a new institution when we actually already have Uganda Wildlife Authority and so on?  Let us look at the issues involved here that the Uganda Wildlife Authority is a parastatal body which is supposed to manage, more or less administer if you like the -(Interruption)- of this country. But if it does not include training personnel for example, training ranger force, this is why we are creating this particular institution to train people in the management and in the whole sense of national park in terms of providing personnel like ranger forces, people who will integrate with the people in managing our national parks.   As you very well know, when you were looking at the Uganda Wildlife Authority Bill, we indicated that one of the management and courses we have adopted in the Ministry of Tourism is to manage this together with the people who live around and that requires people who have the experience in integrating their own attributes with that of the people around the national parks.  We need to train people who will have the skill to sensitize the population about the means to conserve our national heritage and so on. 

So, in summary, the reason why we need to have this institution is because it is a very, very specialised institution and that is why in the whole of East Africa for a long time we only had one of them in Ngetta but as the need has expanded over a time, we now need to have one of our own but that does not preclude us from sending our sons and daughters to Ngetta for higher level training.  And, therefore, this clarifies the other point which is also raised by another hon. Colleague; the worry about liability.  There is hardly any that you need to worry about with respect to the institute that we are creating.  My hon. Colleague who has been in Wildlife for a long time raised the question of quality staff; that on the board of directors, there has to be somebody of good academic background and I wish to assure him that a number of those people including the principal of the institute, the director of Uganda Wildlife Authority and all these people who have the qualifications will, therefore, be able to programme the development of the right kind of standards and qualification.  

Hon. Haruna Imaga mentioned about the need to balance the books on a daily basis because procrastination being a people of time usually leads many managers of public enterprises to run into difficulties because if you do not compile your figures on a daily basis, obviously your margin of error will be bigger with time.  Now there is already no particular reason for an institution of this nature which simply uses an expenditure and income kind of accounting system to have daily posting; because first of all, transactions are not likely to take place on a daily basis.  

Another point which I think a number of Members deliberated on is the composition of the board.  You will realise from the amendment that you have moved which have already been circulated to you that we intend to make changes in the composition of the board.  We actually intend even to increase the number taking into account some of the suggestions hon. Members raised.  But that does not stop me from pointing out for example, some of the errors appearing there.  The permanent secretary on the board has been taken care of in the amendment and then, how about the principal of the institute.  Why can he not be a member of the board?  This has also been taken into account.  One or two other areas in respect to the composition of the board are also taken into account in the amendment.  Hon. Wasswa Nkalubo also pointed out his concern about the dwindling number of the animals; that over a period of time, we have almost decimated certain species of our animal population.


(There was a technical fault during hon. Bachou’s winding up)


MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank you very much Madam Chairperson.  First of all, may I say how delighted I am to see you sitting there.  (Applause)  Although the period is short, I am quite sure that I express the sentiments of the House that we are absolutely delighted and charmed to have you as one of our Chairmen.  

Now, Madam Chairperson, the order that I want to raise is that since I have been here in these benches, I found that Members of the House are not receiving copies Statutes.  They only receive few, bill are amended.  When they are amended and passed into Statutes, hon. Members of Parliament are entitled as of right to get copies of statutes.  Now we are being for instance asked to make rules and regulations under the Statutes which we have passed.  But we do not have copies and Madam Chairperson, you cannot use a bill even if it was a bill, the bill is not a statute.  For the last eight months or so, we have not been receiving copies of our speeches to correct for the purposes of the Hansard and this has not been put in mind.  Madam Chairperson is it in order for the House to continue to sit in view of these very serious and glaring omissions of facilities that enable Members to perform their duties?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you hon. Member but here we are handling the Uganda Wildlife Training Institute at the moment. Can we conclude that before we move?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that clause one do stand part of the Statute.

(Clause one agreed to.)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, is it in order for us to continue when we are under quorum?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the bill.

(Question on clause 2 put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 3 put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 4 put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

DR BACHOU:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I have a number of amendments on clause 5.  In sub-clause 1 which reads as follows: “the governing body of the institute shall be a board of governors” and I would like the following words to be added after the word “governors” - “who shall be appointed by the Minister.” And then in clause 5(2)(a) the number 3 should now be 4 and not 2.  So 4 members appointed by the Minister and the reason is because as we now include the principal of the Institute to be a member of the board and secretary to the board which will be another amendment, the number of board members then becomes even and that creates a  problem of voting.  I would now like to make it another odd number from seven to nine.  Then in sub-clause 2 paragraph (e), the word wildlife parastatal -(Inaudible).  In sub-clause (b) again within the same clause, this should now read: “A member of the association of tour operators or travel agents” because all our tour businesses have got specific associations.  For example, the Association of Uganda Tour Operators brings together all tour operators.  Sub-clause (e) should read as follows: One of the board members will be the permanent secretary of the Ministry responsible for Wildlife or its representative.  And then we like to add another sub-clause there which should read -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I would like with your indulgence that my amendment which seeks to delete the whole of clause 5 so that we just say, the board of trustees of the Uganda Wildlife should be - so that we save a lot of money rather than having two boards.  I beg to move Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now you first dispose of the Minister’s proposed amendment.  Have you circulated yours?

MR WANENDEYA:  I have not Madam Chairperson but we have been allowed to do this as long as it makes sense.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  So, so long as I am in the Chair, you have to circulate your amendment.  Now, I put the question that clause 5(2) be amended as proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR SALIM BACHOU: Madam Chairperson, there was an omission error before and therefore, I would like to propose 2 sub-clause under 5 and then 5(3), 5(4) and that subsequent to that, the visiting 5(3), 5(4) and 5(5) will have to be renumbered accordingly and the amendment is as follows: - the new sub-clause 5(3) should then read: “ a member of the board under sub-section one shall hold office for two years.  And then we go to 5(4) which should now read - sorry.  That should be our new 5(3) Madam Chairperson. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that clause 5(3) be amended as proposed by the Minister.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Madam Chairperson, in sub-section three, I had earlier on and I hope and I do not see it included proposed that the Minister shall appoint the chairperson from the members appointed under sub-section 2(a) and (b).  I did say this so that I might also discuss with the hon. Minister.  My reason for this Madam Chairperson is that if we leave it as it is, then it will mean -

DR BACHOU:  Point of information.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  May I seek the indulgence of the hon. Member to defer the continuing with that particular point because right now, we are on 5(3), after which we are going to the new 5(4).  Then the current one he is talking about will then become our new 5(5). So for the time being, they wait until that time.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON.  I now put the question that clause 5(3) be amended as proposed by the Minister.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

DR BACHOU:  Now the next amendment which is a new 5(4) should read as follows: “A member of the board referred to under sub-section 1 of this section is eligible for reappointment upon receiving the whole office under this subsection.  Except that where the said member has held office for two consecutive terms, he or she shall not be reappointed to the board unless his period of two years has expired.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  That clause 5(4) be amended as proposed by the Minister.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Thank you Madam Chairperson -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Madam Chairperson, I would like to know if the Minister could tell me the meaning paragraph (b) of sub-section 2.  What does a member of a registered tour operator or travel agent appointed do? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 5(5) as amended by the Minister do stand part of the bill.

(Question on the amendment put and greed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 5 as amended do stand part of the bill.

(Clause 5 as amended agreed to)

(Question on clause 6 put and agreed to)

(Question on clause 7 put and agreed to)

(Question on clause 8 put and agreed to)

Clause 9

DR BACHOU:  I thank you Madam Chairperson.  In debating this bill yesterday, there was an objection raised against the Minister actually approving the bank to be used by the Institute and therefore, I propose an amendment that the word Minister be deleted in pursuance of the word board. Thank you Madam Chairperson.  So it will be the board to decide, not the Minister.

(Question on clause 9 as amended put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 10(3) be amended as proposed by hon. Wanendeya.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 10 as amended, put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 11 put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 12 put and agreed to.)

Clause 13

DR BACHOU:  I am proposing that we delete the words assets and liabilities because when you look at a balance sheet that already reflects assets and liabilities.  Therefore clause 33 sub-clause 2(a) should read; “A balance sheet and statement of income and expenditure of the institute in respect of that financial year.”  Thank you Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that 13(2)(a) be amended as put by the Minister.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

MR IMAGA:  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that clause 13 sub-clause 1 be amended by adding the following “and to be balanced daily and monthly.”  Madam Chairperson, I gave my reasons yesterday. To add more this is the normal accounting procedure.  Secondly, it prevents fraud by indicating the actual cash in hand on each day and it gives easy access in extracting information for policy purpose.  For example, if the records are up to date and a need arises that the committee may need to know how much you have spent for a certain period, it will just go to this record.  So I beg that this sentence be added.  Madam Chairperson, I have also another amendment on 13(2) -

DR BACHOU:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  As was noted in this House yesterday, all financial procedures use as a reference document the Finance Act and in that all procedures are said in that and that constitutes the guideline.  Two, when we talk about keeping proper books of accounts and we talk about keeping proper records, there is no need really to go further.   There is no particular reason to really emphasize that it has to be done daily or monthly.  And as I pointed out, for an institution which is not a business entity, transactions do not take place daily.  Suppose there is no transaction on a particular day, do you enter zero on the particular day?  Because you have to do it on a daily basis.  So I reject the proposed amendment by the hon. Member.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that clause 13(1) be amended as proposed by hon. Imaga.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR IMAGA: 13(2), I propose that the word than one month and not more than three months be inserted between the word than.  Madam Chairperson, this is also a very important amendment in the sense that if the records are kept up to date, it takes no time to prepare the final accounts.  So to put three months, most of this time will be wasted.  These books can be completed within one month so that they are submitted to the auditor and the auditor takes three months also to Parliament it taks three months.  So if we give three months, the total becomes nine months.  That is why papers are laid here after one or two months.

DR BACHOU:  I did not quite get the proposed amendment well but I can guess that the hon. Member is really concerned about the period given for preparing the financial statement for a given financial year; that it should not be later than three months.  May I remind the hon. Member, the three months begin with day number one and end with day either 90 or 91 or 92 as the case may be and when he says not later than three months, it simply means it has to be within a period of three months.  Even the first week is within a period of three months.  So, I think we can leave this to the people involved here to work on it accordingly.  Obviously, if the statements are ready within a month, they will be available within a month and we are not saying here that once they are ready, they must wait three months before they are pushed to the next stage.  So I reject this amendment Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question clause 13(2) be amended as proposed by hon. Imaga.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived.)

(Question on clause 13 as amended, put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 14 put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 15 put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 16 put and agreed to.)

(Question on clause 17 put and agreed to.)

Clause 18

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that this clause be amended by putting there a time limit within which the Minister must lay before the House these reports and audited accounts and the reason for saying so is that we never receive the audited accounts.  There is a provision in many statutes but they become a dead letter.  Ministers do not bring audited accounts before the House.  Therefore - so that the Minister shall submit to the Legislature as soon as possible but in any case not later than three months after receiving them.

DR BACHOU:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I have no objection to the proposed amendment by hon. Abu Mayanja.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed by hon. Abu Mayanja.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

Clause 18 as amended agreed to.)

Clause 19

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Madam Chairperson, yesterday we had a problem where this Wildlife institute was because we are being requested to approve the transfer of the assets and we would like to know what type of assets and liabilities and where the institute is so that we can approve what we know.

DR BACHOU:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I did explain in my winding up of the debate that the circumstances which led to the existence of this institution in its rudimentary form, I did indicate that they were really handling any liabilities and in terms of assets, I mentioned about having one domitory block.  Clause 19 Madam Chairperson in addition to what I have just stated is a normal provision of any bill and it is unusual to have the liabilities and assets actually listed either in the schedule or in the appendix to the bill.  I have not seen one like that.  So I do not think there is any need for my hon. Colleague to really be worried about this particular situation.  In any case, if there is need later on, this kind of situation -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.   Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I would like to inform the Minister and the hon. Members that one of the tricks used by some of our public servants is to even create debts when a new institute or organisation has been formed so as to channel some of those funds out.  So how can we be sure that this will be done by the Ministry?

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Madam Chairperson, I see the concern of Members especially that of hon. Abu Mayanja that whereas the hon. Minister who is the mover of this bill is saying that this is normal, it is only normal to the extent that sometimes in framing this sort of clauses, it can sue or be sued in its corporate name.  By this when we were going through the bill at the sectoral committee, we found that this is a young institute at Lake Katwe and it has not got any liability as yet but if Members think that its inclusion that liabilities or assets can be separated, then there is nothing wrong but otherwise, they only looked at it as a normal frame of this sort of thing Madam Chairperson.  There was not any liabilities or assets.

DR BACHOU:  Point of information.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I just wanted to give information.  As Members got concerned about the question of liabilities, it is rather surprising that nobody seemed to have expressed concern about the asset side because that could have also been subjected to -(Interruption)- if the concern of hon. Members could be taken for what they are.  But I have got an assurance from the principal who is now acting there that there are just no liabilities at all.  The institute will only have assets namely filling the equipments, maybe two or three vehicles and the dormitory block.  There are no liabilities.  So hon. Members should not be worried about this.  Thank you very much.

MR OKWERA:  Madam Chairperson, that now answers my question because if there is no liability, there is no need to mention about it in the bill.  So I would suggest that the Minister agrees we delete the word liabilities; because Madam Chairperson, we do not know what are still in the wildlife institute.  It could be this kind of hidden liabilities.  So I am saying let the new institution start from a clean plate so that we see how the executive and the board manage it.  Thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  I have been whispering to my neighbour here and it appears that the old or the existing institute was not established by statute.  It was therefore administratively established.  Therefore, there is no need really to refer it in the law.  If there are things there, let them be given to the institute we are creating as its dowry to start life, as Entandiikwa Madam Chairperson.  If we were creating this institution to take over or to start in lieu of an institute which had been established by statute, then it would have been necessary to refer to it and to transfer its assets to the new one.  But that is something which was there as part of the department and it is a departmental arrangement.  We do not know it, the law does not know it.  So let its property be given by the Minister as something to start with.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  What do you propose hon. Mayanja?

MR ABU MAYANJA:  We delete.

DR BACHOU:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I know that administratively we have this establishment there and if we do not make any provision for the assets to be taken over by the institution that we are going to establish by the Statute, then the likelihood of administrative procedure which is held very much in doubt by some hon. Colleagues committing some act would be a bit high.  I would rather that we leave this provision as it is because even if this institution was established administratively, there may be certain cases which are pending like for example, staff salaries and so on which may be minor but have to be taken over by the new establishment.  

So, I beg my hon. Colleagues to bare with me to leave this having assured them that there are really no liabilities to be concerned about.  Having given them assurance just to leave clause 19 to remain as a matter of principle.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 19 do stand part of the bill. (Interruptions).  You want us to put the question again?  The problem is that you are shouting.  Okay, I put the question that clause 19 do stand -(Interruption)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  There seems to be two amendments on the Floor Madam Chairperson.  I had moved an amendment and circulated Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  What amendment?

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  This amendment on clause 19.  I am seeking to delete the word liabilities so that this new organisation can take over the assets but not with the liabilities.  Liabilities can remain with the government and I have not yet changed my mind from that.

MR OKWERA:  Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with the Minister that the assets of the former Wildlife Institute go with the new baby.  But my only concern is that the liabilities must not go with the new baby.  

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Madam Chairperson, we look at a situation where we said the assets of a non-recognised entity should be taken over.  I do not see first of all why the Minister or this House is debating an issue of an institute which is not recognised by any law.  It was a department.  The Members are saying that look, instead of looking at it, because we have had problems like when we created Namalere farm machinery which was non-existent.  It was liquidated quietly and we were not involved.  

Similarly, we have been with a department.  Now when you say that we take over only the assets and leave out the liabilities, we are just looking at a situation where you may have worker, who has been working with this institute and say look, today we have created another training institute, you are not going with us.  Now when we say the assets and liabilities, what about the employees who are there?  You know you do not only provide for the assets because already we have an acting principal.  We do not just look at only the assets.  Where does he go?  Does he apply or he goes to the institute?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Nkalubo, the workers are part of the liabilities.

MR MWANDHA:  Madam Chairperson, I have listened to arguments that have been advanced by my Colleagues, hon. Mayanja, hon. Nkalubo.  I am not really persuaded that just because this organisation was not set up by Act of Parliament, therefore we cannot pass a law to take over the assets and liabilities of that organisation which has been in existence.  Madam Chairperson, the reason why we must provide for the taking over of assets and liabilities is to provide for continuity.  We should not believe that this organisation which has been in existence because it was not put in place by law, it should not be taken over in a smooth manner so that even the staff and other people who have been in this organisation have security.

DR BACHOU:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I appreciate the contributions of hon. Members on this particular issue and I stand to be convinced by the arguments put forward the learned hon. Member Abu Mayanja and, therefore, feel that I have very little option but to concede that this clause be deleted and whatever is there in terms of assets and liabilities can be dealt with administratively.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that Clause 19 be deleted as proposed by hon. Mayanja.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

The Schedule

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Madam Chairperson, in this Schedule, hon. Okwera wanted to move an Amendment which he also circulated but shied away from it.  We discussed with the hon. Minister and found out that in sub-section (i), the Board shall ordinarily meet for the discharge of business at least twice a year and if we say, twice a year -(Interruption)

MR OKWERA:  Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, is it in order for hon. Ongora Atwai to say, I have shied away from my Amendment when it is here and I am waiting to move it?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  It is not in order

MR OKWERA:  I have not shied away from my Amendment, if he wants to move it on my behalf, I will allow him to do so.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  I think he was just being friendly.

MR OKWERA:  Okay fine.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  Now, the Schedule.  Do you have an Amendment to the Schedule?  Move it.

MR OKWERA:  Thank you very much.  Madam Chairperson, I wish to move that the meetings of the Board take place at least four times in a year.  This is to enable this new Organisation to be attended to as and when business requires it, but if they are going to meet only twice in a year, Madam Chairperson, there could be a number of problems; by the time the Board comes to meet, the multitude of the problem will be too big.  So, this new body needs regular attention from the Board.

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

MR OGWANG:  Point of clarification.  On point of clarification,I would like  the Minister to clarify since we have already amended Section 5, that the Principal of the Institute, shall be Secretary to the Institute.  I would like to seek clarification from the Minister, whether the Secretary shall be the one to record all minutes of every meeting or the Director as in Schedule 3.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  Let us first take hon. Okwera’s Amendment. 

DR SALIM BACHOU: Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I discussed this matter indeed yesterday with hon. Ongora Atwai and I thought I had really convinced him yesterday that at least twice, could be as many as 20 times a year. One he says at least twice, because even bigger institutions like Universities, sometimes you find the Council meeting only once a year or may be twice a year.  Now, in this case, there is at least twice, which means it can be many.  So, I reject that proposed Amendment by hon. Atwai.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Clause 1 sub-section (i) of the Schedule be amended as proposed by hon. Okwera.

(Question put and negatived.)

The Schedule

MR OGWANG:  Mr Chairman, I am proposing an Amendment on Schedule 2; I am just proposing if you can allow me, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  No, you wanted clarification, you are not moving an Amendment.  Minister, can you clarify?

DR SALIM BACHOU:  Madam Chairperson, it is already stated in the body of the Bill, that the Principal will also be a member of the Board as well as his Secretary.  So, I thought that would suffice for the Schedule, simply to leave it as it is, because, we know who the Secretary is and therefore, the minutes will be taken by the Secretary.  Thank you.  

MR ABU-BAKER MAYANJA:  Madam Chairperson, may I kindly take you back, because, we are dealing with the whole Schedule; Clause 1 of the Schedule, paragraph 4.  It says five members of the Board shall form a quorum at any meeting of the Board.  Madam Chair, this is a Board which consists of seven members. 

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you conceding.  So, I put the question that the Schedule do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR COUNCIL TO RESUME
 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES  (Dr Salim Bachou): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

		REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES  (Dr Salim Bachou):  Thank you Madam Chairperson. I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled: The Uganda Wildlife Training Institute Bill, 1996 and passed it with some Amendments.  Thank you.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES  (Dr Salim Bachou):  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I beg to move that report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 1996

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES  (Dr Salim Bachou): Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Uganda Wildlife Training institute Bill, 1996 be read the Third Time and do pass.  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR THE STATUTE ENTITLED: 
THE UGANDA WILDLIFE TRAINING STATUTE, 1996

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  Title settled and Bill passes.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE PRESIDENTIAL AND PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS, RULES, REGULATIONS AND FORMS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr S. Kavuma):  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I first of all, want to add my voice to the many Ugandans who are congratulating you on your worth appointment to this high office of responsibility to chair this honourable House.  I also take the opportunity to congratulate all the women of Uganda for this additional achievement.

Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, I now beg to move that the Presidential, Parliamentary Elections and Forms regulations be approved by this honourable House.

Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, you will recall that we passed the Presidential and Parliamentary elections Interim Provisions Statute early this year and as Members will recall, there was a provision in that Statute that should there be any regulations that will require to be put in place to implement the two laws, those regulations and forms would be prescribed on the recommendation of the Commission and should be brought before this honourable House for approval.

Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, you will also recall that in the Electoral law and in the Constitution, we provided for a number of special groups that are to be represented in the next Parliament which included among others, the women, the Army or UPDF, the workers, the youths and the persons with disabilities.

Hon. Members will recall that as far as the women are concerned, we did enact the procedures through which they will be elected in Schedule 3 to the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Statute.  We therefore, remained with the army, the workers, the youths and person with disability.

Madam Chairperson, it has become necessary that we bring to this hon. House some regulations and forms which are required by law to be brought to this House for approval, then we are therefore, proposing the forms and regulations attached are circulated to the hon. Members earlier on this afternoon.

Madam Chairperson, on the face of it, the document looks bulky, but I did, as I did indicate when we were debating the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Statute, we did a lot of work and covered most of what should be in regulations in that Statute.  We also eventually applied provisions of that Statute to the Presidential Elections to be handled under the Presidential Elections Interim Provisions Statute.  So, Madam Chairperson, bulky as this document appears, a perusal of the same will show that most of it really is in terms of forms which are very usual and very familiar to Members.  

I will elaborate, Madam Chairperson.  If you look at Statutory instrument opening the document, you note that here, we are enumerating the areas in the law or the enabling provisions under which we are going to have the prescribed forms and regulations presented to this House.  There is nothing much in terms of substance to that.  When you move on, Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, the next will be the Oath of members of the Commission.  This is a very simple and straight forward oath, it is in the usual terms of oaths and it should not cause any worry or any anxiety in any member, because, it is something that we have been using from time immemorial.

Madam Chairperson, next, in those forms, in the nomination paper. Here, Madam Chairperson, once again, this is a very familiar kind of form; we have used it already or something very similar to this when we had the CA elections.  I only wish to request for the indulgence of the House to correct a spelling mistake way down on that form where we talk about names and signatories; it should be names and signatures of persons making nomination and then, we are also going to provide a separate space for affixing the signatures.  Otherwise, Madam Chairperson and dear Members, that again, is another very straightforward form which should not cause any problems to any of us.  

On page 4, I intend to correct the signature there, it appears signatories; I intend to correct it and provide separate space for affixing the signature.

Madam Chairperson, on page 5, we now talk about the appointment of official agents of a candidate.  This is another simple form, it is required by our law and there is nothing controversial in it.  I do not think it should cause any problem.

Madam Chairperson, on page 6, this is a statement made under oath by a person to be nominated as a Parliamentary candidate. Madam Chairperson, in effect, this form is calling upon the intending member to declare that he complies with the qualifications as laid down in the Constitution and in the law and that he is not disqualified from standing as a Member of Parliament and it is usual, it is just implementing the Articles in the Constitution and the enabling provisions in the Statute we passed here in January.

Madam Chairperson, on page 8, we deal with the Oath of Identity by a person whose name and voter Number has already been used by another person.  Hon. Members will recall that we provided that in the event, some body turns up at the Polling Centre and he finds that somebody else has been there before and has voted in his name or her name, that person should not loose his right or her right to vote, he should be required to make an oath which if the officers conducting the elections are satisfied about her identity or his identity, then, they would allow him or her to vote. The whole point is fixed on the right to vote, which is a constitutional right and every organ of state in this country is urged by the Constitution to facilitate the pass that person to enjoy his right and the importance here, is, that once that person takes the oath, then if he has been telling a lie, then the criminal law of this country will catch him.  

So, Madam Chairperson, that is the bit I wanted to explain, about that form; it is already the requirement of the law and we can only now provide the form to implement what we passed as legislators in this House.

Madam Chairperson, the next, on page 9 is the proxy authority to vote.  Members will recall that we sat here and we agreed democratically that should there be any member of the Armed Forces or UPDF, the Police and the Prisons who are on duty in areas other those where they were registered and are supposed to vote, those Ugandans should not be denied the right to participate in the elections, they should be enabled to choose a proxy who would vote in their place.  This is the Form to implement that very wise decision taken by this House. 

Madam Chairperson, the next on page 10, is just an oath of a constable. This is a person who could be appointed by the person in charge of organising the elections, to make sure that there is law and order at a polling station and we did say that this chap should also take an oath and this is the oath we are proposing to be administered or to be taken by that kind of person.

Madam Chairperson, page 11, this is a form dealing with declaration of results. As hon. Members know, once there are elections, results must be declared and we did provided that, that declaration shall be in a prescribed form.  So, all we are doing is to implement the provision again on the law with regard to declaration of results; this is normal, we have used it in the past, I do not think it should cause any problems

Madam Chairperson, page 12, this is a return form for transmission of results. Again, this is a document we have been using whenever we have had elections, especially the CA elections to transmit the results from the Returning Officer to his boss, the Commissioner.

Madam Chairperson, page 13, there is another simple form but important.  This is intended to implement the decision we took in this House, that the voters themselves, if they feel dissatisfied with the results declared of an election, if they can martial support from over 500 voters in that Constituency, they should have a right to petition.  This is a form to enable those, if it happens, God forbid to be able to petition. 

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  Are we in order to continue with these important regulations governing our next elections when we do not have the quorum?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: Members are around the House, let us continue.

MR KAVUMA:  Madam Chairperson, the next is the Presidential Elections Forms Regulations.  This, Madam Chairperson is a very short statutory instrument, the purpose of -(Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  We have just received these documents this afternoon, the Minister for Constitutional Affairs is just coming within only an hour’s difference, telling us about these Forms which forms the importance aspect of our elections.  We need to scrutinise these things carefully and we need to really have a weekend to look at these whether - really he is talking about proxy; we need to know, is this in conformity with the law we passed.  So, I do not see the reason why we should have to rush these things today.  Madam Chairperson, I beg that you - is it in order, therefore, Madam Chairperson to continue without even quorum and we are also touching on very important ingredients of our election law where we have to look at it carefully, we do not want to be rushed, because we saw so many pitfalls during CA, we do not want a repeat of these pitfalls.  Is it therefore, in order for the 	Minister to continue?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Members, these Forms arise from a Statute you have recently passed.  Now, because, these matters are so important and they affect the Presidential elections, which are due in a few days time, we really must hurry and pass them. Hold your fire!  So, I am proposing that we adjourn for 20 minutes, you study the Forms and we re-convene.  We adjourn for 20 minutes.

ADJOURNMENT FOR 20 MINUTES

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr S. Kavuma):  Madam Chairperson, when we adjourned for Members to have an opportunity to look at the Rules proposed, I was explaining that in the Presidential Elections Forms Regulations, there was a very short Statutory instrument and the sole purpose of this instrument, is to apply the rules and regulations dealing with Parliament elections under the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Statute, as they may be necessary or applicable with necessary modifications to the election of a President and that is in accordance with the law we passed, it is just implementing that part of the law we passed.  

Madam Chairperson, the next page deals with the Parliamentary election special interest groups 1996.  Madam Chairperson, we deal with the representatives of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces and -(Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, just before we adjourned for the 20 minutes, you were aware, there was no quorum, you said Members were in the lobby and now it is I think clear that those you are imagining to be in the lobby are not there.  Are we in order to proceed without a quorum.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  Take a count.   Hon. Members, it would appear there are only 57 members in the House.  So, I propose that we adjourn to Tuesday, next week at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.20 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Tuesday, 23 April 1996.)




            

