
Tuesday 12th April, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Ag. Chairman, Mr. Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair).


The Council was called to order.


ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oath was administered to:

1.  Mr. Tive Mark

2.  Ms. Bintu Juliet

3.  Ms. Namuyangu K. Jennipher

4.  Dr. H. Namugga Kyambadde Kasule


BILLS
FIRST READING 

THE NON-PERFORMING ASSETS RECOVERY TRUST BILL, 1994

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Just one guidance on top Procedure.  While I do recognise you in the Chair, I have been wondering whether we are going to formalise your authority in that Chair because I have been looking at our rules and find it very difficult, I do not want us to proceed and do things which at a later stage we find ourselves being forced to repeat.  I am seeking your guidance and I do not want nullification of our own sitting.  

In the rules we do not seem to have any idea as to how we get a temporary Chairman or a permanent Chairman and I do agree that you fit in the chair properly but -(laughter)-I want, for you to fit in legally and I wonder, that is why I am seeking this guidance at an early stage because last Friday the formal Chairman asked you to assist but now, I do not know whether that assistance applies to today and tomorrow and for ever more.  Mr. Chairman, can I be guided and be assisted on this matter before we proceed?

MR. EKEMU:  I think up to now, I am still continuing with the task that was entrusted to me and I feel at this juncture there is no need even to call upon the Attorney General to look into that matter, I think we are still perfectly in order. (Applause)

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Given that, we assume that you are continuing the role of an emergence meeting of Friday?  (Interjection)- Assisting Chairman for one year or in other words, we can always have you there whenever the Chairman feels so or we can have you there whenever we want you to be there.  

MR. EKEMU:  I have explained enough and I now direct that we proceed.  Can I call the Minister please?

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NON-PERFORMING ASSETS RECOVERY TRUST BILL, 1994

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, for us who are sure there is a Chairman, I can gladly proceed.  I beg to move that, ‘The Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust Bill, 1994’, be read a First Time.  I beg to move Sir.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Hon. Members you recall that in January last year you debated and passed two important Bills.  Consequently, the National Women’s Council Statute 1993 and the National Youth Council Statute 1993 were enacted.  This whole process fulfilled government goal of empowering these vital groups in our development endeavours.  

The other very important aspect of it was to consolidate our development endeavours in the domains of unit and democracy, through enhancing the participated role of the women and youth of this country.  It is with immense satisfaction that I report to you now that this mission has largely been accomplished. (Applause)  

Prior to the convincing of the recently concluded National Women and Youth Conference at the Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo (ITEK), which took place on the 5th to the 9th of April, 1994, a Nationwide sensitization programme has been conducted.  This exercise, which began during September, 1993 ended just on the eve of elections on the 10th of January, 1994, and this established the Women and Youth councils right from the village to the district levels all over the country.  District delegates to the National organs of these Councils were also elected on the 15th of January 1994.  In accordance with the provision of the National Wowen’s Council and Nation Youth Council Statute, 370 women and youth delegates were invited for the first conference at ITEK, Kyambogo.  

The National Women Council was to be constituted by a total 43 delegates, 39 of these representing the district, two from the Uganda National Students Association and two from the Women Non-Governmental Organisations.  

The Youth body constituted two organs; the National Youth Delegates Conference of 269 participants consisting of the Chairmen of all county or municipality Youth committees and this added up to a number of 171.  The Secretaries for Women Youth in the District Youth Committees, these 39, the Chairmen of the District Youth Committees these were also 39 and 18 student delegates from the Uganda National Students’ Association.  

The second body was the National Youth Council comprising 39 district representatives, two from Uganda National Students’ Association, and 10 female youth elected from among the members of the National Youth Delegates conference.  The full membership of the national Youth Council then came to 51.  

In Kyambogo also, we had District Youth and Culture Officers and Representatives from many youth and women NGOs who attended.  I am very appreciative of the hon. Members who found time to participate in some of the meetings in Kyambogo.

The Conference deliberates under the guiding them of unit, democracy and development.  The participants therefore, had lengthy and useful discussing on the role of women and youth councils in Uganda, development of programmes and projects and focused on the women and youth in the Constitution-making process.  Notable among their resolutions at the end of the cause of the women and the youth of this country. (Applause)  

An appeal was made that since their organisation structures have now been firmly established the House will not hesitate to vote sufficient funding in future for their programmes and activities. In this particular respect, the youth expressed their desire for a revolving fund and credit bank facility, and they also noted some disturbing imperfection in the structural set up of the women and youth councils which they requested should be brought to the attention of this House for correction.  At an appropriate moments and hon. Members, I will bring these matters for scrutiny and remedial action.

The various fora of the Conference and with guidelines and regulations elected the following; (a) they elected 10 female representatives, elected by the National Youth Delegates from among its female members with at least, two from each region.  This was in accordance with Section 5 of the National Youth Council Statute 1993.  These were, Northern Region - Achome Sarah and Turikan Betty.  Western Region - Muhimbise Jackline and Bintu Juliet.  Eastern Region, Namuyangu Jennipher, Okello Grace.  Buganda Region, Nafero Angela, Nampera Catherine.  Central Region, Dr. Namugga Kyambadde Kasule and Aanyu Dorothy. 

They also elected a National Women Executive Committee, and these were elected by the members of the National Women Council from among their number in accordance with Section 9 sub-Section (2) of the National Women’s Council Statute, 1993.  Their Chairperson is Dr. Nakaketo Kikyambu Margaret, their Vice Chairperson is Mrs. Mary Akwir Aneco, the General Secretary is Mrs. Baliddawa Gertrude, the Publicity Secretary is Mrs. Maria Nakabito Kibalama, the Secretary for Finance is Dr. Basaza Margaret, the Student’s representative is Ms. Olive Birungi and NGO representatives will be elected at an opportune time.

There was also election to the National Youth Executive Committee, the eleven (11) member National Executive Committee for the Youth was elected by the members of the national Youth Council from among their number in accordance to Section 10, sub-section (2) of the National Youth Council Statute of 1993.  The Chairman is Sentongo Herman, the Vice-Chairman, is Wadada Johnson, the General Secretary is Bita Mubi Pascal, the Publicity Secretary is Peter Zake Ssenyumba, the Secretary for Women Youth is Nafero Angela, the Secretary for Students’ Affairs, is Okello Benson, Secretary for Labour Affairs it Turyahikayo Ezra, the Secretary for Sports and Culture is Kasirye Ignatius, Secretary for Finance is Lemeriga George, the Secretary for External Relations is Nshekanabo Robert and the Secretary for Legal Affairs is Okot Geoffrey.

Also in accordance with the Constituent Assembly Statute, 1993 under the first schedule for youth (4) delegates are to represent the youth in the Constituent Assembly.  These were to be elected from and by the Members of the National Youth Council and with at least one from each of the four regions, that is, the Northern, Eastern, Western and Central.  This latter requirement, hon. Members was stipulated in statutory instrument 1994; instrument No. 133, which is issued to ensure that justice, prevails in this entire process.

The following were therefore, elected to perform this noble task.  For the Northern Region, Atwoki Ambrose was elected.  For the Western Region, Tumwine Polly was elected.  For the Eastern Region, Chepsco Mohammed was elected and for the Central Region, Ssebalu Kennedy was elected representative.  

Part Five, Section 16 sub-Section (1) of the National Youth Council Statute 1993, provides that the National Youth delegates conference at its first meeting elect five youth representatives at least, two of whom are female from among the members of the National Youth council represent the Youth in the National Resistance Council.  Sub-Section (3) goes further to say that in electing these five representatives the regions of Northern, Western, Central and Buganda were to have one each.  Hon. Members, we have just now welcome to this august House the happy outcome of the provisions of the unique process which the participants in Kyambogo referred to as democracy made simple.  

You have already received, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, the representative for the Northern Region, hon. Tivu Mark.  The representative for the Western Region hon. Bintu Juliet, the representative for Eastern Region hon. Namuyangu Jenipher, the representative for Buganda Region hon. Nampera Catherine and the representative for Central Region hon. Dr. Kyambadde Kasule Namugga.

One remarkable aspect of these particular elections hon. Members, is that lots had been cast to determine which region voted a female representative.  In this respect Western and Eastern Regions produced two female representatives accordingly.  The youth further demonstrated their agenda sensitivity, and I wish hon. Members to appreciate this forward looking move -(Applause)- by returning - with your permission, Mr. Chairman, I want to repeat, the youth further demonstrated their agenda sensitivity by returning two females two more females for Buganda and Central region under severe competition, even when they were under no obligation to do so, hence out of the five NRC youth representatives four are female and once is a male. (Laughter)  

I wish to say on another note that, in future we are likely to see Parliament which are agenda balanced especially now that we see more women coming in.

I wish to conclude that with these structures finally put in place, we are confident that the women will assume their rightful and pivotal role and in nation building.  The two secretaries to implement supervise and co-ordinate all the programmes which these Councils will draw will be established immediately.  This process began with the elected national women and youth leadership staying behind for another three days after the Conference had ended, to locate their bearing and comes out with a plan of action telling out their short term, medium and long term goals.  

All this would not have been possible without the tremendous support of this august House, the support of all my Colleagues in Government and many other departments and individuals who extended to me and my Ministry on behalf of - a lot of assistance on behalf of the women and the youth in this country.  I and they, these are the women and youth will continue to bank on this patriotic sense of commitment to realise the set goals for the women and youth councils and as to strengthen them further as viable democratic institutions with constant moral and financial support.  

I wish to thank you hon. Mr. Chairman, and hon. Members for the successful completion of this exercise and to call on you elders in the House to give support to the new hon. Members and to be with them in a sense of maturity and commitment to the cause that we are here for.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KABUGO:  Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification from the hon. Minister when she says that there is a Buganda representative as well as a Central Regional representative.  What is that? (Interjection) If it is Kampala, is Kampala a Region?

MRS. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr. Chairman, my noble duty was to implement as directed by this House and enacted by the President, the regions which were specified in the Statute and those were Northern, Eastern, Western, Central and Buganda Region, I hope that the hon. Member will go back to this Statute to see what is contained therein.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MOTION FOR THE RESOLUTION

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Sam Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, I rise to move a Motion, requesting this hon. House to give approval to regulations made under the Constituent Assembly Statute.  The regulations provide for the elections of the delegates from the various groups and bodies listed in the First Schedule to the Statute, including District Women’s Representatives.  

I very much regret that it is necessary to seek a retrospective approval solely because Council unexpectedly adjourned in February when it was unable to find a quorum.  I had planned to present the Draft Regulations to this council in that very week and so I was caught by surprise when the adjournment occurred.  

I, therefore, want to assure this House, that in bringing these regulations into operation without the prior Council approval as anticipated by the Constituent Assembly Statute, there was no disrespect for this Council and its vital role.  It was something forced by the unexpected adjournment, as I said, and the need to make the provisions for these elections of women and other group delegates.  Provisions for these elections could not wait until now when the NRC is having First Meeting since early February in particular, we had to make early arrangements for women’s elections because of the need of early announcement of nomination days so that the prospective candidates could take one months advanced leave from the Public Service as required by the CA Statute.  

I will explain briefly the effects of the regulations that are of necessity already in operation.  The CA Statute provides for special groups to elect delegates as follows:  One woman delegate from each district elected by electoral colleges made up of RC.III Councillors and all Members of sub-county members’ councils, ten from the National Resistance Army, two from the National Organisation of Trade Unions; two from each of the four Political Parties that contested in 1980 Elections; four from the National Youth Council and one from the National Union of Disabled persons of Uganda.  The Constituent Assembly Statute provides that the elections of these delegates should be in accordance with both the Statute and the regulations under that Statute.  The biggest election will be the one of women delegates, and the total of persons entitled to vote in the sub-county Electoral College is over 60,000. 

As a result, government agreed that the Commission for Constituent Assembly should conduct the Women’s elections.  The regulations apply most of the rules of the general elections for the 214 electoral areas to the women’s directions.  But these Rules have also been modified to suit the electoral colleges of the Councillors from RC III and sub-county Women’s Councils.  The Commissioner has given instructions to Returning Officers to identify the Members of the Electoral College entitled to vote by virtue of their positions.  Candidates meetings will be half or are being held at sub-counties rather than at Parish level.  There will be no requirement for payments of Shs.100,000/= deposit or nomination fee nor will the ballot paper have candidates photographs on them.  Voting for women’s delegates will take place at either sub-county or county level rather than at Parish level.  

In addition, the Commissioner will be able to modify other aspects of the rules where circumstances do require all the bodies NRA, NOTU, National Youth Council and UNDPO - except the political parties will conduct elections for their delegates in a manner determined by them in consultation with the Commissioner.  There is no provision for the Commissioner to be involved in any way in the conduct of elections for delegates of political parties.  But Government has been approached by some other bodies that want an independent authority such as the CA Commission, to organise their elections for them.  

So, the regulations provide that after consultation with any of the bodies concerned other than political parties, the Minister may get the CA Commission to organise those elections.  The regulations made April 20th the date for the completion of all elections of the women and all the other bodies as well as - for the President to appoint the 10 delegates provided under the CA Statute.  This cut off date was set to ensure that all elections are complete before the CA has its First Meeting, there is, however, provision for the dead line to be extended in any case where the Commissioner believes there are special circumstances.  Indeed it has made an extension in case of women delegates because of the need to fit in the many sub-county level candidates’ meeting required.  The elections will now be held on 25th April, this year.  

Before concluding, I should indicate that it is now planned to hold the first meeting of the Constituent Assembly on Thursday 5th May 1994.  The meeting will need to begin as earlier as possible so that we move quickly to the adoption of a new Constitution and elections establishing a new government.  The closeness of the date for the first CA meeting indicates just how important it was to have these regulations in place.  I, therefore, request all hon. Members of this Council to support the Motion before you.  I beg to move. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Motion now is open for debate, hon. Members.

MR. BWANIKA BBALE (Katikamu County, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I stand here to support the Motion, I would like to thank the Minister to have brought it, but it should appear the Minister has a habit of bringing these Resolutions to be approved retrospectively.  Because even last time when he came to ask for an extension of days of registration, it was done after it had happened.  I hope next time he is not going to make the same mistake or to repeat the same habit.  

I would like to thank the Minister and the Commissioner for the Constituent Assembly to have conducted the recent elections successfully. (Applause) 

I believe we have had a very successful election in Uganda, which we have not had for over 30 years.  The 1980 election was rigged and people went to war but this one ti my observation has not been rigged, and those who feel that elections have been rigged the law is very clear, they should go to court -(Interjection)- no, this time we are not going to bush; we are going to court because the NRM Government restored a good Government whereby we can now go to courts and we can be judged fairly.  

For Katikamu North, I would like to convey the appreciation of my people in Katikamu North to the Minister and to Mr. Akabway and his staff for having conducted these elections successfully. (Applause)  

Now that the Minister has said the CA is starting early May next month and the Minister has a habit of bringing these Resolutions to this House, why can he not look at those areas that we left out when we were debating the CA statute?  

At the time we were debating the CA Statute, this NRC had not repealed Section 118 of the Constitution, which restored our traditional leaders.  I feel that since we are going to the CA and the traditional leaders have been restored, why can we not give them a chance also to send their delegates to CA?  Why can we not ask the traditional leader of Buganda, Ronald Mutebi to send a representative here?  Why can we not ask Kaboyo of Toro to send a representative to CA?  We are going to make a Constitution for this country, and I feel we should not leave anybody out.  My view and the view of the people of Katikamu North is that, these people - we should find a way as a House to give this opportunity to these traditional leaders to bring their delegates to CA.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

DR. BYARUHANGA (Buruli County, Masindi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to add my voice to those who have already thanked you for assuming that Chair, although temporarily.  I wish to congratulate my colleagues who made it successfully to the CA and happened to be Members of this august House.  I would also like to thank the Minister for having brought forward this Resolution.  My Colleague has already just pointed out that retrospective legislation is not a good fashion, all the same, I think I would like to give hon. Minister the benefit of the doubt because as the Members know the last three months have been very intensive, and I think it would have been inappropriate to re-call us to come and discuss this resolution knowing the fire line as it were.  

Now, my only worry, which I want to point out here, is Section 3 of these Constituent Assembly Regulations 1994.  As you know, even the problems we had in the last exercise were associated with one, registration of voters; two, nomination; three, election campaigns and four, polling procedures.  This is where we had problems, it is very clear here as you have pointed out, that the Electoral College at the sub-county is very well defined.  Now, are these registered voters?  Is there a provision to show that the presiding officer must indicate that these must be registered voters?  As I talk now, come people were throwing in their registration certificates as they were voting the last exercise, some of them now have no registration certificates.  

Two, the actual procedure at the polling station, how were these people going to vote?  Is it lining up, is it marking the points because already candidates have been forwarding in their photographs.  So, I presume that there would be some kind of ballot paper with some photographs or names.  

In my district in Masindi, all the nominated candidates who were nominated for women CA delegates had their photographs taken.  What were those photographs for?  I do not know what is prevailing in other districts!  

At the polling centre itself, the distances between the Presiding Officer and where the voter is ticking or putting a thumb free, we had serious anomalies where somebody would just come and keep a direct eye on how you are putting your thumb there.  So, depending on the performance of the Returning Officers, the Presiding Officers and their assistants, we can have problems, and this is moreso, when we have got a few people, these are electoral colleges we have got sub-counties, which are even much easier to monitor and influence directly.  So, I think, the Minister will say something about that and lastly, one observation. 

Under Section 9, the penalty for whoever refuses or tries to obstruct the Commissioner or Returning Officer.  Here you are putting (a) and (b), ‘commits an offense and is liable to conviction to a fine not exceeding Shs. 200,000/= or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both’.  If you look at this, as we passed it on, I think page 20, you will find sub-section 2 of Section 30, they are talking about five years maximum, now, this is two years, I do not see why you should keep on fragmenting this number of years.  Why do we not make it easier for the man who is sentencing and we also harmonise it to five years?  But here it is two years then it is fiver years here!  I think that change is not good for the judges, I do not know.

Finally, in Section 7 sub-Section 2, for the avoidance of doubt, sub-Regulation One gives no power to the Minister to direct the conduct of the functions of the Commission or I seek a clarification on this, it is vague.  Why are you tying the Minister to this extent?  Then, what is the role of this exercise?  It is not clear at all because in sub-Section 7, if the Minister after consultation with the national Executive Committee or Council or similar body specified in the First Schedule directs the Commissioner, at the same time you are now saying for the avoidance of doubt, this gives no power to direct!  So, that is a gray area.  I hope the hon. Minister will clarify some of these issues.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

DR. AMUZA (Moroto County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I will first of all start by introducing myself.  I am called Dr. Amuza, a Veterinary Doctor from Moroto County in Lira. (Applause)  I am sorry to say that it is very unfortunate for the hon. Minister to bring this instrument late; I would have made so many changes.  I have this to say under Section 3 of that paper, and it says, ‘The Commissioner may direct’, - I have only taken the last part of it - and then Section 3(2)(a), also says almost the same thing.  

In the Last CA elections there was a mistake made by the Commissioner.  One day just before elections, that was on the 27th. The Commissioner said, ‘even those who have not got the certificates, having their names there should vote.’  This was very unfortunate indeed and so riggers decided to go in very fast.  So, this one should have been corrected if the Minister had brought this much earlier.

Now, the second issue on this is about the NRA representatives.  If really we are going to be democratic and to have a fair election, I do not think we should allow these people to elect themselves as a minority really.  If the instrument had come much earlier, what we should have done, we should have regionalised the areas where the military men are and then they also go round just as we have been doing.  Thank you very much.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion and in doing so, I wish to debate it from the proposal of the Minister under Section 3(c) where he is proposing that the women candidates should not pay Shs. 100,000.  It is my feeling that it is true that they have the quality and the ability like other ladies who have competed and they have come in; they have met the Shs. 100,000 deposits.  I do not see any justification whatsoever that now that we have given them an exclusive club where we are not competing, that we should also exclude them and give them a free ride, and they should pay the Shs. 100,000 and contribute to the coffers.  This thing is so expensive.  I do not see any reason the Minister thinks that these, because they are ladies, they cannot meet it.  We have these iron ladies, for example, Mrs. Matembe, why can she not pay? (Interjection)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Women candidates who represent districts unlike the recent elections we held have a much bigger area to cover as candidates so many sub-counties, and therefore, they are likely to spend much more than men and other women who went in these constituencies than they are and therefore, I think that the Minister’s proposal is justified.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Information, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and through you to the Member who has just contributed that although the hon. Ladies have got a wider area to cover, they have got fewer people to see and therefore, they have got less financial constraints and therefore they should pay.  

I wish to add that the payment of Shs. 100.000/- is meant to come some costs that are incurred in the process of election process and therefore, it is not fair for somebody to stand and not to contribute to the exercise and democratise the exercise.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, if I may paraphrase Ekanya, the reason for removing Shs. 100,000 is that the election should be free and fair. (Laughter)  

MRS. MPANGA:  Information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think it is very fair - I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, it is very fair for women not to pay Shs. 100,000 because we do not want only the rich women to stand.  We want to be able to take as many; there are not as many men who would like to pay for the women and since this is special, I cannot see why we go back to Shs. 100.000/=          

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Thank you for all that information.  As much as we are being persuaded that we want women to stand and we are being persuaded that some of these good ladies cannot afford to pay Shs. 100,000/-, we had poorer -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Information, Mr. Chairman.  Properly speaking, in making of a law that ought to be objective, honest, a Minister when he has a substantive power or subsidiary power to make a law, he has no right to amend or nullify the effect of the substantive principle law in my submission.  I was surprised when the hon. Attorney General stood up; I thought he was going to correct the House to get into the channel of a corrective wisdom to make the right law. (Laughter)

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  So, Mr. Chairman, I think the point raised by my dear Colleague hon. Obwangor, I think is well taken and I think there is no justification whatsoever why the Shs. 100,000/= should not be paid and I would request this House to refuse this proposal by the Minister -(Interjection)

CAPT. BABU:  Information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that my understanding of this Statute was that women were not going to be elected in the same way the people were going to be elected in the Constituencies.  They were supposed to be elected by electoral colleges, which were totally different.  

However, somebody has requested the Commission to use the same system we had, to try and help the women to have a fair election and I think this is where the Minister is seeking some sort of system in which they can elect these women otherwise, he does not have to change the law because the law is very clear, the electoral college can go and have an election.  Thank you very much.

MRS. MPANGA:  Information.  I want to inform hon. Member that these ladies have already registered; and they have already been nominated without the Shs. 100,000. (Interruption)

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I am very much aware that it was done illegally, that is why the Minister wants us to legalise the illegality and I am requesting this House that, let us be consistent.  Let him be consistent, I do not see the reason why he said the ladies cannot pay, let those who cannot pay call it a day.

Turning to this proposed amendment, the Minister has left a vacuum as regard to the political parties.  Well, when he says under Section 6 of this Statute, the Minister has left the nomination of the two delegates of each political party to the National Executive of that particular party hoping that the executive is there, and it could be that the executive is not there; what shall we do?  Can he advise how it can be constituted say if the President of the Party is out, the Vice is dead and how would they constitute that executive?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you.  May I seek; I think from hon. Member holding the Floor that, if a party has no executive, does that party exist?  If it does not exist, does it justify having two people?

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, that question can be answered by the same Member who has posed it because, I do not think that a political party is only composed of the executive.  There are members; could they be given a chance to constitute the executive.  I was just requesting the Minister to advise in such a situation what can be done. (Interjection)- You know it looks simple but then democracy is not all that cheap, it is a costly affair.  We should look at all the aspects and implications, we should not just say, ‘okay, that one is not there, we end at that.’  

If we intend to have a Constitution acceptable to all Ugandans, we should take all the pains to ensure that all sorts of opinions are involved. Otherwise one day somebody will claim ‘I was not a party.’  What a waste if he says okay, we were not given a chance and why do not we give them a chance if need be?  I do not see why we should say okay, that one cannot be, do not say, okay, we are not a party an then may be we go in for another round; that is why I am asking the Minister to advise us, where we are in such a stalemate how we can go about it.

Lastly, I wish to congratulate the Minister in charge of Women for having had fresh blood added to this House -(Interjection)- yes, the youth - that they have come in though belatedly, but they are welcome.  But, there has been a lot of discontentment around the country that when it came to those who can qualify to be elected to come here that the Statute was not so clear, that it was so restrictive to only 51.  

That Section should be re-visited by this House so that we can have like we have accepted that a woman can join and stand even if she is not a member of the electorate. But this time the thing was so close that a Chairman of a District could not be permitted to stand as a representative to NRC, it is only the youth councils, delegates of the Youth Council were permitted and there is a lot of discontentment around the country, they say that they were not given a fair chance.  If time permitting I think that law of the youth should be re-visited so that we can increase the number and a chance given to others who may not be interested in going through the village councils, like we have permitted the ladies to stand right from the district level without being members of the village level.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. WEKIYA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand up to support this instrument but I would also at the same time want to ask the Minister that let this be - these are the amendments we are going to have - I really thank him very much that if there is anything else that may come after this, please let us discuss it now because I know a situation like the one we were in during the last elections when the Commissioner came up with some last minute pronouncement that have really made a lot of us to think that things were not fairly done and that they say that if someone comes in who is not registered, he can vote and that sort of thing.  

So, please, if there is anything else which you feel should be brought up for the good of these elections kindly, put it here so that we can discuss it and then we do not have too many petitions like we are having today because I can assure you almost three quarters of this country is petitioning and it is due to that last minute pronouncement which I think was most unfortunate and I hope will not be repeated again.

I would also like to thank the hon. Minister for this very affirmative action that has been extended to my sisters -(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM:  Information.  I think, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, the point she is raising is very important because it is so important that is why I rose on a point of information.  For instance, the CA Statue does not provide for a bye-election incase a delegate dies.  Now, these are the kind of things that I think should be brought in now and corrected before we actually go into the Assembly.  Thank you.

MRS. WEKIYA:  Thank you very much for that information.  Mr. Chairman, I was thanking the Minister for this affirmative action more especially as far as paying the Shs. 100,000 is concerned.  I would like to ask this House to accept that as the whole world is struggling to ensure that women and men makes equal decisions, they are also trying to make sure that women get affirmative action so that they can be facilitated to coming into making of these decisions, I would therefore in the same breadth like to request the Minister that since the action is there, he could also assist in facilitating the women, these candidates in some of the districts to make sure that they reach some of the places where candidate meetings are going to take place.  

I will give an example of Iganga District.  It has got some islands and it is so huge, I do not know how these women are going to travel across the waters to go to some Islands to conduct some candidate meetings there.  I wish you could give them at least a boat, they could pay something and travel together, cross and go there, otherwise, you will find that some of these places may not get these candidates meetings because if you have seen that women cannot afford paying Shs. 100.000/- then, I am sure you have also realised that women cannot hire boats to go to some of these sub-counties which are across the waters; some are even bordering Kenya and those people may not get a chance of voting for their lady -(Interjection)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Are you taking information?

CAPT. GASATURA:  Information, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Lady who is holding the Floor now, she is causing this House to wonder, because the emancipation of women is well known and many women have stood against men and won including, I think herself, but then at the same time, when we talk of women being facilitated, she is already treading on the feet of some of these ladies who would like to try and show their might, because some of these ladies are talking of equality.  So, when you talk of to be assisted, they cannot go through waters, and some of these women have even fought wars, it appears you are belittling the ladies and therefore, we should encourage the women to struggle and support themselves, even pay the Shs. 100.000/= if possible. (Laughter)

MRS. WEKIYA:  Mr. Chairman, Achebe says, you eat, you eat live than this one.  So, when you explain some affirmative action to women, you should really be very affirmative and not half-heartedly given to them, that is why I am pleading that at least those who have got Islands should be facilitated to get on to those Islands.

Lastly, I read the Commissioner says, the identification of voters is not really very important in this exercise because there is a specific electoral college.  I do not know how much these Gombolola chiefs and some chairmen are going to be impartial as far as identification of voters is concerned; and there is no marking of their fingers because all those people have got people they are supporting.  I wish there could be some way of identifying them because these RCs do not have identity cards, somebody could come in and stand for another, and somebody could buy off another and send somebody else to go also. Let these voters be identified as belonging to the levels of the electoral college and also after voting, let them be properly identified so that we do not have a situation whereby somebody votes about such a price because these things have occurred, we have seen them happening.  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
 
MR. NTIMBA JOHN:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion and I would like to draw your attention and that of the Members of the House to the contents of Clause No. 3(2) (b) which refers to Rule No. 12 of the Constituent Assembly regulations and amends the parish from being a meeting of the candidates meeting so that of the sub-county.  

Now, as we appreciate, what has actually happened, the candidates meetings for the women candidates has started so late and in some areas people find themselves left with only two three weeks in order to be able to cover more than 30 sub-counties, this has forced some of the organisers of these candidates meetings to have so many candidates meeting in one day skipping from one gombolola to another and so on and so forth, and yet in some places like town, it might be possible because of the limited time to combine two or more sub-counties for the purpose of the candidates meetings.  

I wish the Minister for State for Constitutional Affairs had foreseen this and made provision for this in the amendment of heir Statutes.  I now go on to the content of Clause 5, which says that, the election of the delegates to the National Resistance Army and so on and so forth, shall be conducted in a manner determined by the Bodies concerned in consultation with the Commissioner.  

My worry is that the Commissioner seems to have been given too much power, and how is he going to take decision when consulting these various interested bodies?  I want to put provision to the effect that he should have the opportunity to consult his assistant and bureaucrats and so forth rather than appear to be in position where he sits in a table discussing with the representatives of these interest groups and take a unilateral decision which may not be in the interest of these various interest groups.  

When I say this, I have in mind of what I have described as a disastrous decision by the Commissioner during the Constituent Assembly Elections when we all wake up one day to be told that the Commissioner has decided that anybody with a registration certificate can go and vote even if she or her name is not in the voters register.    This started in a situation where people were smartly enough to see loopholes in this were able to vote more than once, some people would come and boast to me, we have voted seven times.  

Now, how did the Commissioner have the powers to arrive at this decision, was he covered by our laws?  And to make matters worse, we have seen in some places where lorry loads of voters of non citizens, taken to certain electoral areas to vote for the Constituent Assembly candidates and when these were challenged, some of them could not even speak in the local language, they were at a loss and yet they were allowed to vote.  

So, it would appear as if, the Minister will have to really come back and bring in more amendments on this Statute to ensure that we do not allow non citizen to elect our Constituent Assembly delegates and my be they should be brought in now at least for the benefit of those who are going to bring in court petitions in the hope that by the time the court petitions are disposed off, the law will have been to take care of these.  

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am intrigued that the hon. Member would have such very important and crucial information having people speaking Jaluo, Kikuyu in Mbarara and being able to vote without him making attempt to take them to courts of law may be even police for arrest.  I am wondering what king of nationality did he need to act to such a polling station. 

MR. NTIMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I am glad the hon. Member brought this question because I witnessed a situation where people arrived in Mbarara town and they were saying, ‘Winnie turyamukubira terehe’ and when we challenged and asked where they were registered, the poor fellows did not know where they had been registered.  Some of them were arrested and taken to the Police station only to be released by people with armies and pistols, and when appeals were made to the District Executive Secretary, many appeals were ignored because under the laws nobody had the right to prevent by registered voter from voting, and I think the Minister will have again come to this House and streamline a law concerning the display of registers, they were not properly displayed and some people are saying were not ready and everybody knows what disastrous consequences this has resulted into; and what pains me is to see that whereas we have had non citizens electing CA delegates unless something is done between now and next December, January or whatever, we are going to find ourselves in a situation where non-citizens are going to be electing our President and new Members of Parliament; and this morning - I am not trying to much really saying that there are certain individuals - refugees, whom we have given positions in this country, but let me point this out.  

Last week, a President of a friendly country died in very sad circumstances and our Head of State sent a message to Kigali to convey our condolences on the loss of that Leader.  I was shocked this morning to see that some of these fellows who were coming and using ‘kifuba’ to vote are the very same people who are celebrating, slaughtering cows, bulls and so on and so forth, is this not really using our hospitality to embarrass us?  

Finally, let me refer to Clause No. 6, it talks about the delegates of the Assembly of the Political Parties, similar bodies.  Now, I am not very sure whether the Minister or the Government has had consultation with these political parties.  I am not a member of NEC or any political party, but I would like to be told and the House should be told as to whether all the political parties are agreeable to use their national executive committee or equivalent to select their representatives, are we sure that some of them might not want to summon the annual delegate conference before they elect their two representatives to this august Assembly.  I with the Minister could clarify that so that we are in a position to know that we are passing a law which may not have come back and amend from time to time.  With those few words and complaints and expressions of concern, I beg to support the Minister’s Bill.

MR. ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, before I mention anything, let me congratulate you for having attained that role although some people say, he is not appointed but others who were there, you were appointed by a special authority, so you also get a special authority.  Election process is one of the most important things if we are going to have peace in this country.  If we make laws carelessly like this one, now back-dating the law, it is terrible, I am surprised to hear the Minister saying that they did not have enough time before they went for recess these regulations should have been there if the Minister was fore-sighted.  You cannot be up the meat to cook when there is another part of the meat.  You see, this is very vital; in fact, it is terrible to discuss anything when some elections have already taken place.  

Let me tell you that we suffered a defeat as NRC Members because had we had refused rubber-stamping and if we are going to continue with this Parliament, let us not allow any law, which comes from behind; let us make fresh laws and we move forward not backwards.  You see, it looks terrible, they laugh at us here and we are being threatened, they bring the laws which are already in the operation and make us rubber stamp it, this one we should not allow  - so, I appeal to the Minister next time when he brings regulations are first examined, why do you excuse women from paying 100,000/- are they poor?  These women are not poor, even a man in Teso is poorer than a woman.  In Teso women can make beer, but you cannot make anything now in Teso.  So, I was saying, let us encourage people to go forward because our women are coming forward, and I congratulate women who won men in this CA election.  (Interruption)

MRS. BYEKWASO LUBEGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the Members that, I want to suggest that these women be let free of the Shs. 100,000/- because when we talk about women’s emancipation, it is a process, a process which needs a lot to be covered and one of the areas where women are struggling hard is to see that they are economically empowered, we are not economically empowered yet -(Interjection)- okay, I could put a question the hon. Member is there saying that the husbands should come in and assist.  Now, how many of your wives would come to you for Shs. 100,000/- and you give it to her there and then? (Laughter)  It does not make a quorum at all.  So, these ladies as in fact we are still in a struggle, we are trying to attract women to this source of emancipation and if we start demanding - I do not know why we are trying to make money masters over us; we should be masters of money not money making us masters.

MR. ELYAU:  Although I accept my sister’s submission, but I think my sister is unfair.  Why did we allow women to contest with women and they paid you money, these would have been women whom we would excuse because they were fighting men.  But here is a case where women are fighting against themselves; why do you need money to be removed away? They should practice also.  So, I do not agree with that submission. (Interruption)

MRS. OKER:  Point of information.  First of all, I would like to congratulate you very much, Mr. Chairman, for having taken that Chair.  I think when we make a law here; we would go forward not reverse the decision.  It is very absurd to hear that the women who were standing on the women take ticket they had been excused not to pay Shs. 100,000/-, we made this law and I think those of us who stood on the county level fulfilled the Shs. 100,000/-. I do not see any reason this is a law; it must be a law and we must not be taken for a ride, we are trying to exercise our rights as human being and NRM has given us the opportunity that we must exercise our right.  I do not see a reason why these women now are being said they buying these women to support the NRM, we are making the Constitution for Uganda and not for any Government and, therefore, these must meet obligations like any other person.  One thing I can only support is that in case of any problem of transport to transfer the candidates to the meeting place, the can arrange with the returning officer after all they are very few, they can be taken.  So, I do not support this.  Thank you very much.

MR. ELYAU:  I think, Mr. Chairman, you can see the way is very clear for us to move forward.  So, I think time has come for us to make standard laws which are confirmative to everybody, you see this kind of making laws half way here and full way there makes problems to this country more and more.  If these laws were uniform, by now our voters would have known.

I am telling you how people behind are confused they do not know how these women are going to elect, something they are going to have pictures, they are going to cast votes so you can see this kind of thing should have been done in advance. 

You see, during the so called civic education people did not know what to do, until the churches had to come, when the churches came in that is when the people knew those who went for civic education made a mass some of them went and campaigned for some candidates so you see, government must be very careful time has come when we should teach our voters they must be very intelligent because they are the masters, where some votes were cheated some people were told to go and put number one, go and put number three because they did not know what to do, but if the women were told enough - we should really give more education to the voters, time has come so that next time when we are going for a general election our people will be very clever.  So, with these few remarks, I thank you for allowing me to contribute.

MR. AKURE (Jie County, Kotido):  Mr. Chairman, I have two or three things to make, one has always been a problem with Government.  When we are debating laws here they tell us first of all to do a lot of things then they bring these laws for implementation in the House or to be passed and I think Government must be very careful now, we do not want to be drafted each time the law is brought here implementation process has already taken place and you find all we do here is nothing but things which cannot help this nation.  Two, Mr. Chairman, during the day for polling a Commissioner made an announcement saying that every person who has registered as a voter must vote from where a ballot box gets him or her.  

For the case of Karamoja, I really complained, I wrote to the Commissioner explaining the position of these Karimojong nomads some of them are in Teso, they are in Lango, they are in Acholi, they are Sebei -(Laughter)- now out of the total number which registered in Karamoja three quarters of these people did not vote especially in my constituency, I had 21,225 registered voters of which only 13 people just because they were told you cannot vote from where by the box get unless you go to where you registered from and them tomorrow the Commissioner made announcement you see it contradicted the whole system, it becomes a very difficult problem for us to follow up these people of course the whole thing was left free like that and you find in some stations even when the announcement was made, these presiding officers whenever voters come to voter despite that the announcement was made they said, if you did not register here you go away.  

It was very unfair and I think the Commissioner might have heard some other intention over the issue of these elections what was the reason of announcing the thing before a day to the election?  For us we thought may be there was something wrong realising the entire situation in Karamoja.  The people who were in hon. Omara’s Constituency they never voted about 9,000 now these cards I think they might even have burnt them.  I think the Government must take steps so that the people are alerted in advance, if you allow people to vote as they come, it is very - at least two weeks in advance so that the information circulated to the people and they know how they can vote.  

Referring to that, in 1980, if I can remember there were forms to be filled by anybody whoever gets them or whenever, polling day gets him or her there are forms you could fill and then you are allowed to vote, even I raised it to the Commissioner, I wrote to him explaining the position in 1980 elections how they were being conducted but is seemed the man did not see it.  I think each citizen is given a right to vote; is that rigging them? I do not see the rigging at all, it means, therefore, some other people had intention of rigging elections which is not very good for our people.

I wish it were not very fair for our people.  Some of these things can be very dangerous for us.  It is so dangerous at times we may not believe democracy is prevailing.  If it is democracy, it must be there, and the people must be told how democracy is about.  Most of our people are illiterate, they do not know about this democratic system we are talking about.  And also, we found some of these presiding officers, a person may come say, I want Kafumbe, then instead of Kafumbe, he says, - ticks up the name.  You see; it was very unfair.  We observed we found this system was also a problem.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that some of the people who were rigged in my electoral area were the presiding officers, because they were showing voters the wrong pictures sometimes.  As an example, somebody pretended that he was illiterate, so he went to the presiding officer and after having gone to him, he asked for my picture to be shown, but instead the presiding officer showed the voter a person who he liked his picture and not mine.  

So, if you look at Rule 32, some of the people who we treat are NRM. You find we should not give bribes, but if we wanted to find out who was giving bribes, it is the Ministers more than anybody else.  So, it makes laws to be really a big shame, Mr. Chairman.  I thank you for this.

MR. AKURE:  Mr. Chairman, it was really a big problem because, even these presiding officers where a person has been presiding before during registration, you find tomorrow people are being changed, take Akure from point B, to point D.  Now, this is the man who does not know the environment of that place.  Just for purposes maybe of doing some other malice, we found this thing was so difficult.  And most people could not vote, they just went back, they said now, what is all this?

Finally, I would like to comment on Youth Election and what have you.  When the Minister was making a statement, and I think there are two Ministries here involved, one is for Women and Youth, and then one is Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs.   But I think we would have liked, if the Youth and Disabled could be brought together and we start the job together.  Now, there is one function, which is still left; the disabled are not represented.  And what time are these people going to come and join us -(Interruption)

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Point of information.  The disabled are not coming to the NRC; they are going to CA.  The five youth representatives who have come are for NRC, and there are four others for CA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. AKURE:  I thank you for the information.  I do not know the North group.  I thought the North group also is joining us.  If it is joining us, why could this thing not have been done at ago so that we avoid this problem of having people in bits and yet time is running away?  Thank you, Sir.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to support this instrument with some warning.  Many times, we are making the prospective laws.  There was an embarrassing one, where the Vice President had already stayed in office for one year, then we came here to endorse.  There was no way we could not have done it.  And not only that, ITEK was opened in 1987, and run on for a bit of time until 1989, when we legislated on it and made a retrospective art for that institution.  

I would like to avoid coming here for the third time because this is the second time, aware that CA Statute was enacted and revisited just last February when we extended viewing period in the registers.  And today, we are likely to have an oversight in Clause 8, where the Minister is requesting that all the delegates and all the other interest groups be brought in by April 20th.  And he has told us here now that the elections for these women will take place on the 25th of April.  And the delegates are likely to meet on the 3rd.  So, I think it is just proper that, either I delete or amend, when he comes up to wind this Motion.  So that good time is given which may not be another oversight.  

As was also observed by Doctor Byaruhanga, Clause 7 is fake.  The hon. Minister has already done some consultations and thereafter as if he has not done the ground work, he directs the Commissioner who again goes to those same institutions and then he comes back to take the actions that have been recommended.  To me, if he has already done the consultation, then there is no reason why the Commissioner should doubt him, as to go back to those institutions and then come back to issue the directives.  These are the areas that I would like the hon. Minister to take note of.  And not only that; many people have already talked about all the participating, all the intending, all the candidates who are already in the field now, to pay some fee - Shs. 100,000/- is not much.  

Aware that here is the hon. Minister if I may give as an example, traveling all the way from Kampala to her Constituency in Iganga, really comfortably and she wins there -(Interruption)- and even another one in Nebbi paid her due and she comfortably sails through.  So, I think while we are talking about these ones, we should not overlook the fact that we had already made a law.  And I think old age is also wisdom.  Hon. Obwangor made a very good observation when he said that the law once made, should not be abused by one person.

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, as the hon. Speaker holding the Floor say, this is the point that has been repeatedly made that this law in the Statutory Instruments as proposed by the Minister contravenes the provisions in the Statute.  But this is not so.  When you look in the regulations, in Rule 1, it says, those rules apply to the election of delegates referred to in paragraph A, sub-Section 2 of Section 4 of the Statute.  When you turn to the Statute, and you read Section 42(A), it says, ‘The Assembly shall consist of (A), such number of directly elected delegates as is equivalent to a number of electoral areas.’ 

In other words, these rules only apply to those that are directly elected.  What the Minister is saying in the Statutory Instruments is that for the election of these bodies specified, they will borrow some of the rules that govern directly elected delegates, but not all of them.  And one such Rule is Rule 9; they are making exceptions about payment of Shs. 100,000/- as a nomination fee.  This does not in anyway, in line with the provisions of the Statute; the two are separate and independent.  

Furthermore, now that I have the Floor, there was further information from a Member of the House that the Statute does not provide for - by elections for Members that may die.  I am afraid the Member was not very well appointed with provisions of the Statute because Section 28 of the Statute precisely provides for that it says, ‘in the event of the absence of a delegate, due to death, mental or physical incapacity or to any other cause, the Chairman, shall immediately upon the occurrence of that event, inform the Minister.’  

Secondly, on receipt of such information, the Minister shall issue a reach to the Commissioner, requiring the Commissioner to take steps within 14 days of the issuing of the reach, for the replacement of the delegate.  This proves for the replacement of the delegates that may die.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the information given.  Sometimes, when reference is made to people who are not - who are indirectly elected, over the past years some of us have been abused in the streets, that you were indirectly elected.  And yet people stood behind us indicating that this was direct election.  That is the people who wanted this type of election that has been taking place.  I would like also to note that there should be a provision in the Statute about the payment of Shs. 100,000/- for those people who may find that the ring is very hot and decide to run out, that day be refunded whatever money they paid.  I beg to move.

AN HON. MEMBER:  It will not be refunded.

MRS. MPANGA (Women Representative, Mubende):  Mr. Chairman, I stand to support this resolution.  I would like however to point out with Rule No. 3, that the women who have stood, have already found it difficult because the law was fake.  This is trying to clarify what was not clarified before.  It was difficult for them to identify exactly who is going to elect them, and when we excuse of the Shs. 100,000/- we should take into account the fact that are people on open ticket have very short distances to cover.  The Women are covering the whole district and are moving from parish to parish, so even county to county, and it makes it much more expensive and very difficult.  

And since the Electoral College is small, I am making a plea to the Minister that this time we should have any electoral role of people who belong to that Electoral College.  Because it is very easy to manipulate.  There are places where some of these Members who should belong to the college are not filled in.  Have we made sure that they are there or is somebody going to manipulate it at the very last minute to see?  And when you see that there is very little time between now and then, I would like to appeal through these presiding officers, there have been quite a number of malpractices, since a college is a few, we do not need so many returning officers.  I think it would be good if we could choose non-partisans to be the presiding officers.  

I want to emphasise that this exercise is an affirmative action.  And if we make an affirmative action, we should not make if half heartedly, let us make a bold say, these did not know they had to pay the Shs. 100,000/- before, it was not their fault that the law was not made clear at the beginning.  When you look at the Statute -(Interruption)

MR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the law was absolutely clear.  And I think the hon. Member whom I support in have you, should know that the Section which was sighted by the hon. Minister of Defence, was a did exempt to people who are indirectly elected, which includes women that are to be elected by college.  And, therefore, the only mistake that the Minister brought was actually to bring that issue in these Statutory regulations.  He should never have mentioned Shs. 100,000/- in this Statute.  Because the old statute had taken care of.  

So, really, I think Members should know that if they impose 100,000/- on women candidates today, they would be legislating respectively a matter, which they resent very much.  I think that point must be made clear.  The law did exempt women candidate because they are indirectly elected.  Section 2, Section 4; sub-section 2(a); the monetary regulations only relate to directly elected Members who are categorised in the Act.  And therefore, those who were arguing that we impose a monetary fee, women candidates are saying, we should now enact the law retrospectively which in principle we oppose as a House.  I thank you. (Applause)

MRS. MPANGA:  Thank you for the information.  When I say the law is not clear, I am saying it because we left the modality to be done much later.  They were not done at the same time as the CA Statute.  Therefore, since you support me that this is special category and should therefore have special attention, I would like to end by supporting the Minister that we pass this - not refund my money, I did not handle this ticket.  I am only saying, that the women, the 39 district representatives should be treated as a special category as they were meant to be.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Sam Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, I thank you for this opportunity.  I would like to thank all Members for supporting these regulations.  I want to emphasise that these are regulations that were empowered to be made by the Minister and they are not amendment of principle law.  The law was made in such a way that maybe some areas that require improving or administration changes or polishing up and invest some powers on the Minister make these regulations.  It is not an amendment I think it is a misuse of the word.  

I started by sincerely apologising introducing this law retrospectively.  But also gave the reason, the reason was that as a session was going on here, there was no quorum and the house was adjourned before I put the regulations before.  It was not my intention to bring them retrospectively.  

Dr. Byaruhanga raised a point of ballot papers and pictures.  I made it quite clear that we would not have pictures for the women, but the voting will be - in other words, the ballot paper with a name and then will tick the right person and vote using a single ballot paper.  But there will be no pictures.  The reason for this, we thought that at this level people are fairly literate.  And the numbers are not that many and we should not get into the expense of again producing pictures as we have done in the first election; the 100,000/-.  

This seems to bother many Members. But we seem to forget the philosophy of NRM as regards women, or gender issues generally, or what my friends keep on referring to as affirmative action.  The philosophy behind this exercise of bringing women is to promote the women, recognising their position and helping them to come up.  Government carefully considered this question and said that if we are to attract these resources, women power resources, we must facilitate them, and make it easier for them to come.  

Indeed, you may have noticed many of our female Members opted to stand against men to give more room to their friends the other ladies, and they can come up.  It was in light of that the government decided that we should not allow - we should not include a fee on these people whom we want to assist.  Now, another Member has already come up to suggest that we facilitate some women.  Women require facilitation.  This is a way of facilitating them; by exempting them from paying Shs. 100,000/-, we are helping them to come up.  It was a very carefully studied question.  But, that is why, in fact, originally in the main statute, we are not including the 100,000/- for the special groups.  I would like to clarify on that point, that the -(Interruption)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Order.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the Minister to mislead the House when in fact, when one Mr. Rwomushana walked on foot and for lack of money, being a man, he still walked and won; while another one, a woman who soar in a helicopter, she brought a helicopter to Mbarara.  So, not all women are so cheap and not all men are able to pay.

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  It is more of information than order.  Hon. Minister, proceed please.

MR. NJUBA:  I can see now that the candidates meeting have caused some confusion somewhere.  Mr. Chairman, it was in light of the desire of Government to attract as many participants as possible, that we did not include the 100,000/-.  Somebody has said it is a mistake for the Minister holding the Floor to have even raised it in the directives - in his regulation.  The point is, and it must be very clear, we want to be as fair as possible.  We wanted to emulate and these are the ladies really who want to emulate what was happening in the men’s’ elections, right.  

So, what we said, but so many things, Government had taken a decision like attracting them into the election without making too much demand on them.  That is why this 100,000/- is specifically excluded, because we had directed the Commissioner to follow as closely as possible the Statute Provision, but at the sametime, we did not want him to repeat to reproduce the 100,000/-. 

Now, as I said, hon. Obwangor misled the House by talking about amendment.  I am not amending anything.  You here, give me power to make these regulations for the smooth or proper running of this organisation.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of clarification.  This intent of Rule 9(b), is it in effect of the substantive law where you say, a man will - under Statute 6 of 1993, says, you will be imprisoned for five years and the money value is greater than Shs. 200,000/- which is put here.  So, that is why we are -I was trying to correct him.  That is where I am.  We were only given a subsidiary power to make a regulation.  In the 10th of the Section, where substantive law has no power to answer it, unless of course, you are making stupid laws which make corruption.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to use such language which is unbecoming to describe the laws that this House make as stupid?  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman?  

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order.  And you need to withdraw that.  Hon. Obwangor, could you withdraw that word from your statement please?

MR. OBWANGOR:  I am not a liar and as I can see in honesty, if we read Section 30 - I withdraw it. (Laughter)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Order.  Okay, hon. Minister, continue please.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, as you know, there is a term called -(Interruption)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, hon. Members.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, as you know there is a term called ‘passing off.’  Some people pass off as lawyers and then land into problems.  Mr. Chairman, my next point is, political parties.  Somebody argued that their political parties were left out.  What are we going to do?  Government examined this and said Government does not run political parties; that is the business, we do not organise political parties.  If they want to participate, they should organise themselves, we cannot ask the Commissioner to interfere in their elections.  

So, for the other bodies, if they have problem, they can come to the Minister.  The Minister can direct the Commissioner to assist them as a neutral person.  In fact, many of the problems we have run into and the complaints we have put across, have risen because the Government has deliberately left the Commissioner to act independently and that is what is decided.  That was desired, that was deliberate and I cannot answer for him; the only thing I can probably mention is the failure to display the register literally.  What I mean literally, I mean putting them on a Notice Board or apiece of wood in some place.  

But, as you heard, His Excellency the President, the other day saying he had informed the Commissioner that a man sat there with a register on a book on which you could go and check the name.  It is an omission, but I am sorry about that.  It was not satisfactory but some kind of display was done. The rest of the points being raised were actually for the Commissioner and I do not think they will assist our discussion at this point.  The question of 100,000/- has been already handled by my colleague here and I think nobody has seriously moved the Amendment on this one and I shall thank you for the support.  Thank you very much.

MR. TUMUBWEINE MANZI (Rukiga County, Kabale):  I rise before you to put the question to move an amendment on the resolution, Section 3, sub-Section (c), that women delegates to the CA should pay.  I want to move this amendment because on the main law, that the requirement for payment for Shs. 100,000/- should be applied to the ladies standing for the CA elections.  Mr. Chairman -(Interjection)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, any Amendment of this nature should have been circulated before, I do not know whether other Members have seen theirs.  This was circulated yesterday.  Is he in order to make such an Amendment?

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  I think since hon. Members, since there are conspicuous issues raised, it will only be fair that we did work with them and not to suppress them.  So, I would accept the hon. Member’s Amendment.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, in the main law, the regulations in Schedule 3, we are applying to the delegates to be elected under Section 4, sub-Section (ii), Section (a).  But at that time of the passing of the old Statute, the election of women and other interested parties, were not part of the groups to be under the Commissioner.  In the new regulations, we are now moving the women elections from where they were to now under the auspices of the Commissioner and that, therefore, means that we must move them together with the old law, and therefore they should be handled under the same law as the other delegates were elected.  Otherwise, if we did not want that, we would have let the women election under the Ministry of Women in Development and therefore, they would not have been part of this law.  

Therefore, I wish to move that if we have now removed from the other Section B and C of sub-section 4, of the Statute, we now move them to Section A and, therefore, we should be affected by the regulations in Schedule 3, of the main statute.  I beg to move, therefore, Mr. Chairman that they be required to pay the deposit of 100,000/-.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SENGOBA:  Point of order.  Is it in order to move an Amendment to regulations and that Amendment has an effect of amending the main law; because if this Amendment is passed, it would mean, that the Statute has been amended.  And my question is that, is it in order to move an Amendment or a regulation that will have the effect of amending a main law when the Amendment is not moved on the main law?  

MR. TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, before you are ruling, I beg the Chair through you to the Members here, that actually the revolution is the one amending the Statute, because if this resolution, the fact that is now creating a situation where women elections are now under the old Statute, when they had been left out, itself is an Amendment to the Statute.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, before you go, is it in order, Sir, that a resolution should be proposed to amend a substantive law that normally should be amended by a Bill passed through this Parliament?  Is it in order for the Mover to propose such and you give a Procedure?

MR. DAMIANO LUBEGA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to clarify you and the House to Section 30 of the Statute, which gives power to the Minister to amend regulations by Statutory instruments, and I could - avoidance of any doubt, I better use this one, Section 31 reads, I quote, ‘For the better carrying out of the provisions of this Statute the Minister may by Statutory Instrument with the approval of the National Resistance Council signify that resolution amends the Third Schedule and make regulations in respect of any matter which may be regulated under this Statute.’  In fact, what the Minister is doing is following Section 30.  In fact that Minister is right.  To amend regulation is not making any Amendment on the principle law.  That is my observation, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Moving of the Amendment as now before this House by hon. Manzi is in order. (Applause)

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, with that seriousness, I do oppose the Amendment.  The reason is that the effect of that Amendment is to amend the substantive law, and what I am doing as he Minister, is to introduce regulations for the better carrying out of these elections.  That is all.  So, the Mover is arguing that since we have everything under a Commissioner, we should also include the fee of Shs. 100,000/-.  It is not true.  We have not put everything under the Commissioner.  Their election is not like the 240 delegates, and this is a special election.  But they are asking the machinery that was available to be used.  For example, we have only 60,000 electoral colleges; and it is not a general election.  

So, it is misleading for him to be too hard on women and to let it out in the main Statute, all I am doing here is to make sure that I allow the policy of government, use the established machinery, that is the Commissioner to ensure that it is fair - it is well run.  It is also misleading to say that we - because we have put everything under the Commissioner, these two should apply.  We have not.  For example, there will be only electoral colleges who do not do voting and it is not everybody.  So, I oppose the Amendment.

MR. AGARD DIDI (West Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Through you, I would like to appeal to the House to oppose this Amendment, for the simple reason, that when we were dealing with specified categories, like the case with the Army, like the Presidential appointment, like the disabled, we should not talk about the same Rules which govern the elections we have just gone through.  So, as it is the case with those specialised categories like the army and so on, we are not going to demand that) they should come under the Commissioner - because already the laws provide for coordination between those specified bodies and the Commission through the Minister’s Office.  Therefore, I think the question of equating that women can pay plus the fact that they should be considered among the specialised category should not be mixed up.  So, I beg Members to oppose this amendment when it comes.  Thank you. (Applause)

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the proposed amendment.  (Applause)  I wish to refer the Minister to his own regulations - section 9 of the regulations.  Regulation 9 which reads: ‘the nomination of every candidate shall not be complete or valid unless at the time of such nomination.’  Sub-Section b)‘The candidate pays in cash or bank draft.’  Now that the Minister has permitted the nomination of the women candidates, that special treatment has been waived.  

Now, there is nomination, because if that were the case, there would not be all these candidates’ meetings we are having.  There should have been an exclusive club for  - like the army.  I do not think there will be time when we will hear that at the army is busy nominating who should stand for what or the disabled are standing.  

We have nomination and the Commissioner for Constituent Assembly is handling it, and it is put in our law.  I think it is only just fair that the Minister can accept the mistake - if the mistake was done.  In fact they also contribute that 100,000 - that is being fair.

MRS RHODA KALEMA:  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  First of all I was giving information to the previous speaker that actually the women have already been nominated.  The nomination has already taken place.  So, there was no need to go back to it.  Besides, if I may just add on to a subject that has been exhausted - it is very irrational to ask someone to pay if it was your mistake, to put back the payment that you yourself made a mistake not to ask.  So, although I paid the 100,000/-, I am not at all angered by the fact that the women who have been nominated last month that they should pay.  They should not pay and I support the Minister on this matter. 

If I may say something more about the payment. The categories I would like - unless it is out of order to continue with some other sections - the other categories, which I would like to pay is the category of the political parties; because if the political parties - the reason why I feel the political parties should be made to pay, the political parties should be able to raise 200,000 for each delegate.  If the Minister decides to make this regulation, I am in support for that.  At the same time, even the National Youth Council should be able to pay for their delegates because it is only 200,000/- for a whole Council.  The Army and NOTU particularly.  NOTU cannot say - they cannot afford 200,000/- to pay for their Members.  That is all I have to say, Mr. Chairman.

CAPT. BABU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I oppose the Amendment and I oppose it on a very simple basis.  It is that, this very House has been recognised in the whole country of big gender sensitised.  That is one point -(Interruption)- we passed this law ourselves and we gave the ladies in our democratisation process a special platform and that special platform was agreed by all of us - that we must give them a chance so that they can catch up with the so many years that we have overtaken them.  This is an agreement that we agreed here and I think it is just fair that when we reach this particular crisis, we must think twice.  

Whilst you can talk about my sisters who are in Kampala here and in Jinja, who are in towns where money is made, I would like you to talk about the other 36 districts where our sisters; our mothers who might want to stand might not be able to afford 100,000/-.  

I want us to take the principle very seriously that most of you might be coming from those districts, I am talking about and it is, therefore, very important here that we go back and trace our steps - that we agreed in this democratisation process to give the women a special place and if that is so and we have now checked the law and technicians have told us that it is clear, I would like to request very strongly that this Amendment is opposed very strongly.  

We should give the ladies a chance -(Interruption)- especially upcountry - the rural woman, to participate.  You have a tendency to think that all women have money; but our women in the countryside do not and some of them have very good material.  Some of them are very good material, and we must support them; and for that reason, I would like to oppose this Amendment in principle.

MR. TURYAHABWA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise to oppose the Amendment, which was proposed by hon. Manzi Tumubweine. I would like to emphasise the fact that we are considering women in this category at a different level from the women who have stood with men in the electoral areas.  The women under this category were proposed that every district should sent in a woman, just because we wanted them to be many in the CA and to encourage women to participation in decision-making.  I also want to add that the rural women are real poor.  We have this during our election exercise where we saw most of them needing help from the candidates.  So, I wish to support the Minister in refusing this Amendment.

DR. KYAMBADDE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Although we are aware that there are some women who are better off economically than men, those are just a few.  The majority of women are poor.  So, I am of the view that these women should be given a chance to participate in the CA without paying the 100,000/-.  So, I suggest that the Minister’s resolution be passed.  Thank you.

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  We now vote on the proposed Amendment.  Please make your seats hon. Members.  With those in favour of hon. Manzi’s Amendment say ‘aye’ and to the Contrary ‘nay’.

(Question put and negatived).

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question on the Motion.  Will those in favour of the Motion say ‘aye’ and to the contrary ‘nay’?

(Question put and agreed to)

(The Council rose at 5:15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13th 1994, at 2.30 p.m.).




