Tuesday, 16 April 2002

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.
.
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you may have noted that the Order Paper for today is presented as being for the Leadership Code, although we have been for the last one week handling the Rules of Procedure.  I would like to apologize to the Members of the House, and to the Committee on Rules, that we have been forced to bring forward the Leadership Code because it has been outstanding for sometime, and many of the players are going to be out of their offices next week.  So, I would like us to handle the Leadership Code today and tomorrow, and then revert to the Rules of Procedure. 

The second matter of communication is to do with the work of the sessional committees.  On 26 March 2002 the Minister of Finance, fulfilling the Budget Act 2001, laid before this House the Micro-economic Plan and Indicative Budget framework for the financial year 2002/ 2003 and 2004/2005.  Under Section 7 of the Budget Act, the Speaker committed indicative allocations to the Budget Committee and to the Sessional Committees of Parliament. 

I wish to bring to the attention of this House the requirements of Section 7 of the Budget Act, which provides, “each sessional committee shall consider, discuss and review the indicative allocations committed to it, and submit its report to the Budget Committee of Parliament not later than the 25th day of April.”  That is to say, your deadline expires next week.  As you are aware, the Budget Act is an innovation of this House which provides for and regulates the budget procedure among other things.  


It is, therefore, necessary that Parliament be seen to set a good example by us meeting our time frames on the indicative framework.  I call upon the Chairpersons of the Sessional Committees to start work on the budget immediately, and make it possible to ensure that they meet the time frame indicated above.  

To allow Members to participate in the budget consideration, I would like to suggest that Standing Committees suspend their activities until the end of this exercise.  I have already indicated to you that we have agreed to bring forward the Leadership Code.  So, honourable members, please observe the Budget Act. It is our baby!   Thank you.

MR NASANI NABETA: Madam Speaker, I would like to use Rule 42 to move a motion of great importance concerning the disaster of the fire in Jinja Central Market.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any supporters of your motion?

MRS TUMA: Seconded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am satisfied that there is a matter of urgent public importance moved under Rule 42.  So let me appoint 5 o’clock for discussion of that matter for 30 minutes.

MR KIDEGA: Thank you so much, Madam speaker. I beg your indulgence on a small matter, which pertains to my constituency.  It is also a matter of public concern. 

Madam Speaker, you remember for the past two weeks I have been raising a matter of elections of the interest groups to the local council; but I realized that the Minister in charge of the same was out of the country.  But I am now privileged that the Minister is around, and I have consulted with her and she is quite ready to give a position to this House.  

This matter is very serious to the extent that the people I represent outside there are very disturbed, they think there is a sinister mission to suffocate their representation in the local councils, coupled with the fact that on Thursday, LCV Chairpersons are going to be sworn in.  I wonder the legality of the one-man governments, which are going to be established at the district level!  So, it is my humble request that you allow the Minister to update us on that matter.  I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I do recollect that I had indicated that the Minister for Justice should answer that question today.  Is the Minister of Gender going to answer it?  Can you update us on the elections of the constituencies for hon. Kidega?

The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to correct the honourable member that I have not always been out of this country. I also want this to go on record that we have been discussing the issues of the elections of these interest and special groups. I believe that the bills especially the one for the women is already with the committee. I think there was something which we needed to build a consensus on, on the one of the youth elections, and I think very soon, it will also come here.  There was a financial implication which has already been cleared by the Ministry of Finance, and I cross-checked that this morning with the youth council.  So, I do not think that impression is correct and I think the elections will soon be held.  Thank you.

MR KIDEGA: Madam Speaker, you remember so well under your chairpersonship, the question was addressed to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and indeed, I had discussions with her.  I did not mean the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  I referred to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs who I thought has the mandate to deal with elections, and that is why I said that she was in and out of the country.  Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I was expecting too.

THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Okot Ogong): Madam Speaker, this Morning I consulted with the Speaker and the Clerk of Parliament and I was informed that there is an urgent matter to be discussed in the House, in that respect the Leadership Code of Conduct. And I was informed that that matter is not going to be raised today; it will be raised on Thursday.  Otherwise, the Minister is actually very ready to respond to hon. Kidega.  I would appeal that as the matter is not on the Order Paper, it is not a mistake of the Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Minister, in future you should also liase with the person asking the question so that he knows what is being done.  So hon. Kidega, the question will be answered on Thursday without fail.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LEADERSHIP CODE BILL, 2001

MS MUGERWA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, on the last day we had the session here, we were promised a statement from the Minister of Works about the railway accident.  But it is unfortunate that it is not appearing on the agenda.  I am wondering what happened!  

I would also like to remind you that in November last year, the Prime Minister promised a statement from the same ministry talking about the railway accident that had taken place that week.  But unfortunately, although he had given us two weeks, we did not get anything until when they were replaced by the tragic accident last week. I am wondering whether the Prime Minister is still promising or should we get the statement from the Minister of Works?  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now that the Minister of State did indicate that the Minister would this week brief the House, but I do not think he indicated what day he would brief the House. (Mr Nasasira rose_). Hon. Nasasira, concerning the train accident?

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): Madam Speaker, my colleague made basic clarifications on the accident, and the URC also issued the press release which was in the newspapers and on FM radios. My colleague also promised that if there was need that honourable members needed more clarification than the information they have received on that accident, which had no fatalities except what happened, then we will go ahead and issue the statement. If the Members so wish to have another statement, I am prepared to come and issue it tomorrow or Thursday; one of my colleagues will issue it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thursday.

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Madam speaker.  I wanted also to make it clear that I have never and I will never promise air! And whenever I make a promise there is a sector minister who is supposed to take the necessary action. And wherever I have made a pledge, I have honoured it.  It is an ethical and a professional position.  I thank you.

MS MUGERWA:  Madam Speaker, I have the record for 21 November when the Prime Minister made a statement -(Interruption)   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will bring that up on Thursday, because it is about accidents.  Is it not?  Bring that up on Thursday when the Minister of Works brings out the matter of the accidents.

MR NASASIRA:  Madam Speaker, while I answered to the recent accident, I did not catch in detail the second issue that was raised, where the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was mentioned.  Was this one on train accidents or road safety generally? Maybe I could get a clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, hon. Namagwa Mugerwa, what is it you wanted the Prime Minister –(Ms Mugerwa rose_)

MS MUGERWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am glad that the Minister is coming up with more clarity in fact.  We are looking for a common good for this country.  Yes, I am looking for a common good, I do not know whether it was an accident caused by mismanagement by the URC or by the Ministry of Works or by the public. But we are looking for a common good to reduce deaths on our roads.  The Minister should tell us what he has done to prevent further accidents at that station.  That is what I am looking forward to see.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that in November last year the Prime Minister promised a statement in relation to accidents at that junction? 

MS MUGERWA:  Madam Speaker, this is a very short note, let me read it for you.  “Thank you, Mr speaker. As I have always said time and again, I am always disaster-prepared.  The point must be stressed that every ministry must be represented here. But as a person who taught for 30 years, I know people have different capacities to perform. But of course the Minister of works is one of my best performing ministers, and he is naturally in the field.  So, he must have been let down by his subordinates. That matter will be addressed. And I have no hesitation in asking hon. Tim Lwanga to take charge of that matter by drawing it to the attention of the ministry, so that an appropriate reply may be availed to the person who has posed the question within two weeks from today.   I thank you”. 

Madam Speaker, it was me who posed the question, because I had been inconvenienced on my way and the whole public had been inconvenienced. That week we had had two accidents, that is why I posed the question on how we could reduce accidents at that particular spot. But unfortunately, even today we lost somebody in an accident at the same spot. That is why I am very concerned and it is the route to my home.      

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, was that a written question or an oral question raised on the Floor of the House?

MS MUGERWA: It was in the House, that week we had had two train accidents at the same spot. And the Prime Minister had promised to see that maybe we get a stop sign and a big notice warning people that there is a railway crossing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister, I think you could get the Hansard for that week and respond to it on Thursday as well.  Can you answer on Thursday, Tuesday next week for both, including the general statement?  So, next Tuesday, and this is recorded. (Laughter).  So, hon. Namagwa, it will be answered next Tuesday together with the bigger statement on the accidents.

THE MINISTER OF ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Leadership Code Bill, 2001” be read the second time.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is it seconded?  Seconded, proceed.

MRS MATEMBE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I first wish to thank you for the interest you have shown in the issues of ethics and integrity.  The enthusiasm and urgency with which you passed the Inspector General of Government Statute and the speed with which you have handled the Leadership Code, clearly demonstrates your commitment to play your role of oversight on Government very effectively a fact that must be highly commended by both Government and your electorate.  

I am saying this because it took me three years ever since I got my job to manage to get through the Parliament, the IGG Statute and the Leadership Code and I did not.  It is hardly a year now that this House is in existence, the 7th Parliament, that we have already dealt with the IGG Statute and now we are dealing with the Leadership Code.  I must therefore thank you.  

We in Government having realised that the weak legal framework is one of the major constraints in the fight against corruption, now believe that the Leadership Code when passed could be an effective instrument towards the strengthening of the legal framework, and we therefore, highly recommend it to you for passing.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, a Leadership Code was enacted in 1992 with a purpose of ensuring a minimum standard of behaviour and conduct of leaders, and this was in response to the popular demand of the public to have an accountable and transparent leadership that would ensure that there is improved delivery of services.  This popular demand still pertains up to now.  

Hon. Members, you will observe that 1992 was before the current Constitution was promulgated.  Therefore when the Constitution was promulgated in 1995, the issues of accountability and transparency were considered so highly that the whole Chapter 14 of the Constitution was dedicated to the Leadership Code. That being the case, therefore, there was a need to operationalise Chapter 14 of the Constitution, hence the bringing of this Code before you today.  

Secondly, in 1997, the Local Governments Act, which restructured the management of Government, brought in other features that needed to be addressed within the Leadership Code, hence the second reason for bringing this Code here.

The third and important reason was that, in trying to enforce the Leadership Code, the IGG found that it had inherent weaknesses that prevented it from being effectively enforced. And when I took office in the co-ordination of the Inter-agency Forum, which is constituted by anti-Corruption agencies, we thought it was very important to review the Leadership Code against these three reasons.

In fact, by the time I took the office, the IGG had already brought some amendments to the Leadership Code but I think it elapsed when the session of Parliament lapsed. We formed the Inter-Agency Committee, which consulted some people and reviewed the Leadership Code, hence bringing this Code to you. Some hon. Members would say, “Why not amend the old one?” We have found that the provisions to strengthen the Leadership Code to bring it into conformity with the Constitution and other relevant laws are so substantial that it needed to be repealed. So, I am coming to you hon. Members with this new Leadership Code in which I am seeking to repeal the old one.

The objectives of this Leadership Code are as follows:

1. To bring the Code into conformity with Chapter 14 of the Constitution and Local Governments Act of 1997 and other related laws.

2.To require public leaders to act with honesty and integrity in upholding the highest standards of ethical conduct so as to revive confidence and trust in the Government.  

3. To provide a minimum standard of conduct by which public leaders must be governed.

4. To minimise the possibility of conflicts arising between private interests of leaders and their public duties, and to provide for solutions to such conflict.

5. To provide for accountability of leaders by providing clear and enforceable mechanisms for ensuring compliance with its measures.

6. To provide for the establishment of an integrity system in Uganda.

In this era, where the password is good governance, accountability and transparency, we in this country must have this Bill passed as an instrument to promote these virtues that are now internationally upheld. I therefore, urge you hon. Members to support this bill as enthusiastically as you did the IGG’s Statute. That will take us one more step towards fighting corruption, which is a terrible weevil and is about to undermine our existence. I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Leadership Code Bill, 2001.  The Committee scrutinised the Leadership Code in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of this House.  The existing Leadership Code Statute, which was enacted in 1992, was never enforced because the Leadership Code Committee, which was supposed to enforce it, was never constituted. Article 234 of the 1995 Constitution gave the Inspectorate of Government the responsibility to enforce the Code.  

This bill will bring the Leadership Code of 1992 into conformity with the 1995 Constitution, the Local Governments Act of 1997 and other relevant laws.  

The Committee discussed the bill with a number of people including: 

• The Minister of Ethics and Integrity; 
• The Inspectorate of Government; 
• The First Parliamentary Counsel;
• Civil Society Organisations; and 
• The Teso Anti-Corruption Coalition. 

The Committee also received memoranda from young leaders who carried out debates in primary schools and secondary schools and the Anti-Corruption Coalition of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the Bill seeks to provide for a minimum standard of behaviour and conduct of leaders; to require leaders to declare their incomes, assets and liabilities; to put in place an effective enforcement mechanism and to provide for other related matters.  

Madam Speaker, the bill provides for sanctions against leaders who fail to comply with given provisions. It criminalises failure to submit correct information. The Committee proposes that a breach of the Code should attract the general sanctions and where a criminal offence is committed, the existing laws such as the Penal Code and the Prevention of Corruption Act should apply.  

The bill provides for a new category of leaders required to make declarations. The Leadership Code of 1992 left out a number of key leaders who handle large sums of public funds and make decisions in government. The Local Governments Act of 1997 also created a new category of leaders who are included in this Bill. 

Part III of the bill refers to conflict of interest which covers other forms of conduct that may not necessarily be conflict of interest. The Code is about conduct and behaviour of leaders, which takes different forMS The Committee, therefore, proposes that this should be re-named “prohibited conduct”. 

There is a mix up in the subsections on penalties. In some parts there is no provision for breaches. It is proposed that this should be consolidated in section 37.  

The bill proposes that a leader who accepts property or gifts, which are likely to influence his decisions, should be punished. The Committee proposed that a leader who on the other hand gives the same gifts to other people seeking to influence those people’s decisions, should also be punished. In light of the above, Madam Speaker, the Committee recommends the following.

The breaches in the bill should not be criminalized. Sanctions should instead replace penalties for breaches committed.

A standard declaration form should be included, as the fourth schedule to the bill, or to the Act when it is eventually passed.

At an appropriate time, I will move amendments proposed by the Committee to the bill. Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts this report. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Leadership Code Bill be read for a second time. You are free to debate it.

MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Committee that has prepared this report. I also thank the minister who has taken trouble to bring this bill before us.

I do support this motion, and it is my prayer that the hon. members support the bill. I however have a few observations and one is about clause 4(2). We all know that this bill is aimed at fighting corruption and we all believe this. But I feel that it should not deal with leaders like Members of Parliament only. This is because I personally feel that Members of Parliament do not handle, or are not accountable, for any public funds. 

It should also deal with accounting officers, for instance the CAOs, the finance officers, the accountants and also the sub-county chiefs. And I feel that this should also be very clear in this bill. Further to this, I am glad that clause 4(4) is to be deleted in the proposal of the Committee.

Secondly, I am also concerned about clause 7 where declarations shall be treated as public information. In my opinion, the information provided by leaders to the IGG should be confidential and not for general consumption. It should only be released under certain circumstances, for instance in court, on fraud, or on charges to the specific officers.

Thirdly, what if I have no reasonable things to declare, will my people not lose confidence in me? That is my fear, because I do not think our people would like to be led by those who have no wealth anyway.

Fourth, I wonder how ready the Government is to fight corruption. Has it got the capacity to use this law to fight corruption?

And finally, is there capacity for the implementation of this bill? For I wonder if it will not fail, like the land law!  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. The Committee, I thank you very much for the report. I have only one observation to make.

Clause 4(7), on declarations, reads that: “where a declaration is made by a leader in respect of himself or herself or any other person under this section, where the leader or person is found to be in possession of assets and income disproportionate to the known source of income which he or she cannot satisfactorily account for, the leader shall be taken to have breached this Code.”

I have a problem with this. One, there are some leaders, or there could be some leaders, who will by virtue of their positions acquire certain wealth and take it outside this country. Does this bill have the power to find the assets those people have put outside this country?

Number two; if the leader is found or known to have taken anything out of the country and back, let us say to Geneva, how shall we enforce this? How shall we make that leader declare whatever he has put outside this country?

Then on scrutiny, the bill talks only of the leader who cannot give a satisfactory account. But if you look at the whole of this bill, even spouses who are not leaders are supposed to declare. The question is, are we also going to punish spouses whose declarations will be discovered to be disproportionate to their incomes, when they are not leaders? Does the bill cover that? In other words, if all these things cannot be covered, then this bill may just become a showpiece. It will not be effectively implemented. 

I picked the budget projections from the Program Directorate of the Leadership Code and the costs are there. I however do not know whether these figures are in thousands or millions. We are not given the exact denominations in which we should treat these figures. May I know whether for example staff salaries, which is estimated to be Shs 70,089, is millions of shillings or billions of shillings? These figures are not very clear, for our purposes. 

Even then, what is the budgetary situation in place? Is the Ministry of Finance satisfied that when we come to the budget next financial year, we are going to have a separate vote for the implementation of this law? The fact of the matter is, Madam Speaker, we will always get budget cuts.  Given that this bill affects most leaders, are we going to be honest and maintain our integrity? Is Government going to make sure that despite all that will happen, despite the shortfalls in budget revenue realizations, this law will be implemented?  Shall we not use these shortfalls as means of ensuring that we do not frustrate it?  I thank you.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would have loved to support this bill, but there are issues that need to be clarified first. Until they are, I will be reluctant to support it. I am however sure that the Minister has the capacity to clarify on them.

Under the circumstances where someone like me has perhaps nothing to declare, where do you put me? (Laughter).  That is the first query.

The second query, I was a little bit disappointed by what has been mentioned on page 2, namely, the bill proposes that a leader who accepts property or gifts likely to influence his decisions should be punished.  Madam Speaker, this is a traditional society with far reaching cultural values penetrative in nature.  A person may extend a gift to a reigning relative to encourage him perform well.  If you are going to scare him, that whenever you receive a gift of that kind you are in trouble, I do not know where we are going to end.

Apart from the Members of Parliament, the bill mentions the CAOs, et cetera, among the people who are supposed to declare their properties, how much has the ministry gone in ensuring that those people know what is expected of them?  I am quite sure that the Members of Parliament know, but what about the other sectors?  

Madam Speaker, I also need to know from the Minister whether what has been reported in the papers is correct.  There are allegations that this bill is being speedily passed because the donors are threatening not to give us money until it is passed; is that correct?  I am asking on behalf of the people I represent in Lubaga South.

Madam Speaker, why have people tended to be reluctant to declare their properties; I think this is the crux of the matter?  If the Minister has no capacity to answer that question, she should just wind up the bill and we dismiss it.  There has been reported reluctance for people to declare their wealth.  I want to propose the following reasons, if the Minister can query them off, I will be very happy and I will mobilize all the backbenchers around me so that we support her.

One of the reasons why we are reluctant to declare our properties is that, before that bill works, we should set some good example.  The number of ministers in Government who should not be where they are, many of them have been forced to resign on accusations of corruption; they have been re-appointed as if they are born again.  These are the same people who have been giving us trouble in the past.  When you reappoint them, do they become angels overnight?  We need some explanation, and if the whole Minister cannot explain to us why those people are still serving in Government, then what are we up to?  These people should pack up and go, and this is not a joke. Madam Speaker, I came to seriously address this matter.

The Minister knows the bad elements and she cannot release them.  You release them to us so that we take action, then we will be encouraged to declare our wealth. -(Mr Lwanga rose_)

MR LWANGA:  Madam Deputy Speaker, is the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi in order to stand in this august House and accuse the front bench of being full of people who should not be on the frontbench; people who are thieves, when in actual fact he himself has never declared his assets?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think he did not say that all Members of the frontbench are thieves – he said some, but he did not name any person.  But I would not expect hon. Lukyamuzi to intimidate the Minister of Ethics that unless she does a, b, c, you will not do a, b, c.  You cannot intimidate the Minister here; I will not allow it.  Just make a contribution for or against the bill, but do not intimidate the Minister.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker and thank you for your wise ruling – it was very encouraging to the contributor.

Madam Speaker, I want to propose that there is need for us to open political space in order to enable alternative sectors check on the excesses of Government.  The wider in space we are, the more avenues we get to check on the excesses of Government.  For example, Madam Speaker, if we want this Code to work effectively, we need an official position in this Parliament. Suppose the President of Uganda, His Excellency, Kaguta Museveni, my great friend, at any one time is found to be failing this Code, the likes of Ken Lukyamuzi could move a vote of no confidence on him, and we effectively take action without bothering to take any other alternative measures and the man can go.  I would like a law which we can enforce – we are fed up with laws which we pass in writing, in theory and practically there are no avenues of effecting them with results.  

So, I would like to urge everybody in this country to support the view that political space be opened, so that political party organizations effectively participate in Government, and hence provide greater avenues of dealing with bad elements, especially, the thieves.

Finally, I am a little bit perturbed, Madam Speaker, with reference to Article 27(2) of the Constitution of Uganda, and I would like to read it verbatim: –
“No person shall be subjected to interference with the privacy of that person’s home, correspondence, communication or other property”. 

 If Ken Lukyamuzi, the man, for fear of circumstances reigning at present, I do not declare in self defence because of elements which could cause jeopardy to my family and myself, and I am not accused for having committed any offence under a given law, why should anybody see me as a criminal?  So, this is a big challenge – the Minister should explain to us that in the circumstances where I heed to that provision of the Constitution which I have ably articulated; if I refused vehemently to make any declaration and I have nobody accusing me of having stolen anything, and of course I have never stolen anything, where do you take me?  Thank you very much.

MR TOM BAGALANA (Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Chairman of the Committee and Members for this good report.  I am one of those people who register interest in the Leadership Code, and I think all Ugandans should appreciate the fact that where financial management fails, the country goes nowhere.  So, financial management comes, especially, when we can have a check on the corrupt officials and this is the only channel.  I think we have to have a check on corrupt officials.

But before I go ahead, I need to request the House that the standard of declaration of assets and liabilities should not be based on leadership only.  We have very many people in the country, especially in Kampala, who are getting rich overnight and you wonder where they got their wealth.  Parliament should think about this issue. In many instances, the leaders will declare one car and a coat when he has billions of money hiding with a certain tycoon. 

We need to know how these people are accumulating this wealth. It should not only be leaders, even certain sections of society should declare their wealth. You will see just a poor Bagalana here with one plot of land and I declare it, when somebody is siphoning money in Government and he is just a private individual. The yardstick should go far beyond just leaders.  

The report concentrates on declaration of assets and liabilities, but I think the moral fabric of society is not only financial management, but also social responsibility. 

To this effect, I would propose a situation as in the standing regulations in Public Service in the 60s; when you were not married, you would not access a certain position in Government. This issue, I think, is very important.  

Some people who have not ceremonised their marriages should not access certain responsibilities in Government – (An hon. Member rose) – I will give you some time after I have clarified properly. 

I say this because we have very many of our girls in Makerere University who are on the streets, prostitutes, and many of them – (Interruption)

MR KIDEGA: Madam Speaker, I am very disturbed by the statement of my honourable colleague. He is stating clearly that, people who by choice have decided not to have wives or husbands should not take on offices. I am very sure that interviews or even the services rendered by any individual are not pegged on whether they are married or not. Is the hon. Member in order to deprive us of jobs because we do not have wives and husbands?  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the nomination forms do not require marriage as criteria for nomination.  So, you are out of order.

MR BAGALANA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will not reiterate your ruling, but we are developing a law, and I think this can go a long way, even on the nomination forms, if we are to develop this country.  

I was saying that many of our girls are on the streets, they are in Makerere University, they are the ones getting masters, they are the ones going to be deputy speakers but with a rotten moral background.  So, you can imagine – (Interruption)

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I regret to interrupt hon. Tom Bagalana, but this Parliament should be fair to everybody, those who have audience here and those who do not have audience. 

Is hon. Tom Bagalana in order to use this forum, this august assembly, to declare that Makerere University female students are prostitutes, and they are on the streets? Can he substantiate this statement. If he cannot, I would propose that he has the decency to withdraw his statement.

I appeal to you, Madam Speaker, to decide whether it is in order to speak about people who have no audience here, and to malign them generally and to say that they are engaging in immoral conduct and they are prostitutes. Is hon. Tom Bagalana in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bagalana, it is practice here that you do not make such serious allegations about people who are not able to defend themselves in this House. Can you substantiate how many Makerere University girls are prostitutes. If you cannot, please withdraw.

MR BAGALANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In society when you have a wound and you hide it, it never heals; you never get somebody to prescribe the medicine. But for the interest of the House, I withdraw the statement.  

I would like to go further to say that the Leadership Code should also take interest in the aspects of utterances and speeches. Although I have erred in my speeches, I think in many cases the country has been troubled because of irresponsible utterances. Such leaders who make serious statements in a very careless way should be taken to book.  

The other aspect about this leadership code is that we have just a paper or two pages. This is a law in which the country is going morally ahead and where we should have a very big act. To this respect, I would say that this report is inadequate for this august House to discuss. 

We could have an extension or a contribution to this report by the whole country as the Constitutional Commission moves around to try to suggest how the leadership code of conduct of leaders and other people in society should be.  But having a small piece of paper as a leadership code, just entailing on liabilities, would not really amount into a leadership code.

To this effect, I suggest that if possible, professional ethics of certain professions should be developed by Parliament and enshrined in the Leadership Code. These should be followed as law; if breached, it could be taken as breach of the law.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is on clause 26 of the bill. It talks about protection of informers. How sure are we that these informers will be giving correct information that is not prejudiced or malicious?  

Secondly, I look at the Leadership Code Bill as just one of the many ways we can fight corruption.   I appeal to members to pass this bill, but most importantly, I appeal to Government and to the Director of Ethics and Integrity to mostly look at the proactive measures to fight corruption. 

When we had the de-centralisation policy, corruption was also decentralised. Members can agree with me that as we talk of Parliament here, as we put more emphasis on MPs, the districts are rotten as far as corruption is concerned. There is need to put more emphasis or the same emphasis on the districts. We can concentrate on the central government when the moral fibre is decaying down there.

Thirdly, Parliament can be motivated to fight corruption by implementing what is passed by Parliament. There are so many commissions of inquiry that we have put in place but their reports are never seen. It is many years since a commission of inquiry was put in place to investigate the loss of US$68 million of the Luwero Triangle Rehabilitation Fund. To date that report has never been made public. 

I believe another aspect is to look at the causes. As we combat corruption, let us look at the causes. Why do we have corruption? One of them is a very weak procurement system. Ninety per cent of the cases of corruption that we register are procurement-related cases. So, there is need to have a very strong and effective procurement system.

Another one, Madam Speaker, would be voluntary compliance.  We would not even be discussing this here if Members would just comply voluntarily. 

As we talk of sex education in secondary schools, there is need to have this element of ethics at secondary level such that we create a strong civil society that can be able to detect and corrode these very unorthodox practices. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to end here, but I thank the hon. Minister for Ethics and Integrity for her unquestionable commitment to fight corruption. And I call upon Members to support this bill.  I thank you.

MS NANSUBUGA NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the Bill and my worry is about the spouses’ declaration. Most of our spouses are not leaders and it is a leadership code. Hon. Minister, do not look at me, and do not intimidate me. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Matembe, when you look at her, she gets intimidated. You look this side and let her speak. (Laughter). Hon. Nyombi, you have my protection. Please speak.

MS NANSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I put it, the issue of spouses’ declaration worries me because some of our spouses do not even know all their assets and liabilities. What if a spouse sturbonly refuses to declare the assets or liabilities? He is not the leader referred to in this bill. What provision is there to deal with the spouses who refuse to declare their assets and liabilities?  I want to be assisted by the hon. Minister on what will happen -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order!  Hon. Members, please let hon. Nyombi make her contribution in peace. Please, proceed.

MS NANSUBUGA: Another issue I want to raise is in section 4(3). “A leader shall, at the expiration of his or her term of office, declare his or her income, assets and liabilities under this code if his or her term of office expires six months after his or her last declaration.”  
I think this conflicts with “every two years thereafter”. I would like to be clarified on that. Why not follow the two years as already stated? Thank you.

MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion, and I think it is long overdue. As a country, we need this bill to improve on the management of finances. I will not call it financial management, because financial management is quite different from management of finances. 

But I have a problem with the title itself, because as it reads, “The Leadership Code,” you really have problems in defining who a leader is. We look at the schedules and the list of both elected and appointed officers as leaders.  But to what extent is a Permanent Secretary a leader?  To what extent is a Chief Administrative officer in a district a leader? These are public officers appointed to their offices. They may not be leaders because they are not elected into their offices. I propose that maybe the title read “The Leadership and Public Officers Code.” It would make more sense.  

Secondly, I have a problem with clause 7 concerning the declaration being public. Members, you will agree with me that there is an increase in robberies and if we are going to declare whatever we have, this becomes public information. Not all of us are entitled to public security with public guards paid from the state coffers. Even in the Company Act, it is only public companies that have to file their accounts and the accounts made public. But private companies are not. Much as we are holding public offices and we are leaders, I think it is in our interest and for our own security that this should not be made public. It could be made public to certain elements in government-owned society but not for everybody to see.  

Lastly, I want to add on what hon. Sarah Nyombi has just said about spouses. It is not common for spouses to agree when one decides to take up a political office.  Many times they disagree. One may say, ‘I am going to contest’ and the spouse says, ‘do not go’. 

When you become a leader, by jurisdiction of this code, the spouse is supposed to declare his/her assets and liabilities. To what extent can the leader be held responsible for the failure by the spouse to declare what they own? Some people may have more than their spouses and it is not common for you to know everything that your spouse has. Somebody asks, “why?” 

Either by cultural practice or by religious practice, somebody may have more than one spouse. You might find a wife with about three husbands. How do you hold them responsible if the spouse deliberately refuses to declare everything? To what extent can you be held responsible? Under clause 12(2), in the event that the spouse has not declared, you will have to vacate office. Will that be doing justice to the people?  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS SENTONGO TEOPISTA (Workers Representative): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to support the motion if it has the ability to alleviate the current corruption in our country. However, I have to seek clarification on page 10, clause 10(2). It reads, “A leader may accept a personal gift or donation from a relative or a personal friend to such an extent and on such an occasion as is recognized by custom.” What kind of criteria is put in place to differentiate between that public gift and a gift given by a friend or a relative if it so happens that that gift is being given on the same day or at the same occasion? I want to be clarified on that particular clause. Thank you.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I want to submit that this is a very important piece of legislation, and therefore, I would like to call upon colleagues to support it. 

Property declaration is not property confiscation. Declaring property only means that within a given period of time, Government must be able to follow up how people in public offices are accumulating property and wealth and at what rate. 

If you have legitimate ways and means of accumulating property, if you have very fantastic business acumen, like hon. Lwanga, you are making your money in a clean way, why are you bothered? Why are you spending nights not sleeping; what is the problem?  

This is an important legislation, and Members of Parliament, in my view, are being tested here today. We are having a test to show the countrymen and countrywomen on which side of this social phenomenon called corruption we are. I know many people have been lobbied, “do not support this provision”, “do not support the other”, “do not do this and that”. 

This business of the spouse is a valid point, but let us not make it stand in the way. I had a talk with hon. Adolf Mwesige, who is a lawyer, and he had a problem in reconciling the provision in the law with what is in the Constitution. That provision was on rights to private property, but let us not use legalistic excuses. 

I am happy that over time, hon. Adolf Mwesige made some reconciliation, because it is so important. I do know that some people have lied; they have utilized that legal loophole to illegally accumulate property. 

This country has been plundered and it is still being plundered by some of us who are in public offices; not necessarily political offices - it could be the civil service. 

Can you imagine - colleagues here have valid experiences and I have been trying to find out - Uganda seems to be among the few countries where you find someone owning four or five houses, each valued at US $200,000. He or she does not have a bank loan, does not have a mortgage, and is meeting his or her overhead expenses like school fees, drinking, but still owns and accumulates that property. This is one of the few countries. 

You could be an intelligent man or woman, but the point is, let us know how you earn money. You can in fact conduct a seminar for the rest of the people who do not know how to make money.  

Otherwise, we think that some people in this country have taken advantage and have used their weight and their influence to plunder Government resources and public resources.

My complaint with the Minister in charge of this portfolio, hon. Matembe, is the implementation of the law. Let it be said here and now that some of the problems we are having are not because of the absence of the law. We have the sectarian law, but what do we see out there? What do we see out there in public, in society? We have the sectarian law on the shelves covered by dust. 

I contend that the biggest problem seems not to be the absence of the law but rather the willingness to implement whatever law there is in order to meet the basic tenets of the society - political will if you want; you can put it as blatant as that. 

I do not agree with the hon. MP from Bugabula North, hon. Kizige Moses, when he said that on the question of the spouses, there is always disagreement. In fact, the contrary is that when the majority of the people go into politics, there is harmony between wife and husband. 

Ladies and gentlemen, do not hide under the disagreement, “my wife will not accept”, “my husband will not accept”. Do not hide under that. If you have disagreements with your wife or with your husband and you come to public office, then you know that we shall demand that this property must be declared.  

I did not declare to MR Tumwesigye. I have not! I refused because I saw that it was a waste of time. Declaring in the present law is a fuss. The lie of the day was, before God and man, you would declare; it was not necessary! You declare what? It could not be implemented. 

People hide property under their 12-year-old children’s names. I know some public leaders whose children are minors, according to our law, but they own property in the prime areas of Kampala. Some of them own flats in London! 

This business of dilly-dallying here is not good. Let us pass the law, and we call upon those enforcement organs of the state to ensure that the law works, and we really declare. There is nothing difficult if I declare my property and I have got it in a legitimate way. I have some bank loans, I borrow money, so what is the problem; it is not going to be confiscated. But this business of hiding, trying to be legalistic, being bright in order to leave loopholes that are going to be manipulated is unacceptable. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to add my voice to the motion that is on the Floor. Madam Speaker, you will realise that in 1992 when Uganda Government for the first time in an attempt to put in place an institution of good governance introduced by the Leadership Code Bill, by then all of us we were happy, but our happiness did not last long because even when the Parliament then passed the law, its implementation hit a snag.  Where was the snag that it hit, it hit the snag from within Parliament and Government?  We do not have to be told that we need a law to bring to book the leaders who are abusing their positions.  

Time and again we have read in papers infants being Managing Directors of Airlines; ferrying merchandise from Congo; do we really need a law in place in order to bring such kind of leaders to book?  

 Madam Speaker, I am perturbed because for the last decade or so, Uganda Government has lost a lot of resources.  We did put in place under the Structural Adjustment Programme efforts to privatise what Government considered was already insolvent, and therefore a burden to this state.  But since then, we have never known where the proceeds that we realise from these sales, and yet here is a situation where we are saying “yes, we want to wipe out corruption.”  Why don’t we start with ourselves?  Let us be accountable to this Government; let us tell the people what we have done with Uganda Airlines; what we have done with Nytil; what we have done with all these factories that we have sold; UCB the most recent; once we do that then Members will know that we are very serious.  Madam Speaker, I am even much more perturbed -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information.

MR WADRI:  I am still making my point, Madam Speaker.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Thank you hon. Member holding the floor. I am standing up to give you this information because I take your debate very seriously.  With regard to privatisation, the law on privatisation demands of the Minister to regularly report to this House on the performance of the privatisation process, and I hope that the Minister in charge regularly abides by this, and therefore Parliament is rightly entitled to receive regular reports on what happens to the process of privatisation, and I know from what I can recollect that actually the Minister in charge of Privatisation has regularly reported to this House.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR DOMBO:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the hon. Member for giving way.  Madam Speaker, the hon. Member has just mentioned that the implementation of the first Leadership Code law hit a snag because we did not necessary need a law in order for people to fight corruption and declare things that we are doing.  

I just want to inform the hon. Member and the whole House that it has become a method of the people of Uganda that even where a law exists about the Traffic Code, we need to construct humps on the way in order to create awareness.  In Uganda now we must pass the Leadership Code as another hump in order to bring sanity to the people of Uganda and force them to declare their wealth.  I thank you.

MR WADRI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to respond to the information which was given to me by hon. Kagonyera.  I have been in this Parliament for the last ten months, I have never missed any session and on no occasion has there been any information by any Minister to update us about what the proceeds are; how much has been collected- have we given that accountability to this country?

MR KASENENE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, two months back -(Interruption)

MEMBERS:  Who are you?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is the Minister for Privatisation.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIVATISATION) (Prof. Peter Kasenene):  Madam Speaker, two months back, I appeared before this august House and presented Statutory Reports as required by the PERD Statute.  In these reports, we clearly presented the amount of proceeds that has been raised in the divestitures that we have undertaken, how much money is on both the Divestiture Account and Redundancy Account and all these reports have been given to this House, Madam Speaker.

MR WADRI:  Madam Speaker, while I support this bill in as far as the Code of conduct is concerned, I reserve my feelings in as far as declaration of properties is concerned.  One thing which we have to appreciate is that, as it has been alluded to earlier on, we have a lot of social problems in this country.  Theft is on the rise, robbery is on the rise, people have lost their lives for as much as Shs 10,000, when especially the robbers know that they want that Shs 10,000 and they will have to get it.  What measures do we have in place that when leaders give this invaluable information that this information is going to be kept confidential?  I have fear, because several times classified information has ever leaked to the public.  How does it leak; what measures do we have in place that the office of the IGG will ensure that the wealth declared by leaders of this country will not leak out so as to jeopardise their lives? 

 At the same time, Madam Speaker, when it comes to the issue of declaration of properties of spouses and children, I look at this law being rather immoral.  What moral authority do I have to declare assets and liabilities of my child who has grown in the African context, who is already an adult and has made his money or her money in her own ways, and he is not in anywhere associated with my position as a leader; I find it very, very difficult.  Even then, just like hon. Moses has said, several times spouses may not even agree as far as political stand is concerned.  There are many of us who are in this House whose spouses are apolitical, who do not, if anything, want to identify themselves with their spouses because they fear politics.  

Now, if such a spouse for the last 20 years has been making a living through business, and he or she has got genuine business before the partner got the leadership position, what moral authority do I have to give that information?  In any case, what security do we also have in place to ensure that the lives of such kind of people when they avail such kind of information is guaranteed?  I think that is an area where a lot has to be done.  

I have got my fears in as far as the Code of Conduct of the office of the IGG is concerned.  The IGG’s office first and foremost should have been very exemplary in coming out with measures that avert corruption.  But over these years, we have seen that a number of officers in the office of the IGG have been misused by individuals to witch-hunt others and to settle private grievances.

Surely is this the type of institution in whose hands we are going to put all that information? We have got people there who are actually executing duties not duly assigned to them. If they get themselves allocated duties on the streets of the city, how sure are we that we are going to be safe?

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI (Kiboga County West, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank Government for the effort in fighting corruption by coming out with this Leadership Code Bill. 

However, ordinarily codes are written for those people who have had a common training background. You hear about a code of conduct for engineers, a code of practice for doctors, for teachers, for soldiers. What is important in such a code is that you have all been trained, you appreciate the discipline you took, so you respect it in practice. But the leaders of Uganda, including the civil Servants like it is indicated here in the schedule, what common training do they get?  

How do they appreciate a common cause, what knowledge is put in them to appreciate the code of conduct? So really on that issue, I see that much as this is a code of conduct for leaders, it will have deficiencies at the time of implementation. It is going to be implemented over a body of persons who do not have a common data of knowledge and appreciation.

Secondly, we have been told that the object of this bill is to fight corruption. It is true corruption is evil. But really, what is corruption? I believe it includes people who get Government money wrongly, misuse it, misuse their offices, and all such types of vices. But hon. members, we all know the source of Government money is the state Treasury. It is that money that gets misused, that gets misappropriated by some officers, and then we talk about that as corruption? 

Even embezzlement and stealing are sometimes considered as corruption in this country. But sincerely, why do we not put a control function at the outlet of Government money and not impose a control function on the output when it is out there in the open? You are telling everybody, “follow up a leader, if he has acquired certain property, that means he could have stolen something.”  Why do we not control the input point, at the department of the Treasury? We should have a control function to know that if money is budgeted for and it is not properly used, then the officer concerned should answer. There are laws for that, those laws should be applied.  

I have been reading this report and it indicates that breaching this code of conduct will not be an offence, and it cannot be criminalized. So, of what use is it? How will people prefer charges of corruption when they can hide under this legislation, which is just behavioural? I believe that it is important for the Executive, those who have got the bureaucrats with the technical competence, to really design a system that must control money as it leaves the Treasury.  

Do not tell every citizen to run around the country looking for somebody who has stolen Government money when you know very well there is somebody at the gate of the Treasury. Madam Speaker, I compare it to if I was speaking on a loud speaker now. If I were shouting while using it, somebody would come and tell me to control the volume. I could manage to control the noise out of the loud speaker. But implementing this law will be so tedious, unprofessional, and it will be expensive. 

We are trying to control corruption using a method that is expensive. You have got to print forms, and you have got to get the police to look around people’s property here. When actually it would be simpler, through the budget office of Government and through an institution of Government that looks at the performance instead.

So I submit that while this is a very good attempt, I think the Executive needs to do more. Ordinarily we control input signals, not output signals. Because when you try to control the output signal, it is very expensive.

Lastly, is the issue that has been talked about a lot, the declaration of property belonging to spouses. I would say, “yes, declare a spouse’s wealth.”  But one can hide one’s wealth in children or other people. That may be true, but really, I think that one is a liability. There are assets in any system, and liabilities. What asset does a spouse of a leader derive from his position of leadership?  Does it mean if a Member of Parliament died, the spouse will come so that she can enjoy the assets in as much as the public enjoyed the liabilities extended to her or him?  

Madam Speaker, I am really labouring to show that in as much as it is a good law and it is being supported, the implementation of it is lacking. You see that you are going up to the sub-county chiefs, sub-county councillors, everybody! Who is going to implement it? Some guys will perhaps get business with the IGG’s office to print the forms, then they will have a very big database, which they will never analyse. Actually this is a function that grows indefinitely.  It is therefore an unacceptable system. I thank you.

MR WAKIKONA WANDENDEYA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have to thank the Committee and the Minister for the presentation of the Leadership Code Bill. Many things have been said about it, but I will just add a few that I feel should try to improve the performance of the code. 

You notice that most of these responsibilities here we are giving to the institution of the IGG and yet there are so many Acts which have been put under him. I am not being critical of the provisions of the Constitution, particularly Article 223, which stipulates the qualification of the IGG and also how he is appointed. The IGG, is says, should be as qualified as a judge of the High Court.

Presently the position of the IGG goes to one who is appointed by the President. Yet here we are forming a very big directorate, which should live the test of time, and I know that normally when presidents change, most officers heading these offices also change.  This person who should be as qualified as a judge of the High Court, I propose that he should also be interviewed and proposed by the Judicial Service Commission. So irrespective of what happens, he will be like the Chief Justice or the Judges of the High Court. (Applause). 

Declaring property is a good thing and I know in order not to have problems with leaders, it is better they declare property when they are seeking jobs. If I want to be a Member of Parliament, there should be a provision on a form somewhere that I declare property then, before I am elected.  If I want to be a Permanent Secretary or even a CAO, there should be a provision – because normally they tell lies. They will tell you everything, but the moment we are in offices, it is very difficult to convince somebody to tell you what he has.  I know this might be difficult because it will encompass everybody who is seeking such offices, but it is easier to administer and to investigate in case we want to establish whatever the sources of income or the sources of properties are.

Madam Speaker, that is all I have to add to this Leadership Code. I feel if taken at certain – I know it involves amendment of the Constitution but the Prime Minister is here and other people, and I think they should consider taking into consideration what I have put forward.  I thank you very much.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli) :Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I must thank the Committee for having examined the bill and reported forthwith.  I would also like at this juncture, to thank the hon. Minister of Integrity, for having at last put forward on the Floor something resembling the Leadership Code.

When the President appointed hon. Matembe as the Minister for Ethics and Integrity, we all thought the world was going to change.  She started her work – I think she has been heard but she has started feeling the problem.  I think this law should have been called the name of the ministry, “The Code of Ethics and Integrity” for all Ugandans instead of just Leadership Code. By focusing on only the Leadership Code, we are actually treating the symptoms instead of treating the disease. 

By the time somebody is declared as a Member of Parliament or a CAO or a district leader or a minister for that matter, he was bent morally in primary 7 and it is too late even to correct him.  I think our focus should be on the country’s moral decay, which is now being expressed in form of corruption. The problem of moral decay needs to be addressed more seriously than by the bill, which the honourable minister has put on the Floor.

I have been directed by my constituents to support this bill, but where so many young boys of 14 years are in jail for having impregnated girls of 16, 17 years! And the parents of the girls are asking for Shs.3 million as a bribe for the boys to be released.  This is a situation which is actually making boys grow thinner and thinner.  I expected the youth Members of Parliament here to be aware of this problem. I think in all constituencies this situation is there, but in my constituency, magistrates, chiefs, even LC IIIs have joined to extort money from these siblings. 

Let us address where suffering is greatest first. There is a sect of people who are really suffering because of what is going on.  So, I would like at this juncture to ask that we should really change this law to address ethics and integrity of all professionals, of all teachers because they are even more important, five years, six years ahead the leaders they are damaging, they are bending are going to cause us a much bigger problem than what we can imagine from these existing Members of Parliament.

I would have wished the committee of Parliament, which handled this bill to have briefed us –(Mr Nkuuhe rose_)

MR NKUUHE: I thank the Member for giving way.  I would like to give information to hon. Gagawala, that today we were attending a seminar led by hon. Ogalo on Private Member’s Bill, and I think that kind of issue properly comes under the Private Member’s Bill. They gave us skills on how to move a Private Member’s Bill.  So, I can give you more details if you are interested, but I think that could be a subject of Private Member’s Bill rather than making this an omnibus kind of thing.

MR GAGAWALA: Thank you, hon. Nkuuhe. But we are talking about the Leadership Code of a corrupt set of leaders. Really what we are talking about is ethics and integrity of these leaders.  Why again come to pass another bill to address the same issue when we can use this at this moment to clean up the whole matter.  I appreciate that if need be I would do that.  But I think, this is the time to say that what hon. Matembe is trying to tell us is that the ethics, integrity and our morals have decayed! And she has started she has made the first step on a journey of 10,000 kilometers. This bill she has brought in front of us is one meter on a journey of 10,000 kilometers. 

If you look at the history of Tanzania and how humble they became – if you look at the history of Uganda, Uganda was exemplary in the whole world, where a Ugandan passport was treasured as even better than a British citizen’s passport, but today a Ugandan is not even allowed to step in Japan.  Today a Ugandan is taken as a Senegalese; he is a crook!  This is a serious matter, which we have got to address beyond.  

The Committee should have mentioned the practice in other countries regarding this similar problem. I believe this law is a bit still superficial but since we have to start, let us start with this one.
 
Back to Tanzania and Uganda, I am saying Tanzania handled its problem much earlier. Much as hon. Aggrey Awori seems not to agree with me, but I am saying that the level of corruption, which used to exist in Uganda is not what does exist today.  Ugandans were respected and were trusted.  Today the picture is gone and this law is not going to change it.  We must address it at primary level, hon. Minister of Integrity.
 
I expected the chairman of this committee to give us a way forward on reporting system, because if you do not have a good reporting system right from LC I upwards, you will not detect problems for other people to come and attack the disease.  I think if there is no clear reporting system right from the grassroots upwards, we are going to find it very difficult to know what is going on in Rukungiri, Yumbe, and Busia. Unless there is a clear reporting system, a format which is accessible to all of us including those who are not in leadership positions -

I have not seen in the schedule whether religious leaders will be incorporated in this code of ethics because the issue is moral integrity, financial is just a small fraction. I think this leadership code must address the real issues of moral turptitude. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me the Floor.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two matters to raise. One, is this bill in conformity with the Act? Because my understanding is that it should have come with a certificate of clearance from the Ministry of Finance. Or are we being told that it has no cost at all?  Because as part of the process, we agreed that a bill comes with the cost and the certificate, and we need the chairperson to inform this House that all that has been in place instead of us having to guess that it was done when it was not done.

Two, I am aware that the biggest source of loss of funds is from the Treasury, and I know that it is not lost by the Ministers or the Permanent Secretaries or the high ranking Commissioners alone, but in some cases, it starts from the office messengers as well. Court Clerks have been known in this country to lose entire files and kill an entire case as it is being investigated. They do not fall in this category of leaders, but they have access to such vital information that you cannot cost. They leak information; they leak government secrets; they leak all sorts of things and yet the present law has not been able to catch them.

So, I propose that we might have to change the title of this bill to encompass all the appointed and elected people. An LC 1 can cause damage to this nation just as much as a Minister, and so can a Clerk or a Permanent Secretary. I do not think we have so many of them that we cannot keep a register of who has what. If hon. Wambuzi is proposing for the entire nation, as a sub-set starting from all the elected leaders and appointed leaders I think would be a good start. That way, we are going to remove the schedules because there is a bigger mission in the schedules. I do not see in the schedule the Chief Administrative Officer and all other people who cause a lot of financial haemorrhage to this nation, and you cannot mention all of them.

So, as far as I am concerned, if we changed just the title and the two categories of people who may be feared to be the source of corruption in this country, elected and appointed people, I am sure we will have tightened up this law.  

I am also appealing to my colleagues not to let the Executive find reason for this thing not to work by saying it is Parliament that has not been forthcoming in fighting corruption. If it is a trap that it has been passed and therefore we should resist it, I think we should stop that.  Let us support Government and see how they work on corruption this time round. Thank you very much.

MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, but with reservations. First, I feel it is important for me to note that today the Front Bench is almost full. I congratulate the Prime Minister for his excellent mobilisation skills. It is a good thing that almost all Cabinet Ministers are here when we are discussing this issue of national importance.

In general, the bill is good and it should be supported by all Ugandans of good will. But I have one serious reservation, especially, about the declaration of one’s assets.

In principle I have never believed that declaration of one’s assets should be agreed upon by any person as a method to fight corruption. Why? Because it is difficult to enforce. Also, it compromises security and privacy of individuals. We have what is called classified information; all governments, organisations and individuals have classified information. They call it ‘classified information’ because they know it is for their own security. Can His Excellency, the President, tell us the number of army officers in Sudan? The answer is, “no”.  Can a wise businessman tell his competitor the amount of money he has in the bank? You know the answer is “no”. Can a wise commander tell the number of guns and men he has deployed in the field? All of you people know the answer is “no”. Can a wise couple tell all the things that happen behind the doors of their bedroom? 

So, for the provision related to declaration of properties, particularly making it public, let us say “no”. But if somebody wishes to satisfy the whims of some foreigners, or wishes to undertake some public relations work, you must know at the end of the day this law will never be enforced.

How will you go to Ankole and count the number of cows on my farm when the culture does not allow it? (Laughter) I have a poultry farm, I do not allow you to come and count my chicks. Many people here say they believe in constitutionalism, what does Article 72 of the Constitution say?  The majority of Ugandans believe that we have a right to privacy; we have a right to security and any law that attempts to interfere with this right should be rejected.

I am sorry if some Members here may not be agreeable with what I say, but for me I am telling you the truth. You will go higher and ensure that this provision is included in the law, but tomorrow I will ask you, when was it implemented?  

Therefore, in my opinion, I feel that the declaration of assets or one’s properties should be voluntary. Do you think we are angels, free to come and stand here in public and say, “I have millions of shillings, I have 20 cows, and so on”? Otherwise making a law to force us to declare our assets is completely unacceptable. 

I do not want members to forget my point at the time of voting, so I end by appealing to you, let us reject this provision, the provision that compromises our security.  Thank you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have seen the leadership code, and there are a few things in it for which I will seek a clarification from the Minister. 

We are going to declare assets and liabilities, but having been assessed and found that we have excess income earned over a period of time and that we have not paid taxes, what are you going to do?  Are we supposed to pay taxes now? For those who have stolen and have declared it, what are you going to do to them? Are you going to exempt them? Are you going to say that the previous thieves are better than the future thieves?  

If somebody says, “I made my money, over a period of 10 years, I have made my Shs 10 billion and I have been selling charcoal,” do you request him to attach the income tax return to show that he has paid taxes? If not, then that is where the leadership code should start biting. 

Then there is no way of saying that the information we are going to declare should be private.  It should be public so that I, who comes from the mountains, if I have hidden a plot of land in the mountains, somebody will say, “a piece is missing.”  But if you say that it will be a secret, then it stops being a leadership code.  

I want to seek further clarification from the Minister. We have the front bench with about 60 Ministers, have they all declared their assets and liabilities, to show us a living example? 

You have talked about the IGG’s office as the one to enforce this law, has it got the capacity to enforce it? We heard, about a year ago, of one officer in the IGG’s office who was jumping through a window over a bribe of Shs 20 million. Are you telling us that the current ones are angels, they will not be subject to corruption? Of course they will be the ones who will be first corrupted. I suggest that for the IGG to be effective, we first of all have to keep the manpower well, remunerate them so that they can avoid tendencies to corruption. 

When you to go Section 26(1)(b), on page 21, it says, “The informer may be rewarded for his or her information and paid such amount of money as the Inspector General may deem fit.”  Supposing I have got you a thief of Shs 40 billions, and you give me Shs 10,000 because you deem that fit, will I have the capacity to report another thief next time? Why do we not put a percentage of the reported sum as payment to somebody who brings information, so that he is paid say 10 percent?  

Under section 4, you are saying that after every two years, that is when leaders should declare their assets. Two years is a long period. I think the best period should be after every one year; persons should be able to declare assets after every one year.

We now come to the list that has been put up, of the officers and politicians to declare assets. When I look at page 28, number 25, the rank of Inspector of Police and above, these are the small men in police. But when you come to the civil service, you are talking of a head of division or section. You are leaving out some junior officers who also have access to public funds and are misappropriating them. It should be better to say that all the civil servants should declare their assets.  You come to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, if you do not complete your statement, I will pass the permission onto hon. Balemezi. (Ms Mugerwa rose_) Are you raising a point of order?  

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Yes, it is a point of order. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel that there is a lot of confusion surrounding this bill, and because of that, I am wondering whether it is not out of order for us to discuss something that we do not understand properly. The “asset” aspect of it is confusing. The definition of “asset”, I request you to define it for me. What does it mean? Because I have a pen to exchange in order to pay for what I owe somebody, is it an asset then? This definition here is really very ambiguous. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have not heard of other members who have not understood the definition. In any event, however, when we go to the committee stage, we shall be able to have answers to that question. So really, this session is in order. Hon. Nandala, continue please.

MR NANDALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page four, they have defined an asset, so you can refer to it and see what it means. 

Under number 28 on the same page 28, we are talking of some of the district officials and leaving out others. These include people like the DEOs, and the richest people at the district level are the cashiers. Why are we leaving them out? We should say, “all the local government staff should declare their assets.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please try to wind up.

MR NANDALA: I am winding up. In Uganda Revenue Authority, we are talking of the rank of the assistant revenue officer and above. In fact the richest people in Uganda Revenue Authority are the clerks. So, why do we not declare that all people who are holding public offices or are appointed, should declare assets? 

Under 40, they have talked about financial managers, accountants and they have left out procurement officers. These are the richest people, because they have deals with businessmen. I do not see Central Tender Board anywhere.  

It is my view that the list is not exhaustive. When we come to passing this bill, we should include more persons.

Finally, you have talked about leaders only, but I could have some business where I get all my money and invest it in the private sector. I could have a businessman in town and I give him money. Why don’t we set up a law to also take into consideration the business personnel in town; how they acquired assets and how they are dealing with them -(Interruption).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, wind up.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am about to finish. For this law to have effect, it should not be used selectively. If it is used selectively, it will lose meaning. It should be used across the board to avoid double standards. If it is starting to be implemented today, let those who have committed wrongs previously be brought to book, then we will accept that this law we are passing is going to be effective.  I thank you. 

MS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): Madam Speaker, this is a very good law, if only it can be implemented. I have fears because we spent almost the same time passing the law on corruption, but it has been proved that it met with a lot of handicaps. I wonder whether this law will also be implemented. I see very many loopholes, and if only the Minister can give me some answers on a number of questions that I have on her bill, I will be assured that she will be able to implement this law if put in place.  

First and foremost, I would like to know how the Minister is going to cater for the manpower to address this law. As we know, leadership comes right from our villages. If I can know how the Minister is going to see to it that leaders right from the villages and all institutions at the village level abide by this law, it will put my mind at rest.  

My colleagues have talked about the financial implications, but I would have wished to look at the budget. Does the minister feel that such a budget will enable her implement this law?

Clause 8(3) in this bill says that a leader should not hold any shares. But she has not put in place a provision where someone comes into leadership when he or she is a shareholder. I would have felt comfortable if they had indicated that in case one became a leader and was already a shareholder or they have such a position that might bring about conflict of interest, they give a period of time as to when one should hand over such leadership.

Clause 4 is still a contentious matter, Madam Speaker. I look at Mukono District, which I represent, as much as we have many women in leadership, most of these women are not as liberated as the women here in Kampala. Many women in Mukono are property; we belong to our husbands; we are bought. Bride price was paid. So, when you say that property should declare other property -(Laughter)- this becomes difficult for a woman in Mukono. 

Some of us, the women leaders in Mukono, have co-wives. We might have co-wives -(Interruption) 

MS SARAH NAMUSOKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the hon. Lydia Balemezi in order to mislead this House and the nation by saying that women, and especially women of Mukono, are property, when we know very well that they are human beings; is that a different category? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the women of Mukono are human beings, and under the Constitution they are equal. They are human beings recognized by the Constitution so they cannot be property.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on a matter of procedure. When we find that in the course of a debate, everybody is agreeable to the motion and they are not adding anything to the debate, what do we do? Can we move a motion to put the question. Nobody has opposed this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have been listening, and I heard two sides to this debate. There are those for it and those against it. I want to be satisfied that everybody has been able to express themselves on this matter. Hon. Balemezi.

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you for your wise guidance. I was giving an example of the way husbands of women in Mukono pay for us from our areas. In Mukono, what we pay for becomes our property. So, for those of us who were paid for, we are the owners’ property. But this might not be applicable in other areas; I am talking specifically about Mukono.  

As I was saying, some of the women leaders have co-wives who might be having property in the areas where they were born. And as a co-wife, it is very difficult to know the property of your co-wife. So, in case Government comes to find out the property owned by my co-wife which I never declared, will I be penalized?  I would like the Minister to clarify on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you suggesting that the co-wife is your spouse?

MRS BALEMEZI: No, here as a leader I am supposed to declare property of my child, dependants and as a leader, the co-wives in the house depend on me –(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I must commend you for your generosity, thank you.

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Speaker, again the Minister talks of declaring the wealth of a child, in Mukono district, a child is a child until the two parents die.  I am still a child, so the Minister should come up with the age of a child because according to Mukono –(Interjections)- in our district you will find children of 30 years who are employed and even our youth leaders are children, yet they are supposed also to declare their wealth. So, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think I will not allow you to mislead the House, there is the text of what is supposed to be the declaration form and on one of the pages it gives you the details of who is the child and what age; the dependant and the child must be below 18 years. Please wind up.

MRS BALEMEZI: Okay, I thank you Madam Speaker. I withdraw that statement but dependant are those people who depend on me.  

Madam Speaker, again in section 10(1) about these gifts, I would like to see that the Minister specifies these gifts, because I might be representing a Government institution, or in my capacity as an MP representing a Minister in my district, and I am given matooke, tomatoes, enkoko, and vegetables. Madam Speaker, it will be very cumbersome and even difficult to bring this to the IGG, because we normally go on these visits either on Friday or Saturday, in that by the time I come back on Monday, the Matooke would have got ripe, the tomatoes spoilt and the like.  

Madam Speaker, this bill is very good but there so many loopholes and areas which cannot be implemented, where I would wish to see that the Minister revisits and puts some specific points for the guidance of everybody, including the people of Mukono where in some areas we are not actually covered in totality.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY: I will give the next speakers three minutes each.

MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I just have four questions to the Minister.  First, I know there are classified expenditures in the country, but there appear to be also classified persons who are so hard to have their assets declared.  So, is this bill not trying to teach the sheep on how to get the tigers? You also know some classified persons who are very difficult to have their assets properly declared and this has remained a mystery to all the Ugandans; I beg you to comment on that.  

Then I looked at the schedule on the specified officers, section 26, you said Army Commanders, Deputy Army Commanders and Chief of Staff.  I was in Arua yesterday, and there was a loud cry from the public that someone in the military profession who is not mentioned here said, “now if the war gets finished how shall we finish our houses?” So, it means they are in a position of getting reasonable amounts of money, so I am suggesting that commanders or any person beyond the rank of a captain who is in the military field should at least be given an ample opportunity to adequately declare their wealth, because my understanding is that the greatest business tycoons in my constituency are my colleagues who have chosen the army professional and they are not beyond the rank of a major yet they are not specified in this schedule; So, you will have to make a brief comment on that. 

And then I saw the penalties; my question is how long will the penalties be in place? Like, if an MP doesn’t declare his wealth, he vacates the office or he is given warning, because my experience is that even those who were censored at one time where cleared as good people.  So, how long will this particular law work on a victim who has not declared the assets, because we have started forgiving the bad ones and these minor ones should always have an opportunity to be forgiven anyway? I would also like to ask if there could be a possibility of applying this law introspectively? 

Hon. Lukyamuzi asked the House, Madam Speaker, why MPs are reluctant on declaring their assets. I think given my authority in political science, I would say when you are in a transition everything seems to be unclear, and Ugandans having stayed in this 17 years transition, they are still not very sure of tomorrow.  So, they do not want to see a situation where in case of a political change they run to your houses as it has always been happening in the past.  So, can you really, please, marry this idea of the bill and the possibility of having final stability in this political issue where the swords are busy swinging in the sun? 

Finally, Madam Speaker, we have the Enguli act and Traffic Act and these laws are so bad and weak and that has even helped the ordinary Ugandan to violate it.  A pick-up must carry two people, the driver and the conductor. In my constituency they carry at least 15. Those are bad laws which have been legislated upon.  Now, how much capacity do we have to make this law better than the Enguli Act and the Traffic Act?  Thank you very much.

MR  ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I will start by seeking for a clarification.  I have heard a number of colleagues say the law does not cater for the children, but I think this is catered for in the definition; the law defines who a child is, so I refer you to the definition which covers that part.  

Section 10, Madam Speaker, I would be comfortable if the Committee defined the word “gift”, and what it constitutes.   The Committee should also go ahead to define what corruption is; are we going to go by the definition in the IGG Act?  I need some clarification on that.  

The other one is on the definition of the word “spouse”.  The definition given says it is a wife or husband.  I want to be clarified here by the Minister.  We know in our society here, we have known people who have cohabited and some of them have lived a comfortable life more than people who are legally married. Does this law cater for people in society who cohabit?

I have also concerns on the same issue of the spouse. I have consulted with a number of bachelors in this House and outside this House who intend to marry.  This declaration of the properties has raised uncertainty in their future intentions to marry.  I need to be clarified on this; otherwise, we shall end up having no legal marriages in this country. 

I would also go to Section 21 about the reports by IGG to the House.   But when I look at the few reports I have come across, the IGG does not give us the reported cases, the cases concluded; the cases dismissed, how much money has been recovered. On the same note, you know court has dismissed a number of these corrupt cases because of inadequacy in our capacity to handle, sometimes because the police have always failed to appear in court, or the file is reported missing for a number of months, a number of years and the case is dismissed.  What is there to handle those officers who negligently intentionally or unintentionally lead to the dismissal of cases in court?

Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi raised an issue here that the appointment of the IGG could have been from someone who comes from the opposition camp.  But in the situation like Uganda where we do not have multiparty politics, there is no position; because I am of the strong view that the person heading this office should be from the opposition side. Why?  They have an added advantage.  The advantage they have is that they have the highest propensity to disclose the weaknesses in the current Government.  So, I would go by what hon. Ken Lukyamuzi raised.

Now, when we look at the capacity, do we have the necessary capacity to handle, to implement this law?  Because when even I look at out budget projections here, I do not see anything catering for capacity building.  Should I take it that it is included in staff salaries?  I do not think, it cannot be included in the staff salaries.  So, if we are really serious, we should take that into consideration and have it in this draft, because this draft here is giving us estimates for four years.  So, there is need for us to incorporate that in this budget draft. 

Going further on this budget thing, when you look at material surplus and manufactured goods, it is giving us 320, we do not know whether it is 320 thousand, 320 million, this is so little a figure to cater for this.  So, I need this also to be rectified.

On the issue of the money that the IGG recovers, I would request that some percentage be retained by IGG to cater for capacity building, to cater for any other expenditures and morale in this organisation, because we know this covers CID and other investigation organs.  They need a lot of money.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have here budget projections for implementing this bill.  It looks most inadequate considering the expanded nature and role of the new Code.  I also envisage that much of the leaderships will arise below the national level.  Could the honourable Minister tell me whether this budget envisages decongesting the IGG’s office either to the regional or to the district level?  Otherwise, the law is going to be very inconvenient to a large number of leaders. 

Therefore, once we develop a policy like this, we must be prepared to finance its implementation to the convenience of the persons to whom the law is addressed.  Otherwise, it is very unfair to make a law which will end up punishing people even who have committed no offence simply because we will have to implement a Government Policy. As someone who can easily perceive the institutional implications of this bill, this budget to me looks completely inadequate. 

Could the honourable Minister assure us, and in that same question of assurance on the adequacy of financing capacity of implementing the bill, I do understand that the implementation of this bill was almost a condition by the World Bank. I happen to have seen the hon. Minister receiving the outgoing World Bank representative.  She was very loud and clear on the pressure being exerted on her by the World Bank representative.  What part of responsibility is the World Bank prepared to meet towards the cost of implementing this bill? 

Madam Speaker, you look at Clause 5, which is proposed now to be amended.  I think it is on page 2 of the report.  I would like both the Chairman of the Committee plus the hon. Minister to tell me how the IGG’s office will implement issuing a warning or caution, dismissal or vacation of office of an offender of this particular provision.  How is the IGG’s office going to dismiss a President who has failed to compile a report?  How is he going to dismiss an elected leader, DR Okulo Epak, a Member of Parliament who has failed to comply, and a civil servant and so on? 

The way it is stated now leaves a lot to be desired because all of us here have our appointment, disciplinary, and dismissal procedures entrenched in our engagement and conditions and terms of service.  Is the IGG going to pretend in the office of the employers of all the various leaders envisaged here?  I would like to get this clarification because I would like in the long run to move an amendment on this particular thing. If I am satisfied with the clarification, then there may be no need for moving an amendment when we come to the committee stage.

Madam Speaker, the Code is good, but I doubt its implementation.  I have a lot of doubt on its implementation.  I thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Hon. Members, I stand here to support the motion because I believe that leaders must be accountable to the people they lead.  Madam Speaker, corruption is as old as man himself. A man called Adam was corrupted by a serpent through someone -(Laughter)- that was the beginning of sin, and corruption is a form of sin.  

Those of you who read the Bible remember that even Jesus Christ was tempted. Someone takes him to the top of the hill and says, “I will offer you all of this if you do this for me”.  Someone was attempting to corrupt God. So, how do we expect the frail human being, though created in God’s image, not to be tempted with corruption?  

This is a disease to which we are all maximally exposed on a daily basis, whether in positions of leadership or not. Even deep down in the villages, people are being corrupted. What we are attempting to do is to see how much we can fight this terrible disease called corruption. We are not going to eradicate it. I have a feeling that probably it is only in heaven where it can be eradicated; on earth it will be with us. 

I am not counselling my colleagues, Madam Speaker, when I tell this House that in the 19th century, the United States was one of the most corrupt countries in the world. They have had to fight corruption tooth and nail, and I suspect some of the provisions in this law and the enthusiasm that we get from our development partners is based on the historical backgrounds in their own countries.  Therefore, we should not be disappointed. 

I do agree with hon. Okulo Epak that the components of this proposed law may be difficult to implement.  But the Bible and the daily preaching have not stopped us from committing sin, and yet we cannot abolish churches and the mosques because they have failed. 

An attempt is a good thing to do.  Those who can heed it, like those who are saved and will go to heaven, will be protected from being corrupt. What we want to do is to show leaders how they can demonstrate to the public that they are not corrupt. 

 I have a problem with property ownership, especially land.  There are parts of the country where land belongs to individuals. There are others where land belongs to the society. You may belong to a clan and within the land they own, you have five square miles of land; are you going to declare that as opposed to F. Kagonyera’s declaration of the five acres I own individually or are you not going to declare that land?  

One of the reasons I am saying this is to bring out very clearly how our historical context makes it difficult to fight the evils of corruption.  In some societies, there are fairly standard ways of owning property. 

Someone has talked about polygamous families. Of course it can be a very serious problem. Someone whispered to me, “What if a Member of Parliament is one of the five wives?” The husband must declare. But the husband has problems knowing how much he owns together with the other four wives and someone may turn around and say this hon. Member has not declared her property properly, because he or she wants to defeat her next time.  

In other words, our culture makes it difficult, but that does not mean that we should not make an attempt.  What it means is that those who can, those who belong to a monogamous family and own property by title and so forth, let it be declared. If you have problems as a co-wife, maybe you will say so.  

I want to comment on gifts.  Again, our tradition allows us to get gifts. In fact, among the Bakiga, one of the most affectionate ways of expressing your feelings towards a friend is giving them cows, and those cows should belong to them. 

In my view, as a Member of Parliament I should not be disenfranchised from being a Mukiga. I should remain one. When we have these cultural values that we hold so dear, there ought to be a way that we accommodate them. What we are going for is the criminal act that all of us accept.  So, we have got to be careful.

Lastly, I want to commend my sister, the hon. Minister in charge of Ethics and Integrity. In spite of the failures we have had, she has done a very commendable job in her effort to fight corruption in this country.  What she wants is the support of everybody, particularly Members of Parliament, whether they are on the front bench or back bench.  And I want to say that I have regularly, without any problem, declared what I own.  I thank you.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am delighted to note that the frontbenchers and backbenchers are supporting this law.  Contrary to what we have been reading, this law is being supported, and therefore, we can enjoy the legitimacy to lead.  

Legitimacy is a title and the right to lead, and there is no way you can lead when you lack the basic credentials for leading. I am delighted to note that the frontbenchers and the backbenchers support this motion. 

The question was asked, “How many Front Benchers or Ministers have actually declared their assets and liabilities?” By the time I came here, 85 percent had declared their assets and liabilities and 11 per cent of the backbenchers had declared their assets and liabilities according to the IGG. 

I am delighted to note that you are supporting the law. And mind you, when people declare their assets and liabilities, we are depending on moral pressure, but now there shall be sanctions. But even when there is moral pressure, for people to have declared, is a good sign. It means that they can police themselves. This leads me to the second question, because I must be brief.  

Is this bill donor driven? I want to assert that this bill was driven by Ugandans essentially, but we have facilitators of what is being done. These are some of our donors, the civil society and other institutions. That is why we accepted declaration of incomes, assets and liabilities as a conditionality. It was our own volition; it was not imposed on us. If it is donor driven, this bill will not be sustainable. A necessary condition of sustainability is that it must be home grown. And I want to assert that it is largely home grown and it shows that we have the political will to fight corruption.

Some people have been wondering whether they will not become vulnerable when they declare their assets. I want to refer to section (7) of the bill. It says, “The contents of the declaration under this code shall be treated as public information and shall be accessible to members of the public upon application to the Inspector General in the form prescribed under this code.”

In other words, the Inspector General should also have the sense to know the people who should get this information. And, of course, the state will be ensuring your security. We shall work together to ensure that the people who are showing moral authority are not disadvantaged.

Finally, there was worry that if I have not been declaring my assets and therefore, not been paying income tax, will this matter be retrospective? I do not think that the implementation of this law is retrospective. In fact, my view is that we should facilitate people after the law is in place to ensure that they actually police themselves. It is going to facilitate good governance. Let me say that I am delighted, and let us all support this law. I thank all of you, including the Minister of State in charge of the bill.

THE DEPUTYSPEAKER: Hon. Members, earlier on one of you raised a matter of public importance and I appointed 5.00p.m. for the half-hour motion. I would now like to end this debate here and ask the hon. Igeme Nabeta to present his matter, which was supported by other Members of this House. 

I have also been advised that the chairperson of the Budget Committee would like to meet the chairs of the sessional committees concerning the Budget. So I want to have the half-hour motion, the winding up will be done tomorrow at 2.00p.m and then we go to Committee Stage. But I would like to advise the Government to remain behind for the half-hour motion.

MR NABETA IGEME (Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With great sadness I would like to inform the House that on the 14th last Sunday at 1.45 p.m, there was a fire in Jinja Central Market. The chairman went to the Police Department but they told him the driver was not there. So he personally drove the fire truck to the market but when he reached there, there was no water in the tank.  With the help of the hon. Minister, Daudi Migereko, we were able to get one fire truck from Kakira Sugar Works and another from BAT. By the time we were able to control the fire, half of the market was gone. The loss that was caused within just two hours is so severe. Maybe we need to see the people in Jinja Central Market to see why the ladies are crying.  

One of the issues that I want to talk about today is the fact that the fire fighting equipment we have, especially in places like Jinja, do not really function well. We had an incident here at Railway Station when a fuel truck caught fire. We have the largest depot of oil fuel in Jinja. So if we were to have a fire in Jinja with four tanks each with the capacity of 10 million litres, I do not what would happen to the town.  

So the point I would like to address to the Minister of Internal Affairs and all the other ministries involved, is that we need more up-to-date fire-fighting equipment, because if we had fire fighting equipment on Sunday, we would not have had so much loss as we did.

Secondly, 90 per cent of the ladies who work in Central Market depend on micro financing schemes. They do not have insurance, so the poor people now have nowhere to go.  They do not have any ways of recovering their losses and the micro financing companies will start locking them up because they do not have the money to pay them back.

The loss in Jinja has taken away the source of income for the people. It is basically a chain reaction. People who were able to get their food, to send their children to school now do not have a source of income. They need blankets and food. In order to avoid a calamity and an economic catastrophe, we need to address the issue of getting the people back on to their feet. We also need to have some intervention where we can get the micro financing companies off their back. These people need some time to recover to able to start paying back the money. I think we need to get help from the Poverty Alleviation Fund so that the people can get a chance to make a fresh start.

However, when you look at that market, you will realise that the facilities are outdated. The market was built in 1932 and actually it was just an accident waiting to happen. The stalls are made out of wood; people sell clothes, cosmetics and fuel product there. So you basically have an accident waiting to happen, just like the last three markets that burnt down.

So we need to address the issue of building a new market for the people of Jinja Central Market without which the people will have no place to trade. My appeal to you is that we find the most immediate way possible to get funds to rebuild the market. We have the physical plan and the proposals. I think Government we can provide funds to build the market and then the people can get back to work. 

We also have to understand that since we do not have many industries in Jinja, the market is the second taxpayer to the Jinja local government. So with the market gone, the local council is going to have probleMS 

So, Madam Speaker, I am urging government to come to our aid so that we help the people who are depending on micro-financing, to help the rebuilding of the market and also to see that next time we have a fire, at least we have some updated equipment to fight such a catastrophe.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I was looking at the Hansard of three days ago.  Your last remark before we left this House when there was a fire across the street was that you were almost abandoned here.  

This House was originally built for 120 Members.  We are now nearly 300 and over.  Madam Speaker, we have never had a fire drill on how to  evacuate.  Even the equipment itself I do not know whether it can cope with any serious fire outbreak!  I wonder if you are going to guide me on how to evacuate in event of a fire.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, maybe you have not had exercises in the drill.  But we have a handbook issued to every Member after you took office, which has the instruction on how to evacuate this building. But if necessary, I will arrange a session so that we can all be given practical instructions on how to evacuate.

MRS MARGRET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to extend my condolences to the people of Jinja over the tragedy, which befell the traders in Jinja market. 

I want also to add my voice that the issue of fire is becoming a common occurrence.  In Kampala, very many business premises have been gutted by fire, and in many cases at very awkward hours of the night.  In some instances, very many people cannot even be able to rescue even a spoon, if I can use the elementary language.  They cannot even be able to pick a document, which can be used to express how much loss they have had inside those premises.  This one brings me to one or two issues, which I want to raise to the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs.

First, I have had an opportunity to visit certain cities and they are ahead in privatizing the issue of fire fighting. And I think in the Police, they had a modernization plan of moving out to privatize some of these services.  I want now to find out from the honourable minister, where is this plan?  Is it about to leave the drawing board so that maybe some people can move out to make sure that we can actually have some security and safety for our people?

My second concern is the issue of insurance.  In this country, we have many insurance brokers and many insurance companies.  But it is really like a choice to very many people other than maybe a mandate. I wish that maybe it should be enforceable in many situations whereby people dealing in business, particularly people who have business premises should insure their premises. This one in one way or another will safeguard most of our people who are at God’s mercy. And I think the Minister of Finance can advise us on this law of insurance.  

If it is not in place, can this House move to update it so that our people can be sensitized, and make use of the insurance policies which are available.  Maybe others have complained about the irregularities within the insurance companies.  Particularly some people who are insured and maybe they are - I do not want to use the word “being conned” - but somehow, the insurance companies dodge them on very, very small technicalities and they do not actually compensate them.  Can we also move to look into this area? I think if we had very adequate insurance covers, we may be able at least to alleviate some of the plights of our people.

I want also to extend my condolences to the Jinja people, and of course, you realized what happened in Kampala the other day. I think we need to take serious concern as Parliament.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR  HARRY KASIGWA (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  It is true as my colleague has stated, a calamity befell Jinja on Sunday and 2,000 vendors were left jobless.  However, my concern is with the response from the Ministry in charge of Disaster.  The incident happened at 1.45 p.m. However, the Ministry dispatched somebody in the name of the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness 32 hours after the incident had happened. 

My understanding of preparedness is that there should be a 24 hours surveillance mechanism.  To me, we are insensitive to the problems that abound in society.  So, it is high time this issue of response to calamities across the country is addressed.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MRS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Jinja has had terrible nights these few days.  The fire fighting equipment in Jinja is non-functional.  We had to rely on B.A.T and Kakira to calm the fire, which gutted Jinja market.  

The people of Jinja are crying, their livelihood has been destroyed and we urge Government to run to our rescue.  After a good number of hours, the Minister of State appeared.  But still she had nothing to tell us, at least to comfort us.  By her coming, we understood that the Government had learnt about it.  It was a good gesture!  But I think we needed more than that.

The people of Jinja need assurance. This is a market which was built many years before most of us were born, and it is a market our children and our grand children are working in.  We have lived without meals the previous nights and days. Women are weeping, and most of the operators of Jinja market depend on micro-finance whose terms are very unfriendly. They are now demanding their payments.  Can the Minister of Disaster Preparedness come to our rescue?  What can we do for these poor people?  What can we do for ourselves?

We have responsibilities. The office of the Prime Minister please, the Poverty Eradication Programme, come to our rescue. That is our call!  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for this opportunity.  I would like on behalf of the women of this country and on behalf of the women of Kasese to also pledge my sympathies to the people of Jinja, especially those who lost property.  Madam Speaker, when I heard about and saw the fire in Jinja, I became worried.  I was wondering whether it is being politically motivated and I did my own small research. 

I remember that in 1997, the market of Mbale was burnt, also UNDP moved in and helped the people to re-construct the market.  I recalled that Mbarara market has also been recently burnt; I went for the literature and found out explanations that were given for that one.  

I vividly recalled that some of these properties being burnt in this country have also been done by rebels.  So I recalled three incidents in my constituency, twice in Kasese town the property of hotels and shops has been burnt by ADF rebels, that one is clear and it was a political motive.  

Kilembe market, millions and millions of money was lost and those were the rebels coming to inflict pain on the population so that the population may not side with the Government politically, but I am proud of the people of Kasese; in-spite of those burnings, they still went ahead, fought the enemy and completely defeated them; but that one was political and it was very clear.  I have been looking at others in Kampala in a period of about every three months; you would see a big shop with big property burnt.  

Today we are talking about Jinja and maybe other small properties, but let us also recall the so many petrol tanks that have capsized on our roads and so many other people have been burnt.  So what has come to my mind, apart from looking for the causes, I have also discovered that we lack the appropriate equipment to fight these disasters, that is why the loss is so immense that it has got economic impact on the small market vendors.  You are talking about people who are having a capital of less than Shs 50,000/= and once they lose the Shs50,000/= it is gone and they will never come up again in their lives unless there is an affirmative action for them. 

So as legislators, we should take this to be a very serious national problem, and I want to push it in the category of a national disaster, so that we look after this problem which is becoming national and treat it under a policy on disaster preparedness and disaster management, more so when it is affecting the poor or the urban poor, as I have outlined about these incidences that have taken place.

Another cause I found out when I read a few comments here and there is that these fires that are breaking out in shops here in Kampala, for example in some markets, is caused by illegal electricity connections.  Which means the illegal electric connections are on the increase.  So as local leaders, what do we do, because it is causing so much damage?  The Ministry concerned should intensify their inspection. And also the managers of these markets should know that these markets are now targets and they should try to control the illegal power connections as a major cause.  The security for these shops and markets – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up, hon. Member.

MRS BWAMBALE: Am winding up by calling up the mover of this motion to tell us what he has in mind.  You have told us the problem concerning Jinja; do you want the people of Jinja assisted?  We have understood the problem, but I would have been much happier if this debate was going to end up with a resolution.  I hope you are prepared, and I would like to have a look at it and support it; that resolution which will cure immediately Jinja but also be stretched to other incidents that have affected other constituencies.  

This resolution should also be stretched to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, so that it becomes compulsory for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to find out a way of having fire-fighting equipment.  

When the rebels burnt Kasese within two hours, the property of million and million of money was being burnt down.  You could hardly run to Mbarara to go and pick the only equipment that exists in Mbarara.  You could not run to Kabalore where the fire fighting equipment lies, now we are talking about national development – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: hon. Member please wind up.

MRS BWAMBALE: Yes, I am winding up, this is the last sentence. How will the investors be encouraged to come and invest in our country when there is no security, when such a calamity strikes?  Next time we talk about fire, there should also be a remedy from the cabinet.  Thank you very much. 

MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to be part of those who are extending their sincere sympathies to the people of Jinja Municipality.  I would like us to even as we work towards the solution to some of these issues to have a broader examination of fires.  Fires have become such a common phenomena in this country.  

At the rural setting, recently in Soroti District, we had a fire which burnt up a whole lot of three parishes, leaving virtually 60 per cent of those people without houses and food; whole gardens of cassava were destroyed and that was in Kasilo County.  When we tried to get district intervention, surely they had no money and anybody would understand it.  When we tried to get in touch with Government offices where we knew our help was supposed to come from, one of the things that became apparent to us was that our policy – whatever they call it – a disaster policy did not seem to feature fire as a major disaster problem in this country, to the extent that it became practically difficult for an intervention to be made. And as I talk now, I am seeing the effect of the fire not in terms of the saucepans, the plates and the houses that were burnt but in terms of a serious food insecurity issue that is going to be experienced in the next few months.  

Madam Speaker, my appeal even as we try to handle the issue of fire is that Government comes up with an appreciation of fire outbreaks in this country as a major and common disaster problem which has to be budgeted for, which has to be embodied in the whole disaster policy and which has to be addressed because it affects the common people. Once the food is burnt in this country, it is burnt in the gardens and your saucepans and everything is destroyed. Surely you cannot talk about tax; you cannot talk about education; you cannot talk about any other thing. And I would like that even as we come out with a solution, it should be broader, it should be big enough to encompass not only markets and fire fighting equipment, but also redress the long-term effects of fire. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Katuramu.

MR HOOD KATURAMU (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Western Region): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to join my colleague, the Member of Parliament for Jinja Municipality, to extend sincere sympathies to our brothers and sisters in Jinja for the destruction. 

This destruction in Jinja is the same as happened in Mbarara and it should give us a lesson to learn. There should be mitigation in such a situation, for our people who have lost property. As for me, of course I am sincerely very happy that we did not lose lives in Jinja. Madam Speaker, a group of government officials headed by the State Minister for Disaster Preparedness, indeed responded very quickly and went and assessed the situation in Mbarara. I believe they will do the same for Jinja.  

One of the problems that were identified was that there was inadequate access to these markets to at least reduce on the destruction that was caused. It is my contention that Government needs to review the architectural plans, not only of the markets that have been destroyed by fire in Mbarara and Jinja, but also all the markets in this country. 

One of the great reasons I advance is that with the high level of unemployment in this country, markets have become centres of redemption. Many of our people earn a living through self-employment. If we do not review the architectural designs and plans, it seems we shall experience more fires and more destruction in future.  

Another issue is to appeal to the urban authorities. We have experienced a lot of infernos, destroying many shops, but we have not come up with a tentative investigation to know the causes of these fires. Therefore, I feel that with the meager savings our people make, for them to experience such destruction, it will definitely create a lot of economic and social insecurity for our people. I believe that what we ought to do is not to have ad hoc interventions, but rather put tentative interventions for such calamities when they arise. That is when we shall save our population from such calamities. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the same vein I would also like to send apologies from the people of Kole, whom I represent in this House, to our brothers and sisters in Jinja. 

We are talking about fire burning down a market, and we have had this before. At one time it was reported in Mbarara, not long ago we had one in Soroti. All these people whose properties were burnt, they have got only these things they take to the market, and all is burnt! You can now see the situation of poverty they have been drawn into at this time. 

I however think that we have to begin with the cause of these accidents. Some people have talked about illegal electrical wiring. Since “operation sigma” is going around, I think they should pay more attention to such public places. 

I also have one question which has been bothering me, about markets. Planning of management and operations should take place in the market. If you go to such markets, even in Kampala here, you come back disgusted. There is no order of any kind at all. And if people have to run, to for example escape a fire, it means that so many people will be stampeded on and much damage will be done.  

We should appeal to the authority concerned to set up some form of order in the markets. Particularly if you go to them at about 6.00 p.m., if you go to Owino market here, you see a disaster which you can never forget. The road itself becomes a market, there is nowhere for vehicles to pass, and nobody cares about whatever. Supposing a vehicle rams into people who are in the road, how many people shall we have lost? So, I think there is need for us to insist on the authorities instituting some planning in the way things are set up in the markets. Indeed if there were any planning, I would imagine that one or two things would have been saved. That is my main appeal. 

I also want to talk about the question of health problems in the markets. There is a lot to indicate that people who go to these markets do not care about their own health and those of other people who are in the markets. You find a very dirty place housing a market and nobody seems to care. Everyone is concerned about the piece of soap or whatever it is he is selling. And this pauses a danger, it could also bring about death in the end. Madam Speaker, I would like to end by asking that the authorities concerned begin to look critically at the way we manage operations in markets. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the hon. Minister for Internal Affairs ready to respond, before the Prime Minister? Hon. Kiyingi.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I should respond to a few issues that have been raised in relation to the matters of internal affairs and fire fighting. 

I wish first of all to convey our condolences to the people who lost their property and to those who got injured. I wish to thank the hon. members who have raised questions, especially those who participated in trying to help the affected people when this matter came up, or when this tragedy befell the people of Jinja Municipality. 

On behalf of the ministry, I wish to say that we are taking note of the concerns that have been raised. I also wish to report to this House that issues to do with fire fighting have been matters of concern to all of us in the ministry. My Minister has written to the Ministry of Finance a specific paper written for purposes of Cabinet raising that every issue as far as fire fighting is concerned is as a result of lack of capacity to cope with even the slightest fire.  

We have Police strategic development plan which is now going to Cabinet, and the issue of fire fighting appears prominently in that plan.  To the best of my knowledge, I know no plan of privatizing the fire department because it also has its own probleMS  But what I know is that the Sebutinde report made that recommendation that the fire department should be privatized; but it is not a plan that was made by Government to privatize fire fighting. Madam Speaker, I wish to say that in the interest of time, perhaps Members could raise a substantive question on the capacity of this Government to fight fire, and then I will come out with the rest of the details on that matter.  But for now, I think that is my response.  Thank you, Madam, Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I do not think that it is necessary now to raise a formal question, because the matters have been raised from different parts of the country and they are all saying the same thing that there is a problem.  So, if you have taken note, please come back here with the statement on which Members can then ask for elucidation. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I hope that the Minister of State would do so within a period of three weeks so that it is a well research statement; because whenever we have an assignment of a job, there must be a time frame.  

May I on behalf of Government convey the sympathies of Government to the people who lost their property, and also people who really suffered psychological shock and even physical harm when this fire occurred. May I also take this opportunity to thank the developers in particular Kakira Sugar Works, and I am very happy that we were responsive when we handled the Butamira question–(Laughter)- and the local people who actually provided fire fighting equipment.  So, we should not under estimate the role of these developers especially when we are disaster prone.  

May I also thank hon. Migereko, hon. Aporu, the RDC and the Mayor.  They actually took charge of the situation, and then later on, hon. Aporu from my Ministry came to the scene. I know that a team is compiling information on the losses which have been incurred and what action shall be taken to cure those probleMS  I have no hesitation in asking my colleague, Prof. Kagonyera, to hold an inter Ministerial meeting involving the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  Since hon. Kategaya is higher than him, the Minister of State will attend and of course Local Government and Finance, so that this matter may be investigated thoroughly and concrete answers be provided to this problem. I understand that other Ministries should also be involved, so it is extremely important that this meeting should take place and expeditiously handle this matter; but there are also long term questions to consider. 

 May I also finally point out that Uganda is disaster prone and much as we try to respond to disasters, we have a limited capacity. We are trying to improve that capacity, and we are also trying to re-skill the people to respond to some of these disasters but they are extremely unfortunate and they are now fairly wide spread.  So it is a matter of concern to Government and I want to reiterate our sympathies to the people who were afflicted by these probleMS  I thank you. 

MR NABETA: I just had one more question.  I wanted to thank Government for at least saying that they are going to work out something, but is there something that is immediate that we can do for these people?  These people did not have food for yesterday and today, the micro finance wants to put them in jail.  What can we do now before the three weeks are over?   

PROF NSIMBABI:  Well, you see, as you know this matter is urgent and it is always imprudent to start making statements here, because the matter that we have some debtor and micro finance is not insensitive to people who have had their property destroyed.  Prof. Kagonyera is listening very carefully; in fact I wanted to extract a statement from him, but on reflection, we have deemed it prudent that we should not pledge “air”.   We should investigate the problem carefully and actually do what is possible.  It is always very dangerous; I have known a situation where people die, then the State says, “we shall pay fees, we are going to help so and so” and it does not happen; I dread that kind of situation.  I want to inform you that I am a Christian and a professional and I honor my pledges.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: Hon. Members, I think we have come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.   We shall start with the winding up by the Minister and the Chairperson and proceed straight to the Committee Stage on the Leadership Code. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.57 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 17 April 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)

