Wednesday, 13 April 2005

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you and I want to inform you that today I received representatives of students who presented me with a document concerning the subject, which we heard yesterday; that is the Government policy on sponsoring students.  You will be getting copies of this document so that we study it and use it tomorrow when the debate on the policy commences.

2.51
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have an oral question to the Minister of Transport and Works over the workers’ strike that took place in the Railways Corporation.

THE SPEAKER: I thought we dealt with that subject yesterday, and actually there is no such a thing as oral – but I directed that the answer be given today, because there was a time when the Minister was supposed to give you the answer and you were not here, and I think yesterday I dealt with that matter; we shall be following it up.

MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues. One, during the discussion which led to the approval of the 2004/2005 national budget, the Prime Minister made an undertaking that the Minister in charge of Luweero Triangle would be presenting a statement to this august House. Mr Speaker, as you can see now, we are about to conclude this budget and we are now discussing proposals for the new budget of 2005/2006 but that statement has never been made to this Parliament. I would like to know, when should we have the opportunity to receive that statement? 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on 24th February 2005, I raised the issue of pension. Mr Speaker, as you might also be knowing, Masaka District is one of those districts, which find difficulties in paying pension. As I talk now, some of the pensioners are contemplating to take Masaka District Local Government to court over this issue and the results are likely to be not very pleasant.

Mr Speaker, on 24th February, the Minister in charge of Pensions promised to make a statement before this House and she requested for 30 days. So, from 24th up to now, 30 days actually elapsed and we have never seen that statement. Mr Speaker, could you please cause the minister to present that statement?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, will the minister representing the Leader of Government Business inform us of the position?

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Unfortunately the relevant ministers are not here, but I will endeavour to ensure that in a week’s time, both ministers make the said statements.  Thank you.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI:  Point of procedure. 

THE SPEAKER:  What procedure?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I have got a procedural issue related to today’s Order Paper. Mr Speaker, with me I have a copy of notice which was given to the Minister of Energy in regard to a pending question, which I had and I was expecting this question to have featured on the Order Paper today. The notice was sent to me, alerting me to be ready to mention the question in time for the minister to answer.  What was yesterday alluded to by honourable Bright is quite different.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, since we cannot adjust it here, the point is taken, and we shall look into this.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I have exhausted people who want to say something about this; can we move on to another item?

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, when this House permitted the live broadcast of its proceedings on both Uganda Television and Radio Uganda, the Directorate of Information, the Parliamentary Commission through the office of the Clerk to Parliament, were required to work out an administrative arrangement as a condition to the waiver of our costs by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Parliamentary Commission would have paid for the services.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report that this arrangement has been formalised in a Memorandum of Understanding that derives that Radio and UTV broadcasts of our proceedings are consistent with the Rules of Procedure of this House regarding electronic media coverage.

In this regard, Mr Speaker, I will seek your permission to lay on the Table a copy of this document - the Memorandum of Understanding. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee take it up and study it and make a report. 

MR AGGREY AWORI:  Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Procedure on what?

MR AWORI: On the Order Paper, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, I pray that you accommodate my request as previously consulted with you that I move a motion under Rule 41(b) on a matter of national importance and urgency. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean you want to move the motion now?

MR AWORI: If it meets with your wish.

THE SPEAKER: Let us proceed with some other work and then we shall see later, not now. But in the course of the day, I shall consider your motion.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

2.58
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Mr Speaker, I beg to submit that the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2005 be read for the first time. I have a certificate from Ministry of Finance accompanying the Bill, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Let the Committee on Social Services handle the Bill and make the report promptly. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications was requested to make a statement on the current railway strike and yesterday hon. Ssentongo Teopista had put in a question for oral answer, and I am going to make that statement by answering those questions. 

Her first question was; how far has the Ministry addressed the demand of workers on the strike? 
The Ministry under the mediation of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has had negotiations with Uganda Railway workers and representatives since Friday, 8th April 2005. This followed failure of the efforts the Uganda Railways Corporation Board of Directors and management to end the strike –(Interruption)

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, according to the order Paper we should be receiving a ministerial statement but the Minister is doing something different; he is answering questions. The import of this is that, if it is a ministerial statement, according to our rules, we would have to debate it.  Now, if he chooses to answer a question then we are only limited to supplementary questions. I do not know whether it is procedurally correct for him, rather than give a statement, to answer questions Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: I think he is answering a question, which was sent to the Ministry sometime back and I think we are having copy of his answer. Let us not hang on technicality because that issue has been hanging for quite a long time and is causing concern to her constituency, the workers.

MR AWUZU: Thank you Mr Speaker for your ruling.  Yesterday, I was supposed to answer these questions but I said that I did not have information I would answer it today, thank you very much.

The employers represented by Ministry Works, Housing and Communication URC (Uganda Railways Corporation) and Utility Reform Unit of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development today 13th April 2005 signed a Memorandum of Understanding to call off the strike immediately and to consider the use of consolidated salary and actual factor of 1/500 in the computerization of Uganda Railways Corporations terminal benefits and pensions respectively. The details of the formula will be jointly negotiated between Government and Uganda Railways Workers Union management. The negotiations will start on the 14th April 2005 and Ministers approval is expected by 30th April 2005. 

The workers concern to get Government decision on the use of consolidated salary and the factor of 1/500 in computation of the terminal benefits and pensions emoluments following the concessioning of Uganda Railway Corporation expected in December 2005 has therefore been addressed.  

Question 2 was effects of the strike on the supply of goods especially supply of petroleum transported by railway and the crisis of the said merchandize. Since the bulk of the supply of petroleum products continues to come by road, the short fall in supply of railway has therefore not affected the price of petroleum products. I know members might think that recently there has been some hikes in the price of petroleum, but I can assure you that this is so because of the raise of crude oil on the world market.

Close of business on the 11th of April following URC traffic was stranded on the Kenya Railways Corporation, Uganda Railways Corporation and Tanzania’s Railway Corporation network. In Mombasa, we had 6800 metric tons of general cargo and we also had 1600 metric tons of Mukwano oils and 79,000 tons of loose cargo and 567 containers are stuck in Mombasa.  

On the Uganda Railways Systems, 1637 wagons are stranded at various stations in Uganda. In Mwanza, 344 wagons containing wheat, Rice, and Sugar and other products are stranded at Mwanza.

Q.3 Steps taken by the ministry to address the situation:

My Ministry requested the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to mediate in the calling off the strike. The workers today 13th April signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the employers to call off the strike. My ministry participated effectively in assisting the parties to reach a consensus on the issues of use of consolidated salary and actual factor to be used independent of the Uganda Railways Corporation terminal benefits and pension.  

According to the Memorandum of Understanding, the Uganda Railways Corporation agreed to call off the strike while consolidation of salaries and payment of pensions was being negotiated between workers and the Government. The process would take 30 days and the decision on the payments would be made by Ministers of Finance and Works, Housing and Communication and the Minister of State for Privatisation who are the authorities on the railways privatisation.  Thank you Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

3.06
MS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am just very optimistic that the negotiations will take place and as properly stated here, that it will only last for 30 days because this issue of consolidated salary has been on for a long time. That is why it prompted a strike, which took place immediately after the address of the Minister responsible for privatisation because the way it was handled was not really proper. This must be a great concern that must be taken by the Government, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, but maybe I should inform the House that as I was coming in, I met the honourable Minister, Henry Obbo who said that he wanted to make a statement about Uganda Railways.  I asked him whether he had copies of his statement, unfortunately he did not have in this House. But I said I would inform the House if they want to hear the statement they can hear but if they insist on getting copies then the statement would be made after the copies have been processed. So really, it is up to you whether we can waive this so that we can get the latest development in this matter.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: With that explanation Mr Speaker I think we should waive the requirement for the statements to be circulated so that we can debate the statement together with the statement from the Minister of Labour. 

THE SPEAKER: So that we get up to date because as you heard from the Ministers answers, he was relying to the negotiations that were being carried out by the Minister of Gender, and he has the statement. I think let us get the information.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Henry Obbo): Thank you Mr Speaker and my honourable friends. Mr Speaker, I am just going to make supplementary information to Parliament in view of the information my colleague, the Minister of Works has answered to the question that had been previously put to him. My statement is as follows, if I have to make it in full.

As my honourable colleagues may already have heard, there had been a spontaneous sit down strike by over 1,200 workers of the Uganda Railways Corporation starting from Thursday 31st March 2005. The Uganda Railways Workers Union called the strike.  

The underlying causes are as follows:

Uganda Railway Corporation is due to be privatised by the end of this year. The workers of the Uganda Railway Corporation are therefore anxious and concerned about their future and take home terminal benefits. They have seen the handling of workers during the privatisation of other parastatal bodies such as Uganda Transport Company, the Uganda Electricity Board, the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications and so on and so forth and do not wish to be treated in the same way.  

In particular they were concerned about the computation of terminal benefits. In this the two major issues of concern to them had been:

One, the Consolidation of Salaries: The workers had been receiving salaries and allowances on a consolidated basis. The policy of consolidation was; these receipts and taxing them as such had been in place. Later however, the Privatisation Unit met with them and told the workers that the basic and not the consolidated salary would be used to calculate their terminal benefits.  

Two Pensions: There is a debate as to which formula would be used to calculate pensions, the actual factor of 1/600 or 1/500. The Workers feared that actual factor of 1/600 might be used to compute their terminals benefits and this would have resulted in their reduced terminal benefits. 

Effects of the strike:  

The 15 days strike has been costing the Uganda Railway Corporation at least Shs 70 million per day in terms of lost revenue. 

Consumers of Uganda Railways Corporation especially manufacturers have also incurred losses owing to the stranded import supplies and export goods. 

Demurrage charges have also been suffered all the way from Kilindini Harbour in Mombassa through to Kampala.  

National supplies of fuel dwindled; the cost to the economy is unknown but must be huge.

Efforts to Settle the Strike:

The strike was officially reported to the Commissioner for Labour for intervention by the Uganda Railway Corporations workers on 6th April 2005.  A meeting of all stakeholders in the strike was convened for Thursday 7th 2005, this included the management of Uganda Railways Corporation, the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, the Privatisation Unit on the one hand and the Uganda Railways Workers Union on the other. The Federation of Uganda Employers and the National Organization of Trade Unions participated in advisory capacity, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was the conciliator and chairperson.  

Since then, conciliation meetings took place daily.  Progress towards settlement of the contentious issues was low; this was due to the need for the consultations between the persons at the mediation meetings and those constituents not in the mediation meetings.  

This morning the two sides signed a memorandum of understanding in which they resolved as follows:

1. Consolidation of salaries at Uganda Railway Corporation and the factor of 1/500 either actual factor to be considered for use in the computation of Uganda Railway workers terminal benefits and pensions, respectively.

2. Privatisation Technical Committee of the Ministry of Finance, Uganda Railway Corporation Management and the Uganda Railways Workers Union representatives would sit together immediately to negotiate the details and formula of compensation of terminal benefits and pensions. 

3. The PTC (Uganda Railways Corporation Management and Uganda Railways Workers Union representatives would start their negotiations on details and formula with effect from 14th April this year. 

4. The PTC, that is the technical committee of the Ministry of Finance would submit to Policy Coordination Committee, which consists of the Ministry of Works, Ministry of Finance, the two ministers, the agreed details and formula of computation for the latter’s approval. The PCC that is the Committee of Ministers would approve that.

5. Workers were to suspend the strike immediately and await the decision of the whole process by 30th April this year.

6. There shall be no victimization of workers.

7. Finally, with this breakthrough we await the resumption of work in the Uganda Railway Corporation and development in addressing the concerns of workers. The understanding was that work would resume today and I believe that it did resume today. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.16
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by stating that workers and trade unionists do not like strikes but by the time workers go on strike, it means they have been stretched extensively.  The main issue in contention, as stated, is the question of consolidation of salary.

Mr Speaker, Article 40 of the Constitution of Uganda provides for the right to collective bargaining. The workers of Uganda Railways Corporation are members of the Uganda Railway Workers Union and they have in place a negotiating machinery.  This machinery met and agreed that the salaries of workers will be consolidated and that their terminal benefits will be calculated on account of their consolidated salary. 

To our surprise, Mr Speaker, the government, that is, the ministry of finance has chosen to ignore the right of the workers in collective bargaining.  If a decision has been taken within the ambit of the law, no government officers or the government itself should go against it.  

Now in a nutshell, Mr Speaker, this strike has taken place because there are people in government who do not want to respect the right of workers.  Mr Speaker when Pay As You Earn is being calculated, it is based on their consolidated salary. Now when it comes to paying their terminal benefits, some people want to base on basic salary, which is extremely unfair. 

We have been told, Mr. Speaker, that this strike has cost our economy extensively and I must say I regret that this strike has taken this long to resolve. But one question that comes to mind is that; why has a strike of that nature taken 14 days? The whole reason, Mr Speaker, is that the government, and I must qualify, the executive branch, has abdicated its responsibility of labour administration.   

Mr speaker, the Dispute Arbitration and Settlement Act provide for an elaborate mechanism for resolving disputes of that nature. Unfortunately, over the years this system has collapsed because it is not facilitated in terms of resources and manpower and therefore, workers have lost confidence in it. 

We have an Industrial Court in place but for about two years there was no President so it could not sit, and when the President is appointed, there is no money. That is why, Mr Speaker, workers will always resort to creating a crisis if they are to be heard. There was a mechanism in which we had confidence, we would submit ourselves to the Ministry of labour and our issues would be addressed. But if you file a dispute in the Ministry of labour, it can take you about three or four years to get a decision.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member I would not like to interrupt you, but can we address the situation as it is now?

MR MARTIN WANDERA: I am most obliged, Mr Speaker, to address this situation, but I would not like a situation of this nature to occur. That is why a responsible Member like me should volunteer information that can be useful. With that, Mr Speaker, I thank you.

3.20
MR BERNARD MULENGANI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of terminal benefits in Uganda Railways Corporation has been discussed by the ministers in various forums. We have always asked ourselves that various precedents have been set. As the Minister of Labour said, a lot of institutions have been privatised in the country, and we are aware that it is government policy that we go into privatisation. The government would have been forward looking that there would be eventualities of laying off workers and consequently asking for terminal benefits.  

My question is; why hasn’t the Cabinet come up with a harmonized formula that is applicable to all these institutions instead of keeping the workers anticipating for either something that they will or will not be able to attain? We are aware of the institutions that have been raised here by hon. Henry Obbo, the Minister in charge of Labour, that other institutions have been privatised and people given terminal benefits. They have complained; that one would have set a precedent for harmonisation of the formula. Possibly this would not be occurring in Uganda Railways. 

I also want to be clarified on the total loss of revenue by government since the strike begun. How much revenue has been lost vis-à-vis the figures that are pending to be paid either to the workers as terminal benefits. Why I am raising this is that we are just looking at the MTEF; this budgetary framework paper from the ministry. There are a lot of mishaps, say in the ministry of Works Department; the government is not able to counter-fund road works. Some of these losses of money that are being created by inconsistencies in handling institutions that are being privatised possibly would have gone to that field.  

I would also request some further clarification on the containers that are all over the country in Uganda and those that are stuck in Mombasa. We know very well that these shipping lines charge costs on containers if they stay beyond a certain period of time without being returned to the owners or to the shipping line in the name of demurrage. We are also aware that our investors in the country like Mukwano, Uniliver will be charged these costs.  Who is going to meet these costs, because it is not the failure of the companies that they were not able to deliver the services? 

Furthermore, why is it that we wait for these strikes before communication can be made to the workers? As we talk today, the workers of former Kibimba Tilda are also claiming terminal benefits from government. There is a pending petition to Parliament, which is just being held on. We have discussed some of these things with the minister but we would not like to push these ministers to the walls a lot, because if you talk to somebody who is really responsible, some of these things should be taken care of before they come on the Floor of Parliament.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.24
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA  (Bukanga County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy that this strike has finally come to an end.  But Members could ask, why has it taken so long for three ministers to come to the rescue of the workers? What have the workers been demanding? Incidentally, among the three East African countries, it is Uganda Railways that is operating fairly, and this is the corporation we are almost giving to another company which we are now trying to evaluate. 

A strike should not have taken place if our ministers had been fair to the workers. I do not see why we want to hurt other people. What they are demanding is that these workers of ours have been living under uncertainty all along; they have known that railway is going to be privatised. What do they want to know? Our poor people need to know their package but the three ministers never took this matter seriously. The workers have been knocking on every door, making an appeal; if anything, they have been blamed for even coming to Parliament. 

So I appeal to my senior brothers that this is a simple matter. When you compare Uganda Railways with Kenya Railways, you have been doing much better. In 6th Parliament Uganda Railways was on its knees but because government was not funding it.  Now that we are trying to uplift it and giving to another person to manage it, I think it will be our big job to ensure that workers are well paid; they are sure of their terminal benefits at the end of the day; we can get a good person to run it. 

For this matter, I want to thank the Minister, hon. Henry Obbo, you have come out with a better statement than the Minister of Works. I am happy about it, because the moment these workers went on strike, they had given a warning to our Minister of Finance, Prof. Kasenene and hon. Nasasira. They should have come in time to stop that embarrassment of not having enough fuel and losing money. We are desperately looking for money for so many services; we cannot afford to look on when our workers lay their tools down. I think this is a warning to all of us that we need to work together as a team, as a family, not being very arrogant to our poor workers.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The hon. Minister of Transport in his presentation stated that the ministry has held negotiations with the Workers Representatives.  Actually as he was giving his statement or answering the question, I was disturbed because for a very long time, the workers with their union have been demanding for negotiations, then the Minister comes here and tells us “We have negotiated” after the strike has taken place, and he expects us to thank him for that, when actually, I have talked to very many departments, pressurizing for negotiation.  

So, I think the hon. Minister should be able to give reasons why it has taken long just to have negotiations. Do we just endorse crisis management whereby workers, through their representatives, continue pressurizing and it is only through a strike, then negotiations take place.  

In fact even when you look at the end of the statement on page 3, the hon. Minister states that the workers have agreed to call off the strike.  But then the hon. Minister of State for Labour said, “They have suspended” and those statements mean differently.  “Suspending” means, it is just a short period; they might call it on again. So even now we cannot be sure whether this situation will end.  Because at the end of the statement, the hon. Minister says, “After negotiations, they will wait for endorsement of the Ministry of Finance”. To the workers, the Minister of Finance has become a demon, Privatisation Unit. They just come after negotiations and over rule everything, and we do not think this should be an exception.  

So Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister should give us assurance that these negotiations are going to be meaningful negotiations so that we do not have a resumption of the strike. Then assure us why Privatisation Unit comes and over rides whenever decisions are made.  

I would have also liked to get clarification from the hon. Minister of State for Labour. From his presentation, he has done very good work and the ministry has tried so much; but there is a problem of the labour laws. If our laws were not outdated, some of these situations would not arise. But for the last many years, these laws have not been improved and for the last about two or three years, they have been telling us, “The laws are now in Cabinet, any time they are going to come to Parliament.” In the 6th Parliament this is what we were told, in the 7th Parliament, this is what we have been told. We have been waiting for these labour laws to come here. What has happened? Why is it that these labour laws are taking long to come to the House so that we can pass them as a House and then they can be useful for the workers of this nation?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we are discussing issues of Railways, it is very important for us to move together and to realize that Railways is not the small thing we assume it is. It is a pity that the Minister of Works, when he was presenting his paper this afternoon, did not tell us the total cost of the loss, which has resulted to the Private Sector and the Government as a result of the strike in the Uganda Railways.  It is very unfortunate and Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify to this House, what was the total cost of loss as a result of the strike, starting from Mombasa to here?

Secondly, Railways in the whole world has never been a profitable business and it will never be.  Why? - Because the investment in Railways is normally spread over 50 to 100 years.  There is no private company, which is going to wait for profit to get it after 100 years.  The railway of America is about 200 years; the railway of Great Britain is 300 years. There is no way a small private company can start putting forward that it is going to borrow money from a bank and it will repay it back in 200 to 300 years, it is only governments.  

So it is very important for the Minister to tell us; what is the policy as far as railway is concerned? Is this railway important, is it a priority or is it the road from Mombasa to Kampala, which is more priority; or is it the airline system from Mombasa to here; or is it the pipeline which is bringing oil here? We must get these things clear, if it is railway, which is important, then the Minister has got to tell us that it is very important, and they have been sleeping up on this issue! (Interruption)

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, hon. Gagawala, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of information especially in regard to the point, which was alluded to regarding the Railways operation worldwide. The information I would like to give is that the Railways service is globally a public utility. Even countries that are in advanced stages of privatisation namely, France, Britain, still hold stake on Railway services. So it baffles me when I see a young country getting excited to privatise the railways; I shed tears.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Lukyamuzi, the last part was not information. (Laughter)

MR WAMBUZI: I thank you for your correction, Mr Speaker. What we are asking the Minister to clarify to this House is to give us an assurance that the people who have been working in Uganda Railways for the last, call it 50, 100 years, these are your people; they are your voters; they were trained in the Railway Training School. Are we abandoning that there will be need again to train Railway workers? When these workers are laid off, are they going to be re-absorbed somehow?  

These are the things, which we need to know so that we assure our people that actually the people who are working in Railways, they are not about to be thrown away in a dustbin. This is the sort of clarification we would like the Minister to make; to assure this House that after all, the government is only concessioning these other people; it is not selling off the whole way. If he does not tell us, then the workers get excited and say, “Look, they must go on strike because when they sell, they will be relegated to the dustbin!  

Mr Speaker, I request the Minister to clarify clearly to this House these issues so that we move together; we are not against what he is doing. But we are disturbed by his way of doing things, trying to ignore the workers’ interests. When you ignore the workers’ interest, you are ignoring Ugandans, and even the private sector in this game.
3.35
MR AGGREY AWORI  (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise first and foremost, to thank the government for having revived the railway line from Tororo, Soroti to Gulu after being dormant for 20 years. I think that is an achievement, which is rare in the performance of this government.  

However, Mr Speaker, there are certain questions I would like to put to the honourable ministers of Labour, Minister of Communications and Minister of Finance: Number one; this strike is symptomatic of a number of ailments within the system. One, from the two statements we have heard from the two ministers, there is definitely marginal inter-ministerial consultations. This situation should have not developed the way it did.
  
Two; we have heard from my colleague saying that the Minister of Labour was much more forthcoming with information than the Minister of Communications for obvious reasons; there was no consultations between the two. One, to-date we have not received, we have not heard in this august House the transport policy of this government. We need definitely a transport policy, matters pertaining to this especially to public transport. Because of this kind of lack of policy we lost Uganda Airlines. We went about in haphazard manner, this august House received information in bits and pieces and as a result we are part and parcel of the people who butchered our national airline and it went away. 

Mr Speaker, again this question of the Ministry of Finance trying to privatise the rail concession. As much as I agree with my colleague hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, that this is a public facility, which should be not subjected to privatisation, indeed it is a public facility, but there are ways and means now days of making a public facility profitable.  

We have a clear-cut case of Cameroon where my colleague hon. Nathan Byanyima led a delegation of this august House to see how the workers would survive after privatisation. I do not think we have done that. Our workers here went on strike because there is a danger of privatising this particular public facility without taking their terminal benefits into consideration. There is a plan to do the concession for the three counties, Kenya has made arrangements for the workers; Tanzania has made arrangements for the workers, what arrangements are in place for our workers when the concessionaire takes over? 

On the part of Tanzania, the government has actually refused to negotiate with the person who is supposed to take over until the needs and the concerns of the workers have been put in place. 

Mr Speaker, again talking about the interest of the workers, some of the workers who had been used to free housing facility are being pushed out of these houses in a manner which is not humane. One, there is what we call stripping of the assets of the railway corporation; asset stripping is taking place now in URC without government coming to us for authority. They are selling houses; they are selling land that belongs to URC. When you ask them, why are you doing this? They say, we want to reshape this URC so that it becomes marketable to the would-be concessionaires. Again the interests of the workers have not been taken into consideration.

MR BAMWANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Aggrey Awori, that anybody who is going to be taking concession on a railway line has no interest in non-core assets like a small house in Jinja, a small plot in Kabale or anywhere else. What they are doing, what is called stripping the corporation of assets, they are giving the first option to sitting tenants as much as it has been the case with other institutions. Therefore, I would like to assure him that whoever will be coming to invest in a railway as an investment has nothing to do with non-core assets like a small house in Kololo or in Nakasero.  I thank you. 

MR AWORI: I thank you my honourable colleague because you are an expert in that. However, I would like to bring to your attention honourable colleague with your information that we had the same problem with UCB. When they said we are going to strip UCB of all non-core assets, that is when they decided giving away houses at throw away prices to certain individuals, to the extent that when we were ready to sell UCB, there was actually almost nothing at all. That is why it was given away almost for free. So, this question of saying non-core assets to be given away in order to make the business attractive to the would-be investor, that is cheating the people of Uganda. 

Even at the moment, Mr Speaker, as I express my concern, if you check on the railway line we are supposed to have so many metres of free land without concessions. Railway Corporation, I would like to get confirmation from the honourable Minister of Works, have they sold any piece of land, any property in the last 18 months? How many workers have been evicted from their homes because they cannot afford to put down the minimum deposit for the so-called non-core assets that my honourable colleague is referring to, when somebody who has been getting a free house and suddenly he is told now you have to go and somebody else who is enjoying so much money or bank facilities comes and buys his house and he has got to go. These are the issues that are behind the workers concerns.  

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, with your permission, again the question of training. I would like to know from the honourable Minister of Communications, in the last three years, how many graduates of Makerere and Kyambogo have been absorbed in URC? How many other people in URC have gone aboard for further training? These are the symptoms underlying factors that create instability in the minds of the workers and eventually, on a small matter of pay they can go on strike. But the underlying factors are there. Mr Speaker, I call upon the relevant ministers to come up with the public transport policy for this country.

THE SPEAKER: I think we end and we get responses from the ministers.

3.44
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You know in the 6th Parliament, I chaired an inquiry into Uganda Railways, as one of my colleagues has mentioned. The Uganda Railways were literally on their knees and I am happy to learn from the Chairman responsible for Communications that Uganda Railways is now one of the better ones within our region because of the various proposals that we made to try and revitalize Uganda Railways. 

But, Mr Speaker, this particular strike from what the Minister of Labour was saying, the issue was whether to use the consolidate salaries or the basic salaries to calculate the benefits of workers. This is a matter, which government must resolve, and I know that it is even affecting the calculation of pensions. 

You see, Government resorted to consolidating all the allowances and came up with a figure, which became the figure to be regarded as the salary for workers. The reason why they went to a consolidated salary was to try and give workers a living wage. Now, if you go back to the basic salary in order to calculate the benefits of somebody who is being terminated, you are being extremely unfair to him, because you are calculating it on something everybody knew that it was not a living wage. That is why they came up with a consolidated salary. So, Sir, I think this matter must be resolved, because if we do not resolve it, it is going to re-occur again and again and again.

The second point I wanted to make, which has already been made and it must be repeated, is that the delay by the ministers to take action on the strike must be condemned. That delay has cost the economy a lot. And I think those ministers must take personal responsibilities for their inability to take action in time. 

If you read through what has actually happened, you read through the statement of the Minister of Works, demurrages, the delay of arrival things, all those costs, those are costs to the economy. How do you expect this economy to be competitive if ministers are going to take their time in taking decisions on matters, which are going to affect the economy? I think they have to be answerable for their laziness in taking action on matters.

The third point I want to make, Mr Speaker, is that the railways is a very important component in the entire economic situation. And the privatisation of Uganda Railways –(Interjection) 

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, honourable Member, for giving way. The information I wanted to give deals with the fact that there is a very huge cost on the economy. Last week I had the opportunity to go to Mombasa on the discussion of the Great Lakes Region meeting and I met our Honorary Counsel at Mombasa and he told me that we have a very big problem. That many of our business community have had a problem of having very high costs of the demurrages and at times the cost go to as high as US$20,000. Yet, for instance, the container would have been valued at about US$15,000 and many of them have ended up either abandoning their goods or merchandise there and consequently, many of them have just borrowed money from either the banks here or some from the money launderers within the economy. 

I want to say that this is a very serious problem and I think we need to address it urgently, because as you may see, many of our people have lost their property, some of them have mortgaged their houses and they have ended up being taken. I think we need a serious or a multifaceted solution to this problem. I wanted to give this information. 

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much for that information. Hon. Gagawala Wambuzi, asked why the minister did not give us the cost of this strike, and I would like to insist that the minister comes back to this House and gives us the cost of this strike to the economy. If he really cares, he should tell this House what it has caused the economy for this terrible laziness or negligence by the ministers concerned. 

But, Mr Speaker, as I was saying, the railways is a very important component in the management of an economy and the government has decided to privatise or concession the Uganda Railways. I think this particular privatisation transaction should not be permitted simply to be done by the minister himself. I think the minister must report to this House on the process of privatising Uganda Railways. 

It is very important because, the economy depends on the movement of goods and we know that one of the cheapest ways of moving goods is by railways; and if the minister makes a mistake in the privatisation of this particular facility, the economy is going to suffer. Therefore, it is important that this House must be kept informed of the process of privatisation. [Mr Kagimu: “Information”]. I will take it.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I have got a chance to bring my point. I was reading in the press last week, there is a consultant of IMF who advised IMF that if we are to give assistance to developing countries, they must privatise, they must cut the civil service, they must liberalise the economy. And to the amazement of everybody, that consultant apologized that he had made a mistake; that he had misadvised IMF. He said sorry, and everybody was shocked. Now, in view of this, what is the government going to do? 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, with this subject at hand, are we dealing with the principle of privatisation or we are dealing with workers? I think the subject that we are considering is about the strike and their terms of service and pensions and so forth. The other one is a broader matter, which can be dealt with some time in future at an appropriate time, not related to this one honestly. 

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much. But of course, Mr Speaker, the strike was triggered by the privatisation process. If the Minister for Privatisation was doing his work well, we would probably not have had this strike. But as I said, I think it is important for us not to simply allow the privatisation process of railways to go without this House being kept informed of this process so that in case there are mistakes, we can make sure that we put things right in good time. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, honourable members, can we hear brief responses especially from the Minister in charge of Privatisation because as you heard, they were asking why do you not have a common policy of handling these matters and –(Interjection)

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE (TRANSPORT) (Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have agreed among ourselves, three of us will each have to make a small response according to what was asked. 

I want to thank the honourable Member for Workers for her supplementary question. I want to tell her that definitely, I was there this morning and I was a spirit of good faith and, therefore, we hope the negotiations will be finalized in the same spirit.

Hon. Bernard Mulengani asked about the loss of revenue to this country. I can only talk about the loss of revenue to Uganda Railways, because I do not have information for the loss of revenue of other business people and so on and so forth. But railways is losing $40,000 per day, which is about Shs70 million, which for the 13 to 14 days the strike has been on, comes up to about a billion shillings – 900 and something million; about a billion shillings.  

It is true, that there is going to be increased cost on demurrage on the containers, because they are being kept over a period longer than they were supposed to have been kept.  

Now, hon. Lyomoki said that there was a controversy between what the Minister of State for Labour said and what I said on the subject of the end of the strike. I disagree with him, I do not think this is true. What I said is exactly what the minister said although I put it in different words. I said, according to the memorandum of understanding, Uganda Railways Corporation workers, agreed to call off the strike while consolidation of salaries and payment of pensions was being negotiated. I did not say the strike had stopped, I said they had put it off while negotiations continue. I think you need to read what I put down more carefully.

Hon. Gagawala, you are right, it is true we are concessioning the railways, we are not selling.
  
Hon. Lukyamuzi, you talked about railways all over the world, that the government is running all the railways all over the world at – I do not know how small your world is, because I know very reliably, because I do get magazines and so on about railways all over the whole world. The railways in Britain have been privatised and definitely, Britain forms a very big part of this world. So, please, get your information more correct.

Hon. Awori, it is not true that the Ministry of Works and Ministry of Labour did not have consultations among themselves, because although these negotiations are being chaired by an official from the Ministry of Labour, the Director of Transport and Communications in our ministry has been on this negotiation team and he has been in all the sessions. So, the two ministries have been sharing information among themselves. 

I would also like to inform you that, the Minister of State for Privatisation and myself were on that delegation from Uganda, which went to Cameroon and to Cote D’Voire and, therefore, as such hon. Byanyima could not have chaired that delegation.

Railway reserve: We are trying to clear the railway reserve because we want to hand over the properties to whoever is going to take the privatisation of the railways without any encumbrances.  

Finally, hon. Mwandha, I would like to believe that we did not delay in resolving this strike, because as soon as the strike started, we moved to the Ministry of Labour and as I had said, we had our Director of Transport in this negotiation team, so I do believe we did the needful and not delay.

Thank you, Mr Speaker, and as I said, I believe my two colleagues also want to say something.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIVATISATION) (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity to clarify on some of the issues the honourable members have raised, and I would like to thank the honourable members for their contributions especially about the mode of privatisation and matters affecting railways. Raising of these issues gives me an opportunity to clarify on some of these issues that are sometimes not clarified.

First of all, I would like to reiterate that the government is committed to settling the terminal benefits of workers in any public enterprise that is privatised and no worker should be negatively affected by the privatisation process.

Now, how do we settle, how do we calculate, how do we determine the terminal benefits of workers? In the first place, for every privatisation, there is a privatisation technical committee. There is a specialized committee that looks into the affairs of this enterprise, which is being prepared for divestiture.  

Now, what is the composition of this committee?  Obviously there is the Ministry of Finance, privatisation; there is also the sector minister.  So, any enterprise that is being privatised, the sector minister and the ministries involved – usually we hire experts to advise on the divestiture of that particular enterprise and those consultants would sit on this committee. But on that committee also sit the board members of the particular enterprise, the management and workers.  Even in this case of railways, we have conceded and we said workers would be represented on that technical working committee. 

So, the privatisation technical committee considers all issues of the divestiture and reports to the PCC (Policy Coordinating Committee), which is made up of the Minister of Finance, the sector minister and the Minister for Privatisation.  So, the privatisation technical committee goes through all the issues and makes recommendations to the policy coordinating committee, which makes the final decision.

So, in view of that, one of the issues that have come up on the Floor is that there was negligence and delay by the three ministers. Meaning, the Minister of Finance, the sector minister meaning the Minister of Works and myself; and this is not correct. The point is that, this issue of the determination of the terminal benefits was already in the process. The discussions had already started and all that was remaining was to agree on the formula and I will comment on the question of the formula as the honourable member raised. 

The disagreement was, what formula to use and we had met the workers. I went in person, met the workers and assured them that government is committed to paying their terminal benefits, that the government is aware of their demands and I went through with them the demands they had put and we asked for time, not more than one month, for the PTC (Privatisation Technical Committee) to complete its discussion and recommend to the Policy Coordinating Committee (PCC) so that we announce the results.  

So, the policy coordinating committee was waiting for the recommendations of the technical committee then it would communicate to the workers. So, it is a question of the process and we had asked only for one month. So if this process had been completed, the policy coordinating committee would have informed the workers of the decisions; but their demands were known and they were not being neglected, they were being considered.  

Then the question of formula, how do we determine workers terminal benefits? This is clear; we do not need a special formula. For all employees in different enterprises, the terms and conditions of service indicate what a worker is entitled to at termination. That is very clear, but at times when privatisation is taking place, the workers and the management of the enterprise do not agree on the interpretations. The content is already there on the interpretation of what the terms and conditions are, and that is when in few cases we have had problems determining what terminal benefits to give the workers. 

So, when there is disagreement on the interpretation of terms and conditions, then we refer this to the Solicitor General and the Solicitor General who is the legal expert for government will give us the workers’ interpretation or the enterprise’s interpretation. And once we get the correct interpretation of that, we calculate the benefits and the workers are paid. 

So, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think in this case what was happening was that if there was to be permanent disagreement between the workers interpretation of their terms and conditions of service and Uganda Railway Corporation, then they would have asked for a correct interpretation to be given to us. 

Once a correct interpretation is given to us, then we ask the Auditor General to calculate the amount and we pay workers. But there is no intention whatsoever to refuse workers what they are entitled to. In fact, in this meeting I had with the workers, which was attended by the board, by management and some Workers Members of Parliament and so on, we committed to giving even more than they were entitled to but the question was, what would be the final position?

Hon. Byanyima and hon. Lyomoki raised the issue, did the ministers come on time? I think this we have just clarified that the three ministers could not come in before the PTC gave them recommendations to give the final formula. 

As for intervention, I took steps. I met the workers only that I could not commit myself on the consolidation and I think that is why workers were not happy that when I met them, I did not commit myself that I am accepting because, I could not give a unilateral position that is not the position of the Policy Coordinating Committee (PCC). But we asked them for only one month that the policy coordinating committee, would have completed and would come back to them.

The question as to the divestiture method of Uganda Railway Corporation, are we selling Uganda Railway Corporation or are we leasing it, are we concessioning it? Mr Speaker and honourable members, the divestiture method we are using is a concession and as you know, a concession means that the concessionaire comes and operates, but the main government assets, the concessionaire is given a period of time in which to operate the enterprise and we agree on the fees to pay to government and what other conditions we asked. Then after that period, these assets which have remained to government may be concessioned further or government may decide to do with them whatever.  

So, on Uganda Railways Corporation, the method we are using is a concession not a sale. So, we are not selling Uganda Railway, we are concessioning it out and the assets will remain government assets.

Hon. Awori was comparing the terminal benefits of Uganda and terminal benefits of Kenya and other countries. Mr Speaker, it is not correct to say that Uganda has calculated a raw deal for its workers and this is on record and it can be verified. 

On the contrary, Uganda has done more than elsewhere because what happens, and this is what is happening even in Kenya, terminal benefits are given to workers who are going to be laid off by the divestiture process. In Uganda, we are paying terminal benefits of all the workers; whether the concessionaire wants to keep them or not, and we have decided that every worker of Uganda Railways will get terminal benefits. 

The reason why we have decided that every worker gets his/her terminal benefits is because workers are going to change employers. Whereas the workers of Uganda Railways were employed by Uganda Railways Corporation now they will be employed by a different employer, the concessionaire. We have said, let everyone get terminal benefits and if at a later date, the worker is laid off by the concessionaire, the concessionaire will pay only the terminal benefit from the time he takes over. Whereas elsewhere, usually it is the workers who are laid off that are paid terminal benefits but when the concessionaire takes on a worker does not get terminal benefits. So, Uganda has actually, as far as our workers are concerned, done much better than elsewhere.

Hon. Awori raised another issue of assets stripping but hon. Bamwanga had clearly clarified that very well. For any enterprise, which is going to be privatised, we identify core assets that are important for this enterprise and non-core assets that are not essential for that enterprise. After separating the core from the non-core assets, then the enterprise can sell the non-core to raise money for the terminal benefits and for other reasons. So, non-core assets can be sold off. But, for an outsider, when he sees certain assets being sold off like houses and pieces of land, then he comes to the conclusion that there is assets stripping going on.  

So, what may have been observed is the sell of non-core assets of this enterprise. But I am not saying that asset stripping could not be taking place, I am not denying that, I just want to clarify the difference between non-core and core assets. If any assets stripping is going on, on the core assets, which has not been brought to our attention so far, if anybody knows we would request to be informed and we shall act immediately without hesitation or without favour.  So that is the position – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: This thing has taken long; please, conclude.

PROF. KASENENE: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I would like also to answer the concern raised by hon. Mwandha that this issue should not be handled by the minister alone. It is not the minister alone who handles the divesture, it is not like someone selling his coat or his car, we have the technocrats first of all in the ministry, and we hire experts to advice. 

In addition, in this case of the divesture of the Uganda Railways, originally the divesture of Uganda Railways was to be a one-country divesture like we have divested elsewhere. But in view of the broader co-operation of the sister countries of East Africa, it was agreed that Kenya Railways and Uganda Railways should be divested jointly. So, the divesture now of Uganda Railways is a joint concession with Kenya Railways.  

In this case we do not only have the privatisation technical committee, but we also have a joint privatisation technical committee, which brings together the technical committee of Uganda and the technical committee of Kenya. So really, we have put in place a system to ensure that the two countries get the best they can get out of this divesture. I would like to conclude by asking the honourable members to continue supporting us in this activity. I thank you.

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE (LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Mr Henry Obbo): Mr Speaker, I will be making comments on very few points because my colleagues have done justice to the areas asked.  First of all, I would like to thank the honourable members of Parliament for the very good interest they showed on this matter of the strike, and also for the expression of concern regarding the Ministry of Labour in as far as the facilitation is concerned.

Hon. Martin Wandera made a general comment and I thank him for it because what he said was merely informative and does not need my reply.  

Hon. Mulengani made some points and I want to attend to two of them. The question of actual formula. This I have also discovered is not uniform as practiced by the Privatisation Unit of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In today’s conclusion of the discussions on the railways strike, I did impress it upon the Privatisation Unit representative that in future one formula should be applied. 

I also requested, because I did discover that my ministry is not represented at all in that unit and I appeal to the Privatisation Unit, that the Ministry of Labour should be included at least on an ex-officio membership basis because we have got technical know how, and we can give advice which in the end would save this economy a lot of unnecessary strife.  

Hon. Bernard Mulengani also talked about Kibimba and he said that Kibimba workers have not yet been fully compensated. I am unaware about this and I would like to request him to contact my ministry and we shall see what we can do about this.

Hon. Nathan Byanyima asked why the strike had taken a long time. This answer has been given already.  

Hon. Lyomoki, asked also about why it took a long time and the same answer, which my colleagues gave also, applies to the question asked.  But then hon. Lyomoki wondered why the revision of the labour laws has been taking so long. I would like to give some explanation. 

First, when it comes to labour laws, you have a lot of interest groups involved, you have the employers there, you have the trade unions there, you have government there, you have the international community involved, you have also in a separate way the Ministry of Finance in the form of the regulation unit. In order to discuss things with these people and to reach an agreement, it takes a long time.  It is much easier to discuss things with one or two people and then you resolve, but I can now report that we have already held discussions on the revision of four different labour laws and we have reached an agreement. 

What is now happening is, we have asked the Ministry of Finance to give us certificate so that we can present papers to Cabinet and then Cabinet after approval would give instruction to the Attorney General’s Chambers to draft Bills for discussion here in Parliament. The Ministry of Finance is yet to respond and I do not know how to proceed next; but I think what I shall now do is just present the papers to Cabinet and let Cabinet give instruction to the Ministry of Finance to give us the necessary certificate. That is as far as labour laws is concerned. But I want to assure you that we are doing our level best.  

Let me make comment on what hon. James Mwandha did say, the question of condemning and the question of taking personal responsibilities. I think in Parliament, this is rather in the extreme. I do not think any of the three ministries need to be condemned; at least I feel the Minister of Labour need not to be commended considering the very effective way we handled this matter and we resolved the question amicably, saving the economies of this country, of Kenya and of Rwanda enormous losses which they would have suffered had we not been involved. I would like on this note, to thank hon. Byanyima for having recognized the ability with which I handled this matter. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 18/05 to the Minister of Health

4.18
MR MAURICE KAGIMU KIWANUKA (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Mr Speaker, Question 18/05. “Aware that India which has been the main cheap supplier of AIDS drug (ARVs) to Uganda has indicated moves to stop the export of these drugs, and noting that government has put a 10% tax on AIDS drugs, the price of drugs is likely to rise to the tune of Shs 300,000 per dose in the near future.

What measures does the government intend to put in place to protect its citizens by ensuring that the drug is affordable?”

4.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Capt. Mike Mukula): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am here to provide answers to the question raised by hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka, the honourable Member of Parliament for Bukomansimbi, on the ARVs drugs. 

Mr Speaker, the question raised was, “What measures does government intend to put in place to protect its citizens by ensuring that the drug is affordable?” (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI:  Mr Speaker, I see the honourable Minister reading a statement to us, but then Members do not have the copies even the person asking the question does not have a copy.  Can we have the copy of the responses?

THE SPEAKER: No, you see there are two questions, one and two. He was reading the question, which appears on the Order Paper and giving the answer.  Let us really clear this work.  He could have said, question (a) and then gives the answer but he wants to read it in full. This is what he is doing to help you. There are two questions, one and two. You give us the answer.

CAPT. MUKULA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  You say question one and then give the answer.

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr Speaker, question one reads: “What measures does Government intend to put in place to protect the citizens by ensuring that the drug is affordable”. The honourable member is aware that India, which has been the main cheap supplier of the AIDS drug, the ARVs, to Uganda has indicated moves to stop the export of these drugs. Noting that Government has put 10 per cent tax on AIDS drug, the prices of the drug is likely to rise to the tune of ugshs300,000 per doze in the near future. 

Mr Speaker, in response to question number one. The Indian Patency law and that is the drugs, the ARVs, the generic drugs being imported from India. I wish to respond as follows. 

The Indian Government has passed a law on the Patency law of the drugs. This law is intended to enforce the intellectual property rights regulations and that is the Triple Agreement within the WTO thus ensuring the protection of the ownership of the drug patency. If implemented, companies that manufacture the affected generic drugs may no long be able to do so. The resultant effect would be less availability of the drugs.  Consequently, countries that source their drugs from India would be adversely affected.

Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues, following the news of the enactment of the law by the Indian Government, a number of steps have been initiated namely:

One, high level consultations have started at the International level involving the UN Secretary General, the World Trade Organization, World Health Organization different heads of Government and the Indian Government. 

Two, here in Uganda the Triple provision has been re-examined given a provision under the Tripes Agreement that allow parallel licensing of the production of the drugs under emergency consideration is being made to put up a factory for the ARV production in Uganda.  Uganda is expected from the Triple’ Regulation till the year 2016, and therefore, can benefit from the local production of the generic drugs. This measure would ensure availability of the ARVs to protect its citizens.  

Three, information available seems to indicate, Mr Speaker, that the ARV drugs produced before 1995 would not be affected.  If this is the case, there will be no such effects on Uganda because most of the drugs being used today were first produced before 1995.  Mr Speaker, that is in relation to the law.  

Mr Speaker, tax on the ARVs and that is question number two.  In regard to the concern of the tax on the ARVs, a number of inquiries and concerns have been received by the Ministry of Health on the implication of the common external tariff on pharmaceutical particularly drugs for the HIV and AIDS.  

Mr Speaker, during the second meeting of the East African Community Partner States National Regulatory Authorities and Experts on the Pharmaceutical and Medical Products, it was noted that drugs qualified for taxation on the current law, the impact of this on the prices of the anti-retroviral drugs and other essential medicines was immediately drawn to the attention of the East African Community Customs Union.  

Mr Speaker, since then a process for consultation has been set in motion with the view of amending this law, a list of drugs including the anti-retroviral drugs have been submitted for exemption by the East African Council of Ministers of Health.  

The remedy that is currently available is contained in a letter dated 18 of February 2005 by the East African Community Secretariat addressed to the Foreign Affairs Permanent Secretaries, which is in part states:

“In the meantime, the Director General Customs and Trade, on behalf of the Secretary General, East African Community wrote to partner states informing them that East African Community Customs Management Act under Section 114 and a fifth Schedule part A, Section 10 provides for exemption of duty and goods and equipment for use in the AIDS funded project. 

As most of these HIV/AIDS drugs are imported under the global fund for AIDS, UNAIDS and other bilateral AIDS funded programmes, the exemption regime is applicable in respect of such drugs.”  

Mr Speaker, in line with above, the Ministry of Health issued a Press Release on the 4 April 2005 signed by the Director General of Health Services, Professor Omaswa, calling upon all concerned not to levy taxes on the ARVs imported under this Section.  The Press Release was issued following consultations with the Commissioner General of the Uganda Revenue Authority.

So far the new Indian patency law has no negative impact on the availability of the ARVs drugs in Uganda. In line with this, Mr Speaker, honourable members, Uganda is focusing on achieving three million people who will be on the HIV/AIDS by the end of this year.  Uganda is already well ahead of this, we are about to hit our target of 60,000 people on the ARV drugs.

Finally, the matter is being addressed at high levels involving the UN Secretary General, the World Trade Organization, different Heads of Governments and the Indian Government.  Mr Speaker, I wish to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kagimu, you have any supplementary?  No supplementary, okay.

4.29
MR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka):  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I just want to bring to the attention of the House that the very question which hon. Kagimu has asked also was a matter of discussion at 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union that sat in Manilla.  

Like the Minister has said, this question was actually raised by one of our colleague’s hon. Dr Elioda Tumwesigye. In response the leader of the delegation of India said that the law as it is now does not have anything to do with the ARVs. As the situation is and aware of their colleagues, the African countries whatever they did was actually also in line with what is pertaining at the moment, Mr Speaker.  Thank you.

4.30
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I wanted a clarification from the hon. Minister on page two and three.  I am not yet clear. The impression I got from point three is that the drugs which were produced or manufactured before 1995 will not be affected by this legislation. Is it the impression, which I have got which have expounded?  When I look at year 1995, that is ten years ago, are these drugs not about to expire or what?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think this is the date when they were manufactured. It is not that they have expired, but when it came on the market.

DR KASIRIVU: It should be better phrased, Mr Speaker. Secondly- (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Let it be a supplementary question.  What did you exactly mean?  Drugs manufactured in this year and the other?

DR KASIRIVU: Exactly.  Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would have expected also the Minister to give us information.  Sometime back there was information that there was a company here which was interested in starting to manufacture ARVs.  Possibly he would have also given us information whether the Ministry of Health has had any contacts with this company and whether they are being helped to start the process of manufacturing ARVs here in Uganda.  

4.31
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mine is on page 2 where the Minister in his second point mentioned that Uganda is likely to put up a local factory for ARVs. I would like to inquire from the Minister when soon or how soon is this one going to be such that Ugandans can have a lot of confidence.

Two, there is where he said that consultations have been made and set in motion with a view of amending this law.  When is this law likely to come in place?  Is it going to be in the East African Parliament or in the Ugandan Parliament?

Three, what has been the impact on the cost of these drugs?  Supposing India has not really allowed exporting here, now assuming we have drugs from say German and all that, are they going to be as cheaper as the ones for India?  India is well known for providing cheaper drugs.  Thank you.

4.34
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mine is on the issue of the press release.  I would like to know from the Minister whether it is more effective to issue a press release than administratively write to the Commissioner General, instructing him or her not to levy the tax.  Thank you.

4.35
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The last time the issue of AIDS drugs came to this House.  I asked the Minister to clarify on some reports that AIDS drugs were being stolen.  Secondly, AIDS drugs were being re-exported.  At that time the Minister denied these reports.  But to date these reports continues to persist.  

I want the Minister to reassure the country further that AIDS drugs coming for our patients in this country are safe.  Thank you.

4.36
MR AHMED AWONGO (Koboko County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  In paragraph two, the first page, the Minister has said that the prices of drugs is likely to rise to the tune of ugshs300,000 per dose.  May I know from the Minister as to how much these drugs cost as of now?  

4.37
MRS PROSCOVIA SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula South, Kamuli): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  In the struggle against HIV/AIDS, the public was relieved to know that ARVs would give hope to better quality of life and extended life. This is because, before the ARVs were available the situation was very hopeless.  

I do recall that on this continent South Africa has been at the forefront of these patent laws and all the difficulties of generic drugs, and has just made some success with India, with allowing India to provide generic drugs and make them affordable. 

From an international diplomacy level, I am wondering what steps our Government is taking at international level to check India’s move having gotten the support of South Africa, for instance, and other African nations, to force the global trade laws to allow it make cheap drugs and then short change the world, and turn round and make them expensive; because the politics of AIDS internationally is around generic drugs.  

The arguments that were made before generic drugs were allowed onto the market and to be produced, the argument was that they were hurting Africa; they were hurting us, and so the debate went on and on, around making it possible for we Africans who are sick, to have some light support.  So, I would like to understand at what levels internationally are you going to put pressure on India not to short change us?  Thank you.



4.39
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (Woman representative Ntungamo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like the Minister to assure us that these cheap drugs from India are effective. We all know that cheap things are always expensive. So, how effective are these so-called cheap drugs from India?

4.40
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Can the honorable Minister of Health give us categories of people affected by this horrible disease that are entitled to free ARVs; categories like, mothers, children, public servants, private sector or who can get it for free?

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Capt. Mike Mukula): First of all, I would like to thank the honorable colleagues who have been able to raise additional questions and seeking clarification. 

Hon. Kasirivu wanted to know clearly the meaning of the statement we made on page 2 about drugs that were manufactured before 1995. This means that those drugs that were licensed by the Indian Drug Authorities or companies within India and companies that were allowed to manufacture the ARVs, did not fall into the category of this new legislation in India.  I do not mean that drugs manufactured then depending on the life of the drug in the shelve will not last for over 10 years. So, I thought that would help hon. Kasirivu understand the statement.  

Now the question of manufacturing of drugs in the country: Mr Speaker, honorable colleagues, Government of Uganda has a very open and a liberal policy in terms of investment in the country. The Ministry of Health working together with Ministry of Finance and Uganda investment Authority is holding discussions.  

Some of the pharmaceutical industries that are here, already have capacity to produce once we give them the go ahead. In terms of quality and efficacy they can be able to manufacture some of these generic drugs. I want to say that as soon as we put in place, and they have made the basic criteria that we require in the manufacture of the generic drugs, the ARVs, we will through the National Drug Authority allow some of these companies to go and manufacture the ARVs.

Now the question raised regarding the East African Community in terms of the cost of drugs, how will this be able to impact in terms of cost of imported ARVs into the country?  So, far I want to say that there has been no cost implication at all. As I have said in the statement, drugs imported into the country are not subjected to any taxes. This is a matter we resolved because already we had stock in our stores. Most of these drugs that we have in our stores are being given free and we are trying to meet a global target of hitting three million people who are using the ARVs. 

Uganda’s target is to achieve the 60,000 people who are within the bracket using the ARVS. As I talk now the last record that we had by the time I came to Parliament, we had passed a little over 50,000 people who are now using the ARVs in the country. So, we are about to hit our target and Uganda in the sub Sahara region is far ahead of most countries in making sure that we achieve this goal. 

Mr Speaker, the question was raised as to whether it is in order to release a press statement or issue statement or guide taxation by writing to the Director General of Uganda Revenue Authority.  I wish to state the following: 

1. It was important that the Director General of Health Services, Prof. Omaswa, issue this statement in order to alley the fears of particularly those who are using the ARVs. 

2. The manufacturing companies and importers also needed to know including our development partners. it is in the same regard that we had a meeting with the Director General of Uganda Revenue Authority. We also issued another press statement, which was reported in The New Vision and the Monitor.  We thought this would help the general public understand the difficulties that were involved in getting this matter clarified.

The other question raised, Mr Speaker, was whether the ARV drugs were being stolen, re-exported or being handled properly. I want to state very clearly, Mr Speaker, honorable colleagues, that the ARV drugs are safe and well managed. 

 I want to assure, honorable colleagues, that these drugs are being looked after very well. They are toxic and not all doctors can dispense these ARVs. That is why a very complex training programme is initiated in the management of the ARVs. It is in this regard that we have regularly ensured that the general public is guided on the use and access of the ARVs. 

The cost of drugs: I want to say that in all the outlets one through the national hospitals, that is Mulago and Butabika, the 11 referral hospitals in the country and most of the districts and all the other health based organizations that we have been able to accredit the drugs, are being given free.  

Now the qualification to access the ARVs depends on the doctor managing. It is on the case-to-case basis but the basic criteria is those who fall below the 200 CD4 count. The CD4 count is the defense mechanism you have in your body. The moment your body defense mechanism collapse, the CD4 count collapses below 200. You will immediately, depending on the opportunist infections, qualify to access the ARVs free of charge in Government- (Interjection)- the moment your CD4 count falls below 200 you qualify. I hope that helps you, hon. Aggrey Awori. 

The other question raised by honorable Salaamu Musumba –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, there was question that why do you allow somebody to collapse before you can –(Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr Speaker, it is not a question of collapsing. The point is that the moment your CD4 comes below 200, you will immediately qualify depending on the opportunist infections. If you have an early opportunistic infection, say, for example, TB or any other ailment that subjects the body resistance system to heavy torture. It means, therefore, depending on your physician, you will be given to access the ARVS to make sure that your defense mechanism is enhanced.  

Mr Speaker, the question raised by hon. Salaamu Musumba on the India current legislation. The legal instrument that India has been able to go through and the pressure that they are bound to subject the whole world to particularly Sub Saharan Region. Of the 39 to 40 million people who have this deadly virus, this pandemic hits the Sub Saharan Region hardest. This means that for us in the sub Saharan Region, 70 per cent of the people who have this deadly virus are now in Sub region in the African continent. 

It is, therefore, important that all of us collectively, stand up to drive the message across to the World Health Organisation, to the UN, to make sure that during this time of this deadly pandemic, the epidemic levels that Uganda and the other regions in the Sub Saharan Region have reached, should not be subject to the politics of trade. It is matter of life and death. It is important that the issue of ARVs cheap and generic drugs must be accessible by countries that do need this drug.

I also want to state very clearly –(Interruption)

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE:  Mr Speaker, I wish to thank hon. Minister for giving way. I would also like to inform this august House that actually we as a committee we have examined the legislation by the Indian Parliament and it is not as we had feared at the beginning. There are mainly about three issues.

One is that, as of January 2005, the Indian Government was obliged to comply with the World Trade Organisation Triples Agreement, they had up to January 2001 to do so and they had drafted a law to comply with that agreement that had about three weaknesses.  

The first weakness was that under Triples Agreement, it is allowed that usually if you have an infectious disease that threatens life or threatens societies, you are allowed to manufacture those drugs under a process called compulsory licensing.  

Now the Indian Government and the Indian Parliament both the Upper house and the Lower house, they debated a bill. Now in its original form they had put in unnecessary restrictions on compulsory licensing. For example, they were saying that they would not do compulsory licensing of a drug whose patent has not gone beyond three years.  

Two, they would not export such drugs to a second country unless that second country has also put in a law of compulsory licensing in their own laws. 

The second complication they had put in the law was what they call pre-grant opposition.  Usually if a company applies for patent, in this case the ARVs, people living with HIV and AIDs and the public would have looked at that application and then raised their objection.  Now they have made it very difficult for this pre-grant opposition.

The third complication they had put in was that they had what they call the mail box process, which applied to the fact that even before the law came into force, I think India had 7,500 applications for patents. 

So, under the mailbox system, those applications would be considered even if the law is enacted today, they would go back and go to those applications. So, those were the major issues and the World Health Organisation. 

I am sure with pressure from Governments like that, in Uganda we did approach the Indian Government to allow those flexibilities, which are allowed in any case under the Triples Agreement. When we inquired from the Parliament of India, they had said they adjusted the law to take in these flexibilities. We hope we shall be able to get a copy of the current law as has been passed by both the upper house and the lower house of Parliament. Otherwise, currently there are about 700,000 people on ARVs in Africa and Asia and about 350,000 of those depend on the drugs from India. Therefore, the impact is so great if indeed they did not cater for the adjustment in the law.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I wanted to appeal to hon. Mike Mukula to really consider in the East African Community this exemption, because the current exemption as read out, only refers to ARVs imported into the country under projects like Global Fund, PEPFA and other bilateral arrangements in form of projects. Which means that those who bring in ARVs which will not come as projects, would be subjected to tax.  

I think even though we want money, we should really consider this issue and the East African Community should take it up.  We should not put tax on ARVs because currently we do not manufacture those ARVS in East Africa and therefore, it is unfair to tax. 

Once you put a tax even those who would have afforded, if Members of Parliament would have bought for their constituents who are sick, it means instead of buying for may be 50 people, they will have to buy for about 30 people. So, that tax is unfair, it should go.

Finally, we should also think of other countries like Brazil. Brazil now manufactures drugs for their own people and they are willing to come and support us in Africa to manufacture ARVs. So, in case the Indians remain a problem, we should not hesitate to open contacts with Brazil because they are ready to supply us cheap ARVs almost at the same price as India. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA:  Thank you hon. Minister. The information I wanted to give is that when were handling - Minister of Foreign Affairs can tell us because the whole regime of exemption in external tariffs is not complete. 

For the drug itself as they give us a bill supplement No.10, it allows a Minister in a country to exempt. But as they did it, we passed a law here in 2004/2205 whereby we had exemptions of drugs and other items. For instance, like Ugandans who are coming back with luggage’s, the whole East African external tariff, which is confirmed within this year, the regime is not complete and still, has a problem itself.  

So, I would like that maybe the Minister of Foreign Affairs since he is given a provision within the Supplement No. 10, that he can be free to allow the exemption within a state, he has got that opportunity; he can act depending on that.

CAPT. MUKULA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairman of the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS, hon. Dr Elioda Tumwesigye for his additional information to the House.  

I just want to respond to one observation raised by the honourable member and the Chairman, which is the issue of taxation of these ARVs.  There is no doubt, Mr Speaker, the issue of HIV/AIDS in most sub-Saharan nations is a matter of national security. It is hitting the lives of many people at various levels with high proportions.  

It is, therefore, important that as a nation we focus on making sure that we do not encumber our strategic thrust to reduce, first of all, the prevalence and the new infections, but also management of those cases that are already infected. We already have two million orphans as a result of HIV/AIDS in the country.  We cannot afford to have anymore.  

So, I want to assure you, Mr Chairman, that in due course, we will be having consultations with you, but there is no doubt that in terms of policy, in terms of our strategic thrust, we will definitely ensure that no tax will be levied on the ARV drugs that are imported in this country.

Mr Speaker, the issue raised by honourable Beatrice Rwamimari on the effectiveness and efficacy and the quality of drugs that maybe manufactured here, particularly the ARVs.  I want to assure the honourable Member of Parliament through you, Mr Speaker, that the National Drug Authority, which was established by the Statute of Parliament of 1993, is one that has achieved high levels and standards in the management of the quality of drugs both imported and manufactured here.  

I wish to assure you, Mr Speaker, honourable members, that whatever drugs that we manufacture here, or we intend to manufacture here, will maintain the high level of quality and constant quality assurance.  There is no doubt that these drugs, particularly those that are toxic like the ARVs, need to be very carefully managed, need to be very carefully handled and we need to make sure that the process of manufacture is in accordance with the World Health Organization and the international standards that we would like to meet.

Mr Speaker, the question raised by honourable Aggrey Awori on the category, I did answer. 

I would like to take the opportunity once again to thank honourable colleagues who have raised questions. I want to assure you that, the Minister of Health will constantly keep you informed on the process and the developments what we make in the areas of taxation on ARVs. We shall ensure that we work together with the Committee on HIV, a standing committee of Parliament. We will continue to irrigate Parliament with more information.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable Minister and the members.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO REQUEST THE HOLDING OF THE REFERENDUM FOR A CHANGE OF POLITICAL SYSTEM UNDER ARTICLE 74(1)(A) OF THE CONSTITUTION

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesigye): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament passes the resolution to request the holding of a referendum for purposes of changing the political system under Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, it is seconded.

MR ADOLF MWESIGYE:  Mr Speaker, WHEREAS Article 1(4) of the Constitution provides that the people of Uganda shall express their will and content on who shall govern them, and how they should be governed through regular and free and fair elections of their representatives and through referenda; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 69(1) of the Constitution, the people of Uganda have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution, a referendum shall be held for purposes of changing the political system if requested by a resolution and supported by more than one half of all Members of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS the Government proposes that a resolution should be passed by Parliament to request the holding of the referendum of the Electoral Commission for the purpose of enabling the people of Uganda to decide on the political system; 

I therefore, propose, Mr Speaker, that this Parliament resolves as follows: 

In accordance with Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution and Article 61(b) of the Constitution that, Parliament passes a resolution to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum for the purpose of enabling the people of Uganda to decide on the change of the political system.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.  Is it your intention to proceed with this motion or it is a notice to us so that the committee examines the matter before we start the debate?

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  This is a motion.  Mr Speaker, my understanding, if it is a notice, I would like to give an objection to this notice that it is not tenable in law and it cannot be brought to this House as is.  I would like to be advised whether I have opportunity to do that?

THE SPEAKER:  What is the position?

MRS MUSUMBA:  Sir, you do recall –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  My understanding is that this is not an intention to move. This matter will be examined by our committee, which should advice us. We can proceed and hear what you want you say?

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much. Admission of motions in this House refers to background scrutiny as well. Not anything finds itself on the Floor of this House. My objection is based on the ruling of the Constitutional Court that we have never had the Movement System in place and that what we have had is a one party government. So I am wondering, if we have that ruling, which was not contested, how on earth can this be tenable in this House? 

We have decided that we make the laws as they get challenged and interpreted and then how can we continue to pursue a matter that was successfully challenged and we keep admitting such motions in this House in total disobedience to the courts of law? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, there may be merits in your submissions but the issue is, is it a proper time to raise those issues? The mover is not intending to move it today. He has given notice. This matter is going to be examined by the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. 

Those arguments, which you have stated, will come up when eventually we start debating this motion. You will be able to make those objections and references at that material time because that is when we shall decide whether we accept to move with the motion for a resolution or not. Why do you not keep these with you and wait for an appropriate time then we see what to do.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, can I be further clarified?

THE SPEAKER: Let me exhaust this, please.  

MRS MUSUMBA: Can I further be clarified? A notice of a motion leaves this House, the Plenary, and goes to a committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, we want to examine it because what he has given us is the format of his document; he wants it to be examined. Do you want to stop us from debating this? Definitely, you will quote these cases and we shall really use them to decide. Why do you not give the committee the benefit to examine it?

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry, I do not want to appear like I am contesting your ruling and your advice that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I am not contesting your arguments. I am saying, you have merits but not now.

MRS MUSUMBA: Sir, I think it is now I would not like an incompetent motion to waste the time of a committee. It can be sorted out even before because I believe it is not competent even to be here in the first place.

THE SPEAKER: In my local area we have a proverb that when you want to brew beer from these mbidde, even if it is not going to produce what you want, you try it. (Laughter). Well, in Luganda it goes: “N’aganaafa bagasarila essubi”. So why do you not sleep over this? Actually you have raised issues prematurely. But they are valid and will be considered by the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. There will be a report here; we are not bound by their report. We shall debate both this motion and their report. So, -(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Mr Speaker, you have wisely ruled that this is just a notice and not the motion. I remember the Minister of State in Charge of Parliamentary Affairs stood up to second the mover of the notice. I am just seeking guidance whether we are setting a precedent whereby in future notices will require –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It was not necessary but it does not prejudice us. Honorable members, we are not doing anything really. You have now been put on notice, you go and make your research, case law and so forth then you will be equipped. We are not proceeding with it now. 

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, I would just like to put the record straight, if possible, because the notice is to your office and the notice under rule 37 is to your office. That notice is what is on the first page. If we are going to agree that the motion that has been proposed should be forwarded to the committee for scrutiny and the members can look at it properly and then the committee reports on it, that is another matter. But the notice is to your office not to the House.

THE SPEAKER: So how shall I assign this? If it is a notice to my office, yes, I know you serve a notice to the Speaker or the Clerk but if the notice is to me, how shall I send it to the committee when it has not passed here? Do you mean I should sit in my office and say, “Legal Committee, consider this”? Let it be on record. I am sending it to your committee for it to study and give us a report. Your report will not be binding. It will be advisory and we shall treat both your report and the motion and decide accordingly. (Applause)

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a bit uneasy. If we send this notice to the committee it is as if the House has now accepted the motion. This is how I look at it and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, at this juncture as far as I am concerned, we have not started dealing with this motion. And there will be no debate now. The debate will come later. Get equipped with all sureties. When time comes -(Interjections)- well, I have already ruled.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ACCESS TO INFORMATION 
BILL, 2004

5.16
THE CHAIRMAN: Honorable members, yesterday we were proceeding very well until we were stuck after we came to clause 35, the issue of entertaining a complaint for refusal to give information. The Bill was giving this function of entertaining a complaint to the IGG but somebody raised that the IGG should not do this and the other. We gave the committee time to go and study it and see whether they maintain the position or there is another solution that can be given. So, I want to be advised.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Margaret Zziwa): Mr Speaker, I wish to report that the committee had the opportunity to meet with hon. Kawanga, who brought forth the legal analysis of clause 35. He wondered whether the clause would be left under the appeal of the Inspector General of Government, and what it would mean. We were able to agree that we should drop the idea of appealing to the Inspector General of Government and we introduce the Chief Magistrate’s courts in this arrangement. Mr Chairman, if you agree I will move the amendments as proposed.  

Clause 35

MRS ZZIWA: I beg to move that part V, clause 35, in the lead note, we replace the words “Inspector General of Government” with the words “Chief Magistrate”. The clause itself should then read: “A person may lodge a complaint to the Chief Magistrate against the decision of an information officer: (a) to refuse a request for access, or (b) taken under section 17(1) or 23 in relation to that person. I beg to move.

MR MULENGANI: Mr Chairman, I am putting under consideration the accessibility of the Chief Magistrate’s office in regard to the rural populace who even fear to access the magistrates at low levels. In such circumstances, would it not be better to lower the office to below the chief magistrate’s court? I am seeking clarification.

THE CHAIRMAN: What we can say is that there is no part of Uganda that does not have a chief magistrate. In every part of Uganda there are what we call magistracy areas and any part of Uganda must have a responsible chief magistrate. So, I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 36 be deleted. Considering that we are going to take the procedure of the chief magistrate, then this clause will be redundant.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question in favor of deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, in the same way I beg to move that clause 37 be deleted. It would also be redundant.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38

MRS ZZIWA: I beg to move that clause 38 also be deleted. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39

MRS ZZIWA: I beg to move that clause 39 be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: So your explanation is that because of what you have done these become redundant, right? I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 40 be amended and it reads as follows: “A person aggrieved by the decision of the chief magistrate under section 35, within 21 days after the decision is communicated to him or her may appeal to the High Court against the decision of the Chief Magistrate”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 41 be amended to read as follows: “The Rules Committee shall, within six months after commencement of this Act, make rules of procedure of the courts to regulate the procedure in respect of the applications made under sections 35 and 40”. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 42(1), at the end of the sub-clause, insert the expression, “except wherever access to information is expressly prohibited by this Act or any other law”. 

The justification is, to harmonize this clause with part III of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: I Put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45

MRS ZZIWA:  Just before clause 45, there is a typographical error on that part, which is like part IV but should be part VI, miscellaneous. That is a typographic error. Since you have called on clause 45, I beg to move that clause 45(1) be replaced with the following: “Each Minister shall submit an annual report to Parliament on request for access to records or information to public bodies under his or her ministry in relation to the relevant year, and shall indicate whether access was given or not; and if it was not given, state the reasons for denial”.
 
Even in clause 45(2), “For avoidance of doubt the annual report referred to in sub-section (1) may be included in the annual policy statement of the Minister”. I beg to move. 

I think the justification is that the minister – it is the minister who reports to Parliament and this amendment, therefore, should streamline this, other than bringing in another mechanism, which is not palatable to the way reporting to Parliament is done. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46

MRS ZZIWA:  Mr Chairman, in clause 46 we should delete the head note and insert the following: “Protection of persons releasing information”; mainly this is for clarity. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47
MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Given that we have amended the head note on 46 to include officers, is it still relevant to have 47 as protection to officers when actually the subject matter of 46 and 47 is almost the same?

MRS ZZIWA: Sir, I want to recast the context in which this was changed. The whole Bill is about a citizen seeking information from government, not government seeking information from the public. So in that context then the issue or the question of whistle blowers, which is normally perceived as a person giving information, would not be relevant or would not be applicable. That is why the committee recommended that we at least insert or use the word “protection of persons releasing information”. We think it is more appropriate. 

But if you look at protection of officers, this one could even be bigger or more specific than the earlier one because the earlier one may be general. Within government there could be other people who could be giving information.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Does the chairperson of the committee wish to suggest that there could be peoples, who are not government officers, who would be giving out government information? Definitely if a person is competent enough to give out information on government, I would expect that person to be a government officer. Could she clarify further?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, in the original there were two: clause 46 was for a different category from that of 47. Are we together?

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Mr Chairman, information in government possession is accessible by government officers. If you are talking about people giving government information to the public, those people must, of necessity, be government officers. So there is no category of people who can give government information who are not government officers.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Information can be conveyed by third parties. There are people who fear to come forward to give information but they give it to a third party and that third party can convey that information to somebody else. That is how we receive information even when we come here. A government officer gives you information, you examine it, you find it is true; it is not you who has accessed it but somebody else. And once that person comes in as a third party to give information and it is credible, then that person deserves to be protected. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear now? I think the member was saying that we should delete it because it had been covered earlier.

MRS ZZIWA: Sir, if you -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The question is, are the two clauses for the same purpose?

MRS ZZIWA: No, Mr Chairman, please.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why no?

MRS ZZIWA: Because they are targeting and looking towards two different people. We only just changed the context of the whistle blower to the fact that a whistle blower is a person who gives out government information. But this time we are looking at a person who can give information, which may be in the possession of government but it has not been given. He gives the information and this is the kind of person we are looking at in this clause. 

Clause 47 is about the protection of the public officer who is now the one mandated to give out information. 

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Okay, I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 47 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48

MRS ZZIWA: Sir, I beg to move that in clause 48, which deals with offences, we replace the expression, “24 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both”, with the expression, “a fine of 240 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years, or both”. 

The justification is that the fines as proposed in the Bill are too lenient yet the offences are presumed to be very grave. If left that way, the fine will not be will a deterrent so as to scare away potential offenders. The fine should, therefore, be revised upwards and as recommended above. I beg to move.

MR KAWANGA: Surely, if the currency points are that amount, the imprisonment period is far too long. If really you feel it has to be long, at least two or three years are enough. But ten years is a very long period. I suggest we reduce it to something reasonable. If you do not do that the court will be tempted to give fines and never to give the prison sentence.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you then suggest an amendment as this is their proposal?

MR KAWANGA: I am suggesting that it be reduced to three years’ imprisonment.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is a proposal to reduce the years from ten to three, what do you say?

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, what was initially proposed was one year and the committee felt that was too lenient. But if the member is proposing less, and with the view of ten years being too long a period, I think we can agree to the three years as proposed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Oulanyah, was your amendment on this or on a different matter?

MR OULANYAH: On this one.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Can we dispose off this? I put the question that instead of ten years we should say three.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: What is your amendment, honourable member?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, I have heard the amendment proposed by the chair of the committee to the effect that it should now read “a fine of”. That one would be contrary to the Interpretation Act. In the Interpretation Act, when it comes to penalties it says, “Penalties described to be maximum penalties”. So this would be in conflict with the Interpretation Act and I propose that you maintain the words “not exceeding”, and be consistent with the law. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that immediately after paragraph (e), we insert a new clause namely: “Prescribing the categories of information that an information officer may refuse to grant access to under section 27, 28, 30 and 31”, and the justification is to clearly indicate the categories of information that is not accessible to the public. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendments to clause 49?

MRS ZZIWA: Yes, there are two. 

Immediately after clause 49(1), insert the following clause 49(2), “The fee for access to be prescribed by regulations under the section shall be a fee representing the actual cost of retrieval and reproduction of the information”. 

The justification is that we are trying to ensure that the information is accessible to the public as is practically possible.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, there is 49(3). You replace the expression “24 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both”, with the expression, “a fine of 240 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding three years, or both”. I beg to move. It is a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

The Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Schedule stands the schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title stands the title of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAWANGA: I do not know whether the chairperson has forgotten, in view of the change to chief magistrate and the High Court, there is need to change the definition and the interpretation clause of the word “court”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, let us resume and then we come back.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled the Access to Information Bill, 2004, and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ACCESS TO INFORMATION 
BILL, 2004

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill be read for a Third Time and do pass –(Interruption)

5.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Margaret Zziwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that we recommit clause 4 on interpretation because of a very important amendment made in part V of the Bill; and also in clause 23 there was an omission of a very important matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, there is a motion that we recommit clauses 4 and 23 for reasons given.

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.45
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ACCESS TO INFORMATION 
BILL, 2004

Clause 4

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in the interpretation clause the word “court” will have meaning to include chief magistrates’ courts, and the High Court. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 23 as it stands be deleted and be substituted with the following: “A provision of this part under which a request for access to a record shall or may not be refused, maybe construed as:

(a) Limited in its application by any other such provision and, 

(b) Not applying to a particular record by reason that another provision of this part also applies to that record.”

This is mainly meant to bring out the clarity of this provision otherwise the way how it was constructed was very vague. I beg to move.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, I am discovering a strange situation of using the words “shall” and “may” in the same provision of the law. What will be the implication? We either stick with “shall” or “may”.

THE CHAIRMAN: It depends; part of it may be “may” and the other part “shall”. One is mandatory and the other one permissive. I do not know, but it can happen. It may depend on the policy it is carrying. There could be two policies, but you can separate it if you think you can.

MR OULANYAH: I propose that the first part should read, “A provision of this part under which a request for access to a record shall not be refused, may not be construed as …”, instead of saying, “… for access to a record shall or may not be refused may not be construed as …”. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So what is the policy? “Shall” is mandatory, “may” is –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Actually part of what led us to re-draft this was because there were about three contexts. There was “shall”, “may” and “may not be”. So, it became very confusing. That is why the committee had thought of reducing it to a provision as I have read it. I thought it was relatively clearer. “A provision of this part under which a request for access to a record shall - and that is affirmative - or may not be refused”.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it cannot be. You either suggest “shall” or you may use “may”.

MRS ZZIWA: Okay, then I will concede to the construction. Maybe now the “shall” will just confine it to one specific thing. So we take the “may”, which is an alternative. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You delete “shall” and use “may”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Access to Information Bill, 2004”, clauses 4 and 23, and passed them with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): I beg to move, Mr Speaker, that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS NAMAGGWA: Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity to say something immediately after passing this Bill.

THE SPEAKER: No, why do we not finish this matter, where is the motion you are contributing to?

MS NAMAGGWA: Sorry, I will come back again, thank you. Given the opportunity –(Interjection)- I thought that the Bill had been passed.

THE SPEAKER: Not yet. 

MS NAMAGGWA: Sorry, I will come back if you give me the opportunity, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I will do so.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ACCESS TO INFORMATION 
BILL, 2004

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “ The Access to Information Bill, 2004” be read for the Third Time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that the Bill entitled “ The Access to Information Bill, 2004” be read for the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A Bill for an Act entitled “The Access to Information Act, 2005”.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much –(Interruption)

5.54
MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Once again, Mr Speaker, I beg your pardon. I thought it had passed. I would like to say what I had wanted to say when the Attorney-General expressed his intention to present the motion as he had done about two statements ago. I think it is the right time for me to request the Minister of Information or the Government to protect our dear government because for about a week now we have been hearing a media report saying that government does not have money or the Registrar General does not have money to register the Democratic Party.

This being the show of the Minister of Information following what the Attorney-General’s intention was, I want to find out from the minister whether really he can protect our government from this accusation, if it an accusation. If it is true that government does not have money, could they tell us when the Registrar-General would get the money to ensure that actually the Democratic Party registers? 

If it is not true that actually government has got money, could the minister challenge this media report, because I think the name of our government is marred? And this is the right time for government to ensure that a favourable condition or environment is created for all the parties. And even if we are going to protect our parties in the future, we should create an environment for them to participate in the activities that are conducive to the elections. So, what is true as far as this report is concerned, Mr Minister? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know who is going to answer because it should be the Attorney-General. However, the Leader of Government Business here may be able to answer it because the registration of parties falls under the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney-General. Unfortunately he is not here but the Leader of Government Business is here. Was this question directed to the Ministry of Information?

MS NAMAGGWA: Mr Speaker, I tried my best to stand up when the Attorney-General was still in the House but I did not catch your eye -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, certainly I know. I know the  registration of parties falls under Attorney-General and Ministry of Justice, but he is not here. The only person to answer is the Leader of Government Business.

5.57
THE MINISTER IN THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to beg your indulgence with an apology. First of all, I was making consultations with the rules and genuinely I was not attending to the question raised by the honourable member. She should either restate it or we can wait for the appropriate minister, as you have ruled, to answer her question. Otherwise frankly and honestly, I was consulting the rules. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, then since you are here, inform your minister, the Attorney-General that this query has been raised so that you give an answer tomorrow.

RESPONSE ON THE REPORT ON PEACE AND SECURITY IN THE NORTH AND NORTHEAST

THE SPEAKER: The minister is not here. I think we have completed the day’s business. With this we come to the end of today’s business, apparently. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.57 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 April 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


