
Thursday, 10 April 2003

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)  
                                                                                                                                   
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table a motion for a Resolution of Parliament on the Financing of the Rural Finance Services Programme (RPSP) by International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, let the appropriate committee handle the document.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, noting that I moved a minority report yesterday, I am also a possible source of amendments to this Bill.  So in light of that, I would like to seek the following clarification from the minister before I float those amendments consequentially.

THE CHAIRMAN: But I thought your report was to the effect that the entire Bill should be thrown out.  So, if the entire Bill is thrown out, what do you amend?

MR LUKYAMUZI:  My report was seeking to scrap the fee of 1,000 shillings until an appropriate one has been found.  That was the main case in my presentation.

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought you said that the amendment is not serving any useful purpose.  The entire thing wants an overhaul, therefore, there is no use considering an amendment.

MR LUKYAMUZI: There is documentary evidence that what I am saying is exactly what appears -
THE CHAIRMAN: But anyway, you will be free to move any amendment whether you put in a minority report. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: So what about the clarification I am seeking before the amendment?

THE CHAIRMAN: We are now in Committee Stage.  So a clarification should be relevant to the kind of amendment you want to move.

LAND AMENDMENT BILL, 2002

Clause 1:

MR NDAULA KAWEESI:  Mr Chairman, I wish to amend “2002” to read “2003”.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Do you have two amendments?

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (2) of Clause 1 substitute “on the day of 2002” with “from the date of assent”.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 as amended agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3:

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to amend Clause 3 paragraph (a) by substituting the words “and District Registrar of Titles” with the words “District Registrar of Titles so appointed to the extent that he or she has been authorised to exercise or perform any power or duty conferred or imposed by this Act upon the Commissioner.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

(Clause 3 as amended agreed to.)

Clause 4:

MR NDAULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to amend Clause 4 (a). For the word "the" appearing in the first line, substitute the word “any”. And paragraphs (b) and (c) should be deleted.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question on the proposed amendment put and agreed to.)

(Clause 4 as amended agreed to.)

(Clause 5 agreed to.)

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I want to insert the following new clause after Clause 5, which has been passed, that section 6 of the Act is amended by substituting for the word “parish” appearing in paragraph (d) of sub-section (2), the word “area”.  That section 7 of the Act is amended by- 

(a)	substituting for the word “parish” occurring in subsection (2) the word “area.”
(b)	substituting for the word “parish” occurring in subsection (4) the word “area”. 
(c)	substituting in subsection (4) the words “about land” with “about the land” and deleting the words “within the parish” appearing between the words “tenure" and "to”; and 
(d)	substituting for the word “parish” occurring in paragraph (d) of subsection (6) the word “area”.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question on the proposed amendment put and agreed to.)

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Speaker, Section 8 of the Act is amended_ 
(a) in subsection (1): 

    (i) paragraph (a) by deleting the word "a" appearing between the words "of" and "customary", and substituting the words “issue that” with the words "approve the issue of a";  
(ii)	paragraph (b) by substituting the word “issue” with "approve the issue of";  
    (ii) by substituting for paragraph (d) the following   paragraph_  
“d) reject the report of the committee and where recommendation of the committee is to issue a certificate, refuse the issue of a certificate and where the recommendation of the Committee is to refuse the issue of a certificate, approve the issue of certificate.”  

(b)	in subsection (3) by deleting the words “by the Board”; 
    (c) in subsection (5) by substituting the following subsection_ 
“where the Board approves the issue of the certificate of customary ownership with or without conditions, restrictions or limitations, the Recorder shall issue the applicant with a certificate in the terms of the decision of the Board.”  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question on the proposed amendment put and agreed to.)
(Clause 6 agreed to.)

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I want to insert a new clause after clause 6 of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Another one?

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Yes. There is section 10 of the Act, which is amended in subsection (3) by substituting for the word “parish” the word “area”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7:

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to move that Clause 7 be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 8:

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 8 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9:

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to amend Paragraph (b) by substituting "subsection" with "subsections (5) and (8)". I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9 as amended agreed to.

Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11 agreed to.

Clause 12 agreed to.
Clause 13:

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to amend Clause 13 by deleting sub-clause (1) appearing at the beginning of the clause, and to substitute Paragraph (a) with the following paragraph:

    (a) In sub-section (1) by substituting the following_
    1) A tenant by occupancy may, in accordance with the provisions of this section, assign, sublet or sub-divide the tenancy with the landowner."  I beg to move.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman that amendment seeks to dilute the tenancy that this law is seeking to protect.  It is amending Section 32 of the Act by deleting the power to mortgage and the power to pledge a certificate of occupancy by a tenant.  This goes to the real heart of what a lawful occupant of the registered land is, and what he or she should do with that land. 

Now, these people whose certificates the law now is saying should be mortgageable are the producers of wealth.  These are the backbone of the economy of Uganda.  The producers of food would not have plantation coffee in Uganda, if these small holders were not the ones to grow the coffee.

The whole Programme for Modernisation of Agriculture is targeting these people, and modernisation of agriculture is to usher these peasants - small holders, into commercial agriculture. And one way of doing that is by enabling them to acquire credit by pledging what they hold; and that is land.  If we diminish their capacity by removing mortgaging, as the committee is proposing, then we shall not have done justice to the people who are supporting our economy.  I am persuading colleagues to oppose this motion.

THE CHAIRMAN: But, honourable members, there is a problem here.  Yesterday we were told that Section 32 contradicts the Constitution, you said that - now if this section is contravening the Constitution, can we really proceed without addressing this issue of contravening the Constitution and we continue just dealing with it; because if this is the position, how do you deal with something which is unconstitutional?

MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do recall you making reference to, I think, Page 5 of a statement in the committee’s report, which was to the effect that the rights which were given under Section 32 of the Act to the tenant by occupancy far exceed what is envisaged in the law to be made under Article 237, I think, (8) and (9) of the Constitution.

I have a contrary view because the conclusion of the committee was based on that statement, and also to the fact that it was in contradiction with Article 26 (2) of the Constitution.  Now, my understanding of that Article is that it preserves the right of ownership of an individual.  

The rights, which are given in Section 32, really have got to do mainly with the use of the land, and I would find it very difficult to agree that Section 32 on that score alone is in contravention with Article 237 of the Constitution.  That is my position.  

Article 26 protects ownership, and I think that has to do with compulsory acquisition of land.  But Article 32 of the Land Act has to do with how the tenant by occupancy can utilise the land. And I do not think those are contradicting Article 26 of the Constitution.

MR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, considering the explanation by the Attorney General, I would wish, therefore, to move that we delete the committee’s proposal so that we revert to the original text in the Act.  Mr Chairman, under PMA, there is a component of micro-finance, and peasants are supposed to access this micro-finance using these certificates of occupancy so that they can build themselves economically. If they cannot be allowed to pledge these certificates, then how will they access the micro-finance, and how shall we be able to modernise properly?

THE CHAIRMAN: Dr Kasirivu, you are now moving with us, but the learned Attorney General has given his position. The committee made its position; maybe you have to ask them what parts of the provision are contrary so that we resolve them and then we proceed?

MR NDAWULA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Really, on this page, the committee endeavoured to put the justification.  The words “mortgage”, “third party rights” and “pledge” and other lawful transactions should not be included because of the reversionary interest possessed by the registered owner, and the lack of a definitive period to this tenancy by occupation.  

The rights given to the tenant are already sufficient and giving the tenant this right may cause land disputes, especially when the tenant fails to pay up the mortgage or fulfil the pledge.  There is also need to consider the landowners right as protected under Article 26 of the Constitution.  The tenancy by occupancy is the lowest level of land holding.  For economic reasons, this tenant cannot be granted certain rights illegally, otherwise there will be no reason to aspire for a higher level of tenure in order to acquire better rights.  

The committee considered all these, as I said, and the reasons are being put out here.  This is the lowest form of land holding.  The tenant by occupancy should aspire to a better level of rights.  Now, if the rights of occupants are the same as the rights of the landowner, then Article 26 (2) of the Constitution is contravened. 

Mr Chairman, if the land we are talking about is 1 sq. mile and it is so occupied, and those who are occupying it are allowed to mortgage; they are allowed to have third party rights; they are allowed to pledge; they are allowed to enter these other lawful transactions, implicitly the landowner has been deprived of property by legislation.  That is why we are saying let this occupant have a right to assign, to sub-let and sub-divide but should not mortgage because there is a reversionary interest of the registered owner of the land which he is occupying.  So, that is the reason the committee considered for this amendment.  Thank you.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am a member of this committee and I just stand to substantiate further what the chairman has said.  We are just laying ground for incessant litigation if we say one property belongs to more than one owner, because that is what will be said in law. 

There is also an element of giving the occupancy in perpetuity.  Now if the occupancy is in perpetuity, and the owner is also in perpetuity, what are we saying?  This Parliament has a duty to give proper direction.  We should not shy away because the other alternative seems to be the popular view.  We should not shy away by creating problems for our children tomorrow.

THE CHAIRMAN: This section apparently is causing problems because some people are saying it contravenes the Constitution, the Attorney General says it is not.  Don’t you really think there is need to have a further study to leave it intact?

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you Mr Chairman.  Yesterday when you directed our attention to the constitutional provision, the Chairman of the committee explained that situation. The minister got up and did not contradict the explanation of the chairperson, but he went on to say that where there is this conflict, he has to put a team to do the study. And since the basic controversy is the conflict on the right of ownership, the provision that is proposed by this committee should be taken. If subsequently the ministry finds a study that can justify them by inserting mortgage et cetera, then we will consider that.  But for the moment, to avoid a conflict that has risen, I think the amendment as proposed by the committee is the best way forward.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.  There is a proposed amendment by the committee, which we have had.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 13 as amended agreed to.)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, with due respect to you, I had humbly warned that I would float in my amendment.  But as I was coming in, you read 11.  So may I be permitted to read the amendment?

THE CHAIRMAN: Now what we do, let us proceed.  We can always recommit and then you bring your amendment. There is a procedure.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged.

Clause 14:

MR NDAWULA: Mr Chairman, I wish to amend clause 14 by substituting the following as sub section (6):  "A tenant by occupancy or a registered owner who is aggrieved by the decision of the board or valuation of the appointed valuer under paragraph (iii) of sub section (4) may appeal to the district land tribunal."  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 14 as Amended put and agreed to.)


MR NDAWULA: Mr Chairman, I wish to insert a new clause after clause 14 as follows:  "That section 39 of the Act be deleted."  I beg to move.

MR BAGUMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I oppose that motion and I invite you and honourable members to look at the Act.   Section 39 is a comprehensive section; in fact this section is the answer to the Constitution Article 237 clause (9).  The registerable interests are the ones indicated in sub-sections 1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6 and how to go about it.  Removing it means the Constitution was not properly put into effect.  This is an elaborate way of showing the registerable interests that the Constitution is talking about.  We rather retain this section.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean you have to legislate - if I did not have land, to acquire mailo land do you have to legislate for me?  This is saying, “tenant by occupancy referred to in section 32 of this section may, in accordance with this section, acquire any registerable interest in respect of the land she or he occupies”!

If I am an occupant, do you have to legislate for me to buy mailo land from the mailo owner? Do you have to really?  Or that I was merely occupying the land, and then I buy freehold from him; do you have to legislate?  I think that is why they are saying it is not necessary.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, I think this category of citizens, an occupant of registered land, should have a point of reference somewhere, and it is this section 39; there is no other reference. Maybe we are now resorting to what the lawyers call ignorance of the law is no excuse.  We are helping this person – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but has it caused any problem?  A person who has been occupying somebody’s land to say now buy me, I want a title in my name, do you have to legislate for it?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Having it is making no harm. 

MR AYUME: Mr Chairman, this provision is really optional.  It is not compelling the tenant by occupancy, but is merely giving him information regarding the right to apply to the registered owner for any of these interests.  That is all this provision does.

THE CHAIRMAN: Really to say that I have been a squatter, therefore to own land, you have to legislate it here!

MR BAMWANGA: Mr Chairman, this particular section is trying to give confidence to both the occupiers and the landlords. Because it is very important that if you want to go to equity you must go with clean hands.  If we are not going to maker sure that the tenants are protected, the landlord actually may say I do not want you to buy – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Is this a protection?  Whom are you trying to protect?  You are on my land and you want to own land and you have to be told that you can do it?   I want to put the question. There is an amendment by deletion proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to insert a new Clause before Clause 15 as follows: "The Principle Act is amended by inserting immediately before Section 40 the following new Section_ 
Family Land Rights 
39A(1) Any person owning a registerable interest in land on which he or her family ordinarily resides, and from which they derive sustenance shall include all the persons who constitute his or her family on the certificate of title of the land in issue as registered owners.  

(2)	For the purpose of this Section, a family shall be deemed to be a legal person represented by the head of the family from whom they shall derive their corporate name.  

    (3) In the registration of a family on the certificate of title, the corporate name of the family shall be used and the details of the family members shall appear in a schedule to be updated from time to time.

    (4) Upon registration of the land in issue, the Commissioner shall endorse a Certificate of Title with the words “no survivorship”, and these words shall have the same effect as provided for in Sections 54 and 55 of the Registration of Titles Act.

 
(5)	A person shall be deemed to have ceased to be a member of a family for the purpose of this Section_
    (a) in the case of a spouse, when the person is divorced or separated under the laws of Uganda; and 
    (b) In the case of a child when a child attains majority age;
and the person’s interests in the property will be deemed to have been automatically extinguished notwithstanding the person’s name on the certificate of title.  

(6)	Upon the death of a family member, the land in issue shall be deemed to be vested in the surviving registered proprietors.
(7)	Subject to the provisions of this Section, any person who is entitled to be included on the Certificate of Title under Sub Section (1) shall be deemed to be a registered owner notwithstanding their exclusion from the schedule under sub section (3).
(8)	In this Section- 
(a)	”children” include adopted children;  
(b)	”family” means a spouse, children below the age of majority, or orphans below the majority age, with interests in inheritance of the land on which they reside; and 
(c)	“Spouse” means a husband or wife as defined under the laws of Uganda.

This provision has been drawn from Sub-Section 40 of the Land Act.  The Registration would put very third party on proper notice as to whom to obtain the consent from, and this provision is in the spirit of Article 31 of the Constitution on the rights of the family, particularly clauses (1) and (2).  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: But Chairperson 31(a)(1) imposes a positive duty to register.  What will happen if a registered person whom you command to register the other interest does not do so? 

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, in 7 we have said that: “subject to the provisions of this Section, any person who is entitled to be included on the certificate of title under Section (1) shall be deemed to be a registered owner notwithstanding their exclusion from the schedule under Section (3)”.  So even if this registered person does not go to register, these are deemed to be on that Certificate of Title. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what will happen to a third party who with the Registrar of Titles to the properties registered name (A), and is commanded to register and does not do so.  

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman under such circumstances, I believe there will be regulations to this particular Act that we will be looking at case to case basis.  What is likely to happen, like you have indicated - but maybe the laws make it clearer? We are looking at empowering section 40, which is already in the law.  Because today there is Section 40 that requires written consent from a spouse and children. We are only saying that since these family members are required to give a written consent, they may as well be owners of this particular property - (Applause). 

THE CHAIRMAN: We are trying to solve a problem because we may cross over and then leave a very serious problem. Because when you say “deemed”, can somebody see deemed on a certificate which carries one name?  How will it be protected?  I have gone to the Registrar of Titles, they have said this land is registered in the name of 'X' and then you are saying, "Oh other people are deemed to be on the title"!  I am only saying, can’t we find a better way of effecting a new policy because this one will miserably fail?

MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I think the problem as you rightly pointed out is: Third parties who go into the register to search for their records, how can they find information that such and such a person has been deemed to be the registered owner, when in fact his/her name does not appear on the register?  Now, I would propose that such persons, for whatever reason, they initially don’t go to register and they are deemed to be owners of this property in question.  We could go on to provide that such persons must register within such and such a period.  

THE CHAIRMAN: The reason why I asked this question was that you imposed a positive duty on a person who has a certificate in his name, who may not be in support of this policy which you are advocating.  Obviously, if he is not supporting this policy, he will not take the steps to register other people who are interested.  

Maybe you had better give the duty to people who are interested to get registered.  That will be practical because they will go to the land office and say, “block so and so is registered in the name of so and so, but we are entitled under the law to get registered”. That will be productive rather than asking me to go and register them. 

My problem is that you may defeat your policy by imposing on a person who has a title to do something that is contrary to his wishes.  Maybe, let us hear from the honourable minister.

THE MINISTER OF ETHICS AND INTEGRITY: (Mrs Miria Matembe): For me it is my view that when we make any law, then the law should be enforced. These persons we are talking about are not strangers; they are members of the family who work together on this land and gain life out of the land.  

We are saying that if somebody is going to be registered, they should be part of this registration.  I am thinking that the institutions that are supposed to register have got roles to play, and it should be upon these institutions to inquire into whether – I am making a suggestion because this is for all of us. 

These institutions should not just be left free; they should have a duty to see whether the provisions of the Act have been fulfilled. Because, if I go to register my land, I think it is upon the registrar to certify that actually the requirement of this law has been satisfied. And, this very law can call upon the individual to submit this evidence to show that yes, even members of the family do agree that this is the case.  That is one version.

On the other hand, the issue you were raising to us as to the man who wants to buy land and he goes to the records and his name is not there, I thought this country presumes that everybody knows the law. If the law says that these people must be registered, and if they are not, they are deemed to be – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think you failed to appreciate the problem.  The problem is this: A registered person who owns the land where he resides and so forth registered it 20 years ago and he has a certificate in his name.  Then the spouse and children who were not on the title 20 years ago join him.  This provision is saying, this person who had this title in his name 20 years ago should go in the registry and say, "I have now got so and so, register them."  

My question was that, suppose he does not do it, how do you penalise him?  It is not easy because they did not impose the duty on those who are interested.  Maybe if you had said people who acquire interest under this policy could go and register, then that would be okay.  But in this case, if this person declined, you don’t know where his certificate is; you may not even know the plot number; you cannot say the registrar should inquire for you. How can he do it?  There are over 10,000 titles that fall under this category, how can the register do it?  That was my question.  I am saying let us find the best way to effect the policy, but this one will miserably fail.  

MRS MATEMBE: I do agree with you in as far as the land which was registered a long time ago is concerned, but my contribution was about this law, once it is passed, will that land be registered.  I hadn’t addressed my mind to the law we passed sometime back. I thought it was covering it because it is already registered. I do not know whether it was going to work the other way, but I was looking at the land that will be registered under the law, and that one would be possible.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all, Mr Chairman, when we are amending the law, we have got to analyse the mischief, which the law seeks to cure.  In my opinion, the mischief which section 40 sought to cure was that spouses were mortgaging and selling properties without the consent of their spouses, and section 40 cured that mischief.  There is no husband who can now sell land, mortgage land or pledge land without the consent of his wife.  That mischief is cured- (Interjections)- Yes, if they are doing so, they are doing it contrary to the law; maybe it is enforcement but the mischief is cured by section 40 in my opinion.  

To stretch it further now and going to this amendment the Committee is moving, I think would be going too far because even this new registerable interest we are conferring on spouses and children can be challenged. The Land Act is not the only law that governs land management; there is the Registration of Title’s Act, Section 256 that says that: “A certificate of title is conclusive evidence of ownership”.  

What if you want now to register a new interest in my land and I challenge you under the RTA, have we made a corresponding amendment in the Registration of Titles Act? I think we have got to be careful because this in my opinion borders actually on compulsory acquisition because someone has got his title and interests. Now, to import foreign interests in this title without his consent, in my opinion, borders on compulsory acquisition, and we might get constitutional problems. 

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to agree with hon. Adolf Mwesige in as far as he saying that when a provision is brought in the law, it is to cure something. Section 40 as it is in the Land Act 1998 was to cure and protect the land at the time of transferring it so that the members of the family, including the children, as we passed it, can be protected and cannot be deprived of land without their consent and knowledge. 

The amendment of the committee is going further to protect another interests.  This is the interest of being owners as a family - (Interjections)- Yes! and being owners as a family under a corporate name of the head of the family.  

Now if you were uncomfortable with the word “deemed” in 7, would you be happy if I proposed that it be deleted?  We delete the words “deemed to be a registered owner” and you actually become a “registered owner”

THE CHAIRMAN: No. You see, it is not a question of being happy or not. I am only saying the purpose for which you are making this amendment may be defeated. In the first place, under 39(1), you are giving a positive duty to a person who already has his name on the title to go and put other people. And I am saying, supposing he/she doesn’t put his/her wife/husband or children on the title, what happens? Then the committee proposed that even if he does not do so, they would be deemed to be there when they are not there. 

We are talking about registered land where you go to the register of titles and find who is the owner. May be those people who will come and survey it will refer it to some other people; that is different. But the land could change hands simply by changing the title name.  This is my problem.  My problem is to assist you.  I know your mission, but I am saying this proposal is not helpful.  I am only pointing out the deficiency in the command that you are putting under 39(1).  I was just alerting you to improve on it, but as for policy, I am only guiding you.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Chairman.  That is why I was proposing that we could delete (7) because it is already catered for under (1). The land we are talking about - let me be clear - is not about every piece of land in this amendment.  It is about the matrimonial land, and the matrimonial land where, as a wife or a husband I have a right; where as a child below age has a right.  We are talking -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: So honourable member,

MRS BWAMBALE: Yes, please.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you heard hon. Adolf’s submission- if you are talking about a home where others stay, nobody will come in and stay because they will notice you. But we are talking about registering your interest; we are talking about registering your interest. But here you can be satisfied, nobody will come to evict you because if he comes you will say “but I am staying here, this is our home”! You can resist that but for purposes of registering, you may not succeed.

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, you have appreciated the problem and the House has appreciated the problem. When you talk about registration, there are laws that govern registration. I think the minister responsible to implement the directives of this law will be having a form designed under the regulations specifying who should appear on matrimonial land.  So, it will be a command of the law to appear and if you do not appear, therefore, you have contravened the law.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me put the question.  

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am not a lawyer. I would like to be educated on this formulation.  In the first instance, it would appear in this provision that it applies equally to husband and wife, but the impression everybody is having here is that it is the husband’s land.  This has to be clarified because everybody around here is just thinking that it is the husband’s land on which the wife and the children must be registered. But the way this is formulated, it means that if I was married to woman X, and I move to stay with her on her land, then I should be registered.  Please, let us be very clear - (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please!

DR OKULO EPAK: You we are saying yes, but everybody here has understood this thing differently, and if that is the case, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No I think because, honourable member, the normal thing is wives go to their husbands' homes.

DR OKULO EPAK: Yes, but at least that is normal, but we are now making a law to cover both the normal and the abnormal, and it must be understood that even the abnormal is applicable.

Secondly, if the land happened originally to be registered in the names of the lady whom I am married to, and I am now moved to live with her on that land and property, what will be the corporate the name of the family? (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, there is already a title in the name of Margaret Akello, married to Okulo Epak and Okulo Epak is now living with Margaret Akello on her land, and we have produced children. That Margaret Akello’s land now has to incorporate Okulo Epak and the children! Now, whose corporate name will it be?  Will it be Margaret Akello or Okulo’s name?  

Secondly, the idea we are all entertaining is that it is the man’s land. But the law here is saying, “On which his or her family.” So please, do not take anything for granted. It is saying “On which his or her family.” 

Mr Chairman, the way I am assuming that land on which his or her family ordinarily resides, and from which they derive sustenance is concurrent. I am assuming that it is meant to be concurrent. This conjunction makes one not the other, but both. Now, supposing on that land we are only normally residing and we are not deriving our sustenance from it? In fact, that would be the case but here it has to be concurrent. It means, therefore, if it is not concurrent, this law will not be applicable. It has to be land on which we normally reside, and on which we normally derive our sustenance. Without that, it is not applicable.  

Further clarification, Mr Chairman, I find this law very strange, trying to define a family. Honestly, if by this law of land ownership you have to define my child, that when the child attains the age of maturity he is not a member of my family, then I find it a very strange law. I find it a very strange law that a son of maturity age ceases to be a member of my family! It is a very strange law indeed! A family is commonly known, it is understood. In many cases you do not even have to define it. But this law is trying to make a new definition of a family, which excludes the child of maturity age. I find this very unacceptable!  

Sir, in the Administrator General’s Office, whenever a head of a family or whatever it may be, dies, automatically all the members of the family, including the extended family, are included to be catered for. Now, in a civilised society, I think that is the best arrangement. Nobody would be left out. If the purpose of this law is to make sure that nobody is left out, then the Administrator General’s Office and facilities are the best facility we have. In fact, it goes beyond land.  

Finally, Sir, I find it very strange that we should be mixing up the issue of marriage with the rights to own property. Honestly, it is very unfortunate!  I think I have respect for my family, I have respect for my wife, whether they are in the title or not. If there is any case of death of the head of the family either:
 
    (a) I will write a Will, which will pass all my estates to a number of people, or;  
    (b) As I am living now, even without this law, the house in which we are staying, the land from which we are deriving sustenance, we are sharing equally. Do I need this law really to order me to do what I do ordinarily and customarily?  This is preposterous.

Mr Chairman, I propose that this provision is deleted and we remain with (40).

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I want to give some information on this particular clause. From the information that has been coming on the Floor, from the way members are debating this, hon. Okulo Epak wanted to know whether this is “resides and derives sustenance.” That is exactly what this provision is talking about. 

We went to the countryside in four districts asking about this. In many of those areas, we found out that actually, when the head of the family dies, clan members come, take over the land, throw the wife and children out and these children become destitute - (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do we not put the question? You see, honourable Chairperson, the problem is about the formulation you made. It may cause problems because now, for instance, when you say, “a person who has reached the age of 18 or maturity ceases to have an interest”, does it presuppose that then you will move to the land office and say my son who was on the title some 18 years ago has ceased to be, delete his name? These are some of the problems that the formulation is causing. There is a problem with the formulation.

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, I move that the question be put.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will not put the question because many other Members are still –(Interruption)

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to move that we stand over this particular clause as we work on the formulation. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, maybe we should stand over it so that they study it further. (Mrs Seninde rose_) Let us hear amendments.

MRS SENINDE: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to move an amendment on Clause 39(1). I would like to replace the word “owning” with “who wishes to get.” The reason being -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: You read your formulation.

MRS SENINDE: The sentence reads, “Any person owning a registerable interest in land.” I would like to bring my amendment as “Any person who wishes to get a registerable interest in land on which his or her family resides.” 

The justification is that the word “owning” is causing problems, because I relate this to the fact that a person may be on an inherited land. And just like the example we have just heard, where you find the person had his land already registered, I think there is a very big gap now if we pass the law with this word “owning.” I would not like us to enact a law that will not be implementable. I suggest that if we put these words “who wishes to get”, I think it will be okay for any family that wishes to go on with this kind of registration. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members let us – otherwise we are going to get many amendments. Now, you have heard this particular amendment saying "any person who is interested to be registered…" So, the duty is on that person to go and get registered - (Interjection). Yes, let us vote on it. I put the question on that.

MR KOLUO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would, for example, agree with the proposal, but I have this concern. Let us assume all my children have crossed the 18 years, they cease to have rights on that land, and I remain alone with my wife. Let us assume the corporate name being talked about is I, the husband and I die and this wife remains. Now what happens to that land? Can she sell that land?

THE CHAIRMAN: It becomes hers. Now, when you die the wife owns the land.

MR KOLUO: So, my concern is, my children should remain part of my family even when I am dead, and they should have rights over my land even when I am dead. So, unless we are going to say, after they have attained 18 years, and when I, the corporate name die, then the rights lapse back to the mother and the children, this law will have problems. Yes, the wife can sell the land and even remarry, leaving my children suffering. This is not acceptable!

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the amendment by hon. Seninde was to change from the person who is registered to a person who wants to acquire interest in the land so that he is the person who goes to the land office. That is her amendment.  

(Question put and negatived.)

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we stay over this clause until tomorrow.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, why should we put it to tomorrow? We want to dispose of this law today.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, there is a motion –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please be cool. That is how we can dispose of this matter.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: There is a motion from hon. Hyuha and I wish to say something on this motion –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We assigned two days for this law.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Then let me give the Government position, Sir. This is not the first time this House has, during its life, addressed this issue of matrimonial land. And I gave information to this House that Cabinet directed the Minister of Lands, me, to carry out a study countrywide; not in four districts but in all the 56 districts of Uganda, and that study was accomplished around October last year. After my ministry handled the land aspects to the question, the Minister of Justice was also enjoined to carry out a similar study on family relations: The broad range of family issues including co-habitation, including polygamous families, including the extended African family, including clan land and tribal land, a whole range of issues.

Yesterday, Sir, I did inform the House that in February this year, Cabinet considered the principles behind the family law - the domestic relations law, which addresses this and other family relations in greater detail than this amendment is seeking to give –(Interruption)

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise on a point of order. Is the honourable minister in order to legislate in anticipation of some principles, which are not even in the bill? Our Rule of Procedure 60(1) prohibits him. Therefore, is he in order to speculate? (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not in order to anticipate, but I think the interpretation of his explanation is that he is not supporting this. I think he is giving a home to this law; that is all. 

Why do I not put the question? I want to put the question, but I think we should do it by show of hands. Now, those in favour of the amendment put up your hands –(Interjections)- okay, order! There is a motion that we stay this provision until when?

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, after you put a question on the amendment by hon. Seninde and it was rejected, hon. Hyuha moved a motion, which I supported and the Chairperson supported too. So, would it be procedurally right for –(Interruption)-

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us dispose of it. The motion is that we stay consideration of this particular amendment until when? 

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, given that we received our time schedule that we shall be sitting even on Friday morning, I would beg that we stay over this particular clause until tomorrow. Given the importance of this clause, let us give it more time so that we amicably agree on this particular clause.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I can say just now that maybe tomorrow, for one reason or another, we may not be able to sit, although we had agreed. So, I think the motion can be adjusted to, say, on Monday. So, the motion is that we stay it until Monday.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, honourable members, I understand the next Clause 15 is related. So, we may also have to skip it until next week.

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17:

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to amend Clause 17 paragraph (a) by substituting the following as subsection (2). “Subject to the provisions of this section, the commission shall be responsible for the management of the fund, and may contract out the management of any part of the fund to an organisation in the public or private sector; but no such contract shall absolve the commission from the responsibility of management.” 

The justification, Mr Chairman, is that the remaining details are of a policy nature, and the amended clause provides for better legislation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that paragraph (c) be deleted. The justification is to make it more obligatory for the commission to carry out its functions rather than granting it discretion that might be abused.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17 as amended agreed to.

Clause 18:

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Mr Chairman, I want to move an amendment to insert in the Act immediately after section 48(1)(11) to read that the members of the commission - that is the Land Commission - shall hold office on full time basis. The justification is that the present Land Commission is on part time basis, except the chairman, and there are many programmes of Government, which have lagged behind because the Land Commission is part time. For example, there are many pieces of land for Government, which have never been surveyed and whose whereabouts have never been established. Their ownership has not been secured. And this is supposed to be done by the Land Commission.  

Mr Chairman, the committee itself has indicated that the land fund should be extended. That means there is extra load on the commission. So, I suggest that the Land Commission is on a full time basis. I beg to move.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Chairman, Article 93 of the Constitution makes it clear that any motion which imposes a charge on the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund can only be moved by Government. So, the honourable Member is not competent to move that motion - (Laughter).

 Clause 18 agreed to.

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to insert a new clause after Clause 18 as follows: Section 58 of the Act is amended by - 

    (a) inserting subsection (1) at the beginning of the section;
    (b) adding the following paragraphs after paragraph (d) of the subsection (1): 
(e) one member representing landlords;
(f) one member representing tenants; and 
(g) one youth representative. 

I beg to move.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, the introduction in this provision of tenants and landlords brings back the same controversy, which we tried to remedy when we tackled the issue of right of occupancy, and it is the same thinking that has caused us to stay, because to specifically say that let tenants be represented, a tenant’s interest is not on my land, it is in the house.  Unless they are talking about a tenant in another format, because if it is a tenant who is provided for already, then we are extending that right which the committee’s proposal initially wanted to protect. Because now the tenant will go and make claims that cannot be protected or defended by the law, and you end up in the same argument, transferring from here to that committee that should solve this problem. 

I think the specification should be on the category of people based on neutrality not representation of interest, because once we have interest here, then the impartiality is destroyed.

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, really this is a composition of a district land board, and already the members who are there are: one member representing municipal councils, one member representing urban councils, one member from each county in the district and we are adding on one member representing landlords, one member representing tenants and one youth representative.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but the question is, you are talking about landlords, what is the function of a district land board? Is it to deal with mailo land or is it to deal with freehold? We must know its function to determine the membership, and it seems here that issue was not addressed.

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I am compelled to withdraw that amendment.

Clause 19:

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to amend Clause 19 by substituting the following: Section 60 of the Act is amended by –

    (a) substituting subsection (6) with the following: “(6) Each district council shall have a district land office, which shall provide technical services through its own staff, or arrange for external consultants to the board.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Amend "district council to have a land office"?

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, this should be each district.

THE CHAIRMAN: I hope you are aware that the district land board is not a department of the district council. There are people who think that a district land board is a department of the district council.  It is not true.

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: It should be: “Each district shall have a district land office, which shall provide technical services through its own staff, or arrange for external consultants to the board.” 

    (b) deleting subsection (7). 

The justification, Mr Chairman, is that this amendment deletes details, which are of a policy nature and need not to be included, and is more effective in providing for the intended effects of the proposed amendment as noted in the memorandum of the bill. It also provides for proper drafting by providing for the amendments on the different subsections separately.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the role of this office?

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: This office is really to give technical support.

THE CHAIRMAN: To whom?

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: To the district land boards.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, the amendment by the committee seeks to knock out mine. But, Sir, the amendment in the bill is listing those technical services, and it reads as follows: “Each district shall have a district land office, which shall provide through its own staff, or arrange for the provision of, technical services to the board to facilitate the board in the performance of its functions under this Act. And the technical services to be provided to the board under this subsection shall include, but shall not be limited to land administration, surveying, valuation, registration, physical planning and environmental management.”

THE CHAIRMAN: So, the difference is that for them they are talking about the district council, and you are talking about a district. Okay.  You see, honourable members, there is a difference that for him he is talking about a geographical district, but for you, you are talking about a Government. Which is which?

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Actually on the contrary, it is his, which talked about the district council, ours was just a typing error, and it is a geographical district - (Interruption). Yes! If the Members have got the amendment, it is actually his, which talks about the council, but ours talks about the district.

THE CHAIRMAN: In view of that, I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 19 as amended agreed to.

Clause 20:

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to amend Clause 20 by saying the proposed subsection (2) be amended by substituting for the words “ paid such a remuneration and allowances” with “remunerated and paid allowances.” Justification, it is a grammatical error.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 20 as amended agreed to.

Clause 21:

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to amend the proposed subsection (1) of Section 65 by –

    (i) substituting a capital “S” on the word “sub- county” on the first line;
    (ii) substituting “Division Local Council” with “Division Level” and
    (iii) deleting the words “or under” on the sixth line. 

Again to amend the proposed subsection (7) of Section 65 by –
    (i) inserting the word “A” at the beginning of the subsection; and
    (ii) deleting the words “or under” on the fourth line.  
Justification: Typographical errors.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 21 as amended agreed to.
Clause 22 agreed to.


Clause 23:

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I propose to amend Clause 23 by substituting the following just in paragraph (a). “(1) There shall be a tribunal in each district to be known as a district land tribunal, which shall consist of a chairperson and two other members, and sit from time to time to hear and determine disputes concerning land matters within the district.” The justification is to correct grammatical and drafting errors.  I beg to move. 

Then paragraph (b) is to be deleted. The justification is that the appointment of the land tribunal members by the minister will compromise their independence. In the majority of land disputes, the Land Commission, the Registrar of Titles, district land boards, which all fall under the administration of the minister are potential litigants. By appointing tribunal members, the minister would be a judge in his own case.  Furthermore, the tribunal members will not be regarded as independent, since they will have to determine cases bearing in mind the interest of their bosses. I beg to move.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, the position of Government was stated yesterday, and I wish to add the following that, the Constituent Assembly spent time considering an alternative way of dispute resolution regarding land, and established land tribunals under Article 243. The 6th Parliament also spent a very long time in the months of May and June providing for land tribunals. Sir, the various organs of Government; the Judicial Service Commission, the Ministry of Lands, the Ministry of Justice have all been working together with the Public Service Commission and the Local Government, providing for this new institution called the land tribunal to be a hybrid between the customary system of land dispute resolution and the legal system of resolving these disputes; to be a people’s court easily accessible without the procedural details that we see in the traditional courts. If the minister responsible for this law and lands is not the one to appoint and manage and provide for these tribunals, it means we wasted our time, CA wasted its time. The courts on their own have managed this matter through restructuring, as the case is demanding.  

Sir, I am persuading colleagues to look at tribunals as being people’s courts, people’s participation in dispute resolution; special courts easily accessible by the majority of our people, the customary owners of land, the occupants of registered land whom we see as the potential clients of this land tribunal. We better retain this as a parallel system of land adjudication, land dispute resolution whereby as Article 243 (5) of the Constitution stipulates, any appeals from these tribunals shall go to the High Court.  Sir, I oppose the amendment by the committee.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to support the committee. Land matters are very sensitive matters and I quite agree with the committee that the registrar of titles, NEMA, Uganda Land Commission and even the ministry itself are potential litigants. Can you imagine a situation where a tribunal appointed by the minister, and I as a private person have a complaint against the registrar of titles, and the chairman of the tribunal and the tribunal itself know very well that the registrar is their boss, and they were appointed by the minister. Even if he was not their boss, he is from the same department. What kind of justice can I expect to get in those circumstances?

Mr Chairman, we must understand and respect the principle of separation of powers. Yesterday we spent a lot of time to understand what a tribunal is. The tribunal should belong to the other arm of Government and not the Executive. I know the minister quoted examples of other tribunals that have been created, but these tribunals are different from this tribunal in terms of its functions. Therefore, we need to protect our people and we cannot create a situation where the minister will be a person to preside over the affairs of this tribunal. This tribunal should be separate, it should be in the Judiciary and I think we should keep the recommendation of the committee. This is the only way we can protect people’s interests in land.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR FRANCIS AYUME: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to say at the beginning that the proposal by the minister for the minister to appoint the chairperson or members of the tribunal on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission has really no legal impediment. I will, for example, give the following instances: The President as a head of state appoints the judges of the High Court on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission.  The Chairperson of the Tax Tribunal, which handles matters to do with URA, is a person who is appointed by the President, also on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission. There are also instances where the minister responsible for Communications, on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, appoints the tribunal under the Communications Act or Statute. I could go on naming several other examples.  

What I am trying to demonstrate is that the fact that the minister does the appointment on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission should allay any fears that the minister would be appointing people who are not of the right calibre or qualification.  The proposal in this law is to ensure that logistics, management and welfare of the tribunals are the responsibility of the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment.  

Now, as the minister did say a few minutes ago, in as far as the supervision of these tribunals with relation to their quasi-judicial work is concerned, the law provides for decisions of these tribunals to be appealed to the High Court. I think is not well founded. I would therefore support the proposal by the minister that the minister does the appointment because he is responsible for the welfare and the management of the tribunals, while the Judiciary will be taking care of the legal aspects of the operations of the tribunals. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well you have heard the sides. I put the question on the proposal of the committee. It is opposed by the minister - (Interjections)- Yes they are on appointment of the members. The minister wants to appoint them. What we have is the proposal of the committee. Honourable Member, can you please repeat for the House?

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, the proposal of the committee is to amend Clause 23 of the bill in paragraph (a) by substituting the following: “There shall be a tribunal in each district to be known as a district land tribunal, which shall consist of a chairperson and two other members, and sit from time to time to hear and determine disputes concerning land matters within the districts.”  The justification is grammatical and drafting errors.

Paragraph (b) the committee wants to amend paragraph (b) by deleting it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear?

PROF. LATIGO: The amendment as provided for by the committee actually grammatically is worse than what is proposed by the minister. The justification was that you improve it grammatically, but in fact you worsen it grammatically. My proposal is that we adopt what the minister provided because the English is clear.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you adopt their amendment, it means it will have amended what the minister proposed. If you reject it, then we shall proceed to put the question on the other one and if you want to amend it, then we shall amend it. I think that is how we should proceed.  I put the question.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, we should further amend Clause 23 by inserting a new paragraph after paragraph (b) as follows: (c) In subsection (3) by substituting for the words “A member of the tribunal shall be a person” with the words “The other members of the tribunal shall be persons.” The justification is that the word “member” is all embracing of the tribunal members including the Chairperson who has already been provided for in subsection (2) 

Paragraph (c) and (d) be deleted. The justification: it is just a consequential amendment to what we have just decided under paragraph (b).  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23 as amended agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25:

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose an amendment in Clause 25 that it should be deleted. The justification is that the proposed subsection (1) of section 76A is redundant as LC courts will still be the courts of first instance. Under Section 4(1)(b) of the Resistance Committees (Judicial Powers) Statute 1998, the jurisdiction of LC courts in land matters is restricted to customary land tenure. It is also important that the LC 1 courts remain as the courts of first instance in these matters since they are the courts on the ground. The proposed subsection (2) of section 76A is more appropriately placed under Section 88 of the Act on appeals. I beg to move.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, I will start with an explanation. The bill seeks to establish the LC II committee court as the court of first instance because practice has indicated that the residents of a village in LC 1 are relatives, and in most cases they are not administering justice with impartiality. At a larger division, a parish constituted in most cases of more than 12 villages, is big enough to have a court that is impartial at that level. This has been arrived at through a study and, therefore, I am requesting colleagues to give it a second look and go by what I am proposing in the bill, that the first court of first instance in the LC system is the Parish or Ward, LC II courts. Therefore I oppose the committee motion.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think you have heard the rationale in that if you start with LC I, they are local. They are either relatives of the landlord or relatives of the other person. To make it wider, you make it a parish; one, because there will be other people from different areas. I think that is the rationale. Now the committee has proposed an amendment of deletion and the minister has explained. Therefore, you see both sides. Now I put the question on the committee’s amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment following this one?

MR NDAWULA: What I have is to insert the following clause after Clause 25, and I do not have any on 25. 

(Clause 26 agreed to.)

MR NDAWULA: Excuse me sir, I do not know when the amendment was passed on deletion – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: It was not. It was negatived.

MR NDAWULA: I was waiting to hear that it was going to be counted as being part of the bill so that I could stand up to bring a Clause after 25.

THE CHAIRMAN: Did you have to insert another clause?

MR NDAWULA: Yes, I had a clause immediately after 25.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is what we said and the question was negatived. Therefore it means they opposed your proposal.

MR NDAWULA: Mr. Chairman I expected that maybe that you were going to call that it stands part of the bill. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us repeat it. I put the question that Clause 25 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NDAWULA: Mr Chairman this is to insert the following new clause after Clause 25. That Section 77 of the Act is amended_  

    (a) in paragraph 3 of sub-section (1) by substituting the following: ‘Determine disputes as the court of first instance in all land matters, Certificates of Title where the subject matter does not exceed 2,500 currency points.”  
    (b) by deleting paragraph (d) of sub section (1). 
(C)	in sub section (2), deleting the words “all the powers of the Magistrate’s Court Grade I granted under the Magistrates Act and shall, in addition and in so far as it is not provided for in this Act, have..” 
(d)	Delete sub section (2) on page 71 by substituting by sub section (3). “Notwithstanding Sub-Section (1) of this Section, a District Land Tribunal shall not make an order for cancellation of entries in a Certificate of Title and vesting the Title, but shall refer such cases to the High Court for the necessary consequential orders”.

Mr Chairman the justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of Clause 27 deleting Section 85 which provides for the jurisdiction. To provide for the pecuniary jurisdiction of the tribunals and to eliminate the reference to magistrate’s courts as a consequential amendment arising out of the proposed amendment, paragraph (b) of Clause 23 of the bill.

The proposed sub section (3) is to avoid contravening Section 185 of the Registration of Titles Act CAP 205, which limits consequential orders to the jurisdiction of the High Court.  

Section 79 of the Act is amended_ 

    (a) in sub section (1) by deleting the reference to sub section (1); and 
    (b) by deleting sub section (2). 

The justification: as a consequential amendment arising out of Clause 27 which abolishes sub county and urban tribunals under Sections 81 and 82.  I beg to move.

MR LATIGO: Mr Chairman, my problem with this provision is that it presupposes that we went ahead with their proposal and deleted Clause 25, yet we retained Clause 25 and now there is going to be disharmony between this proposal and what is in Clause 25.

MR NDAWULA: Mr Chairman, in no way does this one refers to 25. It refers to 27, which is actually abolishing Sub County and Municipal tribunals. It is not referring to 25 anywhere; it is referring to 27 and 23.

MR AYUME: Sorry, Mr Chairman. I think there is a matter of drafting here in (c), because you do not talk of land matters with Certificates of Title. I think you are talking of land matters involving Certificates of Title.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear? Chairperson, have you appreciated?

MR NDAWULA: Yes, I have no objection to that.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, I have a problem and it is as follows: Section 77 of the Act is talking about jurisdiction of district land tribunals. The Committee is amending that Act by giving it powers to determine disputes as courts of first instance. These two are misplaced; his amendment is misplaced. Section 77 of the Act is amended.  This is what he says in paragraph (c). What he is talking about here, that a district land tribunal is a court of first instance is not the case.  

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the case?

MR. BAGUMA: The case is that the LC II Court, the Parish and the Ward is the Court of first instance. Therefore this amendment is addressing something foreign.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, if my interpretation of the committee’s amendment is correct, I thought district land tribunals are courts of first instance with respect to matters with certificates of title!  I thought that is the qualification we have to consider. It is not a blanket amendment. That it is a court of first instance in all land matters. That is my understanding of this amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it seems there are not many clauses remaining and apparently we will not be able to finish the work today because of what we decided in respect of proposed Clause 39(a). I would advise that maybe the Committee looks at this and they try to synchronise it, because it may cause some confusion as you can see. Don’t you think we should do that so that we resume the Committee stage on Monday when we come back?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the bill entitled the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2002 and has considered Clauses 1 up to Clause 26 and stood over two matters.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you very much for the work done. We have come to the end of today’s business, and the House is adjourned until Monday 2 p.m. when we shall continue with the Committee Stage in respect of this bill and other matters listed.

(The House rose at 4.36 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 14 April 2003 at 2 p.m.)




