Thursday, 17 April 2003      

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Strangers Gallery, we have lecturers, staff and students of Uganda National Institute of Special Education, Kyambogo. They are here to follow the proceedings.  You are most welcome! (Applause). And on the other side, I see- but, unfortunately I did not get the name of the school- we also have in the Strangers Gallery other students from a school in Uganda- (Laughter).  They are most welcome!  I undestand they are from Majansi Secondary School in Tororo, hon. Dorothy Hyuha’s constituency.  

Honourable members, the other day I told you there were vacancies on the Committee on the National Economy, and two honourable members have already procured the necessary support, and they are Hon. Jennifer Namuyangu, Woman Member for Parliament, Pallisa and hon. Godfrey Ahabwe from Rubanda.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER:  So, you now become members.  Honourable members, you remember, yesterday I told you it is necessary to draw the terms of reference for the select Committee we set up. I do not know whether you are ready to do this so that the Committee can immediately embark on its assignment?  Are you ready - or if you are not ready, you leave it to – (Interjection) - no, the Committee should never set terms of reference because we are the ones who have selected it. So, they cannot assign themselves work to do; we give them the work to do. So, it is necessary that we think about the terms of reference. Maybe we should do this on Tuesday, if you are not ready.

DR CHEBROT:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I stand to raise a matter of national concern.  Those of you who have been listening to international news, there is a disease which has arisen called Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), and since this is becoming a global world of travelling, I wish to know what measures the Ministry of Health or those charged with the responsibility of taking care of our health have put in place to ensure that this disease does not come to our country?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, in the same vein, I am rising on a point of serious concern, to express dismay at the reluctance the Government frontbenchers are exhibiting in these days to do serious business.  Let the Executive demonstrate to us that they are now incapable of following what is going on in this Assembly.  Any serious Government which does not heed to what Parliament is deliberating ceases to be serious.  So, on behalf of the people of Rubaga South, I would like to express concern- (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order to hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, because he has referred to a very capable Government and determined Government as being very incapable. As Government, we are here fully represented and I have been asked by the Prime Minister to represent Government and I am capable of representing Government- (Applause). 

I can assure Members of Parliament that any issue that you raise in Parliament here will be addressed accordingly.  So, is it in order for hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to say that Government is not fully represented in this House, and yet there is a minister who is fully in charge of all the happenings in Parliament? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, I was also informed by the Rt hon Prime Minister that he has assigned the hon. minister, who has just been on the floor to take charge, and therefore, Government is represented. You put your question to be answered.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Much obliged, Mr Speaker.  May I use this opportunity to put my question?

THE SPEAKER: No, you cannot have two opportunities; you have finished, next time.

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, a procedural concern.  A month ago, you told us that from time to time, a minister responsible for security would keep us posted on matters of national security.  Last week, we got a statement on a matter pertaining to a raid by the Pokot on Kapchorwa; we rejected it. We have a much more serious situation in the north western part of this country, where UPDF is operating in a foreign country and it has been alleged by international organisations that a massacre nearing genocide has been committed and our UPDF troops are operating in that area.  I would like to know from the Government whether we should be held responsible for any genocide committed by the UPDF or not?

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, this is not something, which occurred yesterday, this is something, which must have occurred a long time ago! And if you wanted to deal with it, you should have put a formal question.  But the opportunity that you are given after the communication is only for something which maybe arose yesterday, or has risen now and you need to address it.  But if you want a formal statement on that, please take the necessary steps and you will get the answer.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS AMENDMENT BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2002” be read for a second time.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded, proceed.

DR MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The object of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2002, is to amend the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001, in order to provide for the merger of three institutions to form one university to be known as Kyambogo University, under section 22 of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001. The three institutions are: 

    1. The Uganda National Institute of Special Education.
    2. The Institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo.
    3. The Uganda Polytechnic, Kyambogo.

The bill also provides for a legal framework to deal with the consequences of the merger.  It seeks to avoid a vacuum for the staff and students of the merged institutions.  It seeks to provide for the new university to take over the assets and liabilities of the merged institutions.

Finally, it seeks to provide for recognition in the registration of the Islamic University in Uganda and for recognition of its academic awards by the National Council of Higher Education. I am happy to report that since the First Reading of this bill, I have had serious cordial working meetings with the Committee on Social Services.  We have discussed the bill in detail and I wish to concede here that these discussions led to improvements in the original bill.

This bill is necessary and timely to give a clear and firm legal basis for the merger of the said Uganda National Institute of Special Education, Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo and Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo, into Kyambogo University.

The bill is also necessary to streamline institutional arrangements for the university, and for all matters arising out of the merger.  I, therefore, recommend the bill to this august House for quick approval and enactment.  Mr Speaker, honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I beg to present the report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services on the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2002.

Honourable members, the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2002, was read a First Time in this august House on 12 February 2003.  

In accordance with our Rules of procedure, Rule No.154c, the bill was referred to the Committee on Social Services to examine critically before being debated by this House.  

Our methodology: 

Various stakeholders were invited to present their views and submit memoranda on this bill. The Committee is grateful for the input made by the following institutions: 

 (i) Makerere University (MUK)
 (ii) Mbarara University of Science and Technology (MUST)
 (iii) Gulu University
 (iv) National Institute of Special Education, Kyambogo.
 (v) Uganda Polytechnic, Kyambogo (UPK)
 (vi) Institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo (ITEK)
 (vii) Uganda Management Institute (UMI)
 (viii) National Teachers Colleges (NTCs)
 (xi) Primary Teachers Colleges (PTCs)
 (x) Paramedical Training Institutions
 (xi) Makerere University Business School (MUBS)

The Committee is extremely grateful for the contributions made by Members of Parliament representing workers and the National Union of Educational Institutions during the discussion of the bill.

Lastly, the Committee is grateful for the cooperation and input from the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Financial Implication: 

In accordance with the requirements of Section 10 of the Budget Act, the Certificate of Financial Implications of the Bill was signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and submitted to Parliament. (The Annex is attached)

The Committee analysed the financial implications and these are the findings: 

    i. There is a merger of the budgets of the existing three separate institutions: – UNISE, UPK and ITEK.
    ii. The budgets of capital development, wage and non-wage increases in the medium term in order to put the staff of the three original institutions under the same salary scale, and also to cater for the teaching equipment and materials to match with the level of the university.
    iii. The Committee could not establish within the budget indicators the retirement benefits for staff who may be affected by the merger.  The Committee has recommended that the Minister of Public Service should address this matter within their budget.
    iv. The Committee noted with concern that Government has never established a formal unit cost per course per student in public universities.  It was therefore difficult to determine the exact budgetary allocations for the recurrent expenditure for the proposed new Kyambogo University.

Honourable members, turn to Page 4, the background to the bill. Parliament enacted the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001, under sections 73 and 130 of that Act.  The Institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo, Statute 14 of 1993 was repealed and, therefore, established ITEK as a public tertiary institution under section 130 and 131.  Similarly, under section 131 of the same Act, Uganda Polytechnic, Kyambogo was established as a public tertiary institution.   

However, under section 130 of the Act, Uganda National Institute of Special Education Act 1998 was saved.  

The objective of this bill, honourable members, is to amend the Universities and Other Tertiary Institution Act, 2001, and provide for the merger of the following institutions to form one public university known as Kyambogo University: 

    i. The Uganda National Institute of Special Education  (UNISE)
    ii. The institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo (ITEK)
    iii. The Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo (UPK)

Historical Perspective of these three Institutions: 

Honourable members, I wish to highlight here why the Committee thought it necessary to analyse the historical perspective. We had heated debates on why the amendment bill was silent about the staff and students of UPK, and yet the staff and students of UNISE and ITEK where brought on board.  So, we had to go through the historical perspective of these institutions.  

Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo (ITEK) and Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo (UPK) have evolved over the years from a small training college and technical school respectively, to a public university status as proposed.  ITEK started as a government teacher training college at Nyakasura in Fort-Portal in 1948.  Eventually, it moved to Kyambogo Hill as a National Teachers’ College, offering diplomas in primary and secondary education.  It then became an Institution of Teacher Education (ITEK) affiliated to Makerere University offering diplomas and degrees in education.   

It also became responsible for curricula assessment and awards of Grade III teachers certificates and diplomas in Primary Teachers Colleges (PTC) and National Teacher Colleges (NTCs) respectively.  Currently, ten national teachers colleges and 47 primary teachers colleges are affiliated to ITEK, where their course programs and examinations are moderated.  

In 2000 and 2001, ITEK established a pre-service Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science with education of Makerere University.  It also instituted in the same year two postgraduate programs: the Postgraduate Diploma in teacher education, which trains teachers or tutors for both primary teachers colleges and national teachers colleges and the national teachers colleges (NTCs).  

The other postgraduate program is the postgraduate diploma in education that trains teachers for secondary schools.  Training teachers at degree and post degree levels required better-qualified academic staff, and thus the vigorous staff development program.  

ITEK was granted a self-accounting status in the 1994/1995 financial year.  The ITEK Statute, 1994 governed the institute, which was eventually repealed by the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act as mentioned above.  

The Historical Perspective of UPK: 

On the other hand, UPK started as a manual school, 1921 and later was established as Kampala Technical School (KTS) in 1928, and became Uganda Technical College in 1964, issuing certificates in the respective technical skills.  Uganda Technical College was the only college in Uganda that trained middle level supervisory, managerial as well as skilled craft manpower. In 1986, it was upgraded to Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo (UPK).  

The new institution (UPK) was mandated to spearhead the development of skills, training of middle level personnel in industry, commerce and agriculture, offering certificates and diplomas of UNEB.  It was also to coordinate training initiatives with Uganda technical colleges and technical institutes in areas of the good practice, and with the National Development Curriculum Centre and Uganda National Examination Board, in areas of curricula and assessment.  The aborted UPK Bill of 1998 would have brought the Uganda technical colleges and technical institutes under the over all supervision of UPK in academic and professional matters. 

UPK has continued to offer training programs in a diversity of technical and professional areas in engineering, science and technology and technical teacher education, having regard to entrepreneurial education.  

UPK was governed by the Education Act, 1964, where the academic staff and other employees where hired by the Ministry of Education, currently recruited by the Education Service Commission under the Education Service Act, 2002, and its examination done under UNEB.  

At the commencement of the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, UPK started its transformation to become a fully-fledged public tertiary institution. Before completion, the merger came in.  

Honourable members, like ITEK, UNISE was established by an Act of Parliament entitled: “The Uganda National Institute of Special Education Statute, 1998" Act 14 of 1998.  It was established as an institution of higher learning with prospects of developing into a centre of excellence of training, research and dissemination of knowledge and information in the area of special needs education and rehabilitation in Uganda and beyond.  

Special needs education in Uganda, as we know it today, started at the Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo (ITEK), through the establishment of a fully-fledged department of special needs education in 1998. It was planned for the department of special education to evolve into an institute.  

Special needs education being relatively a new area of study; training of staff was part and parcel of the establishment of the departments.  Teachers with interest in this area were appointed at ITEK as assistant lecturers, and thereafter, sent abroad for further studies at master’s level.  It may be pointed out that the transformation of the department of special education into an institute was enhanced by continuous evolutionary development of ITEK.  The Department of Special Education finally moved to its newly constructed site in 1996/1997, but ITEK continued to be responsible for programs until UNISE was legally established by Parliament under the UNISE Statute 1998.  

UNISE conducts courses leading to the award of diplomas by ITEK under standards provided by the ITEK Statute 1993.  This made it an affiliated institute of ITEK.  The institute may also conduct courses leading to the award of degrees of Makerere University under standards provided by the Makerere University Act 1997, which affiliates it to Makerere University separately from ITEK.  

Honourable members, during the enactment of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001, the UNISE Act was preserved, but the other two were repealed.  This one we preserved.  This was contrary to the recommendations of the task force of experts of 1999, led by the Tusubira Report 1999, which was set up by the Ministry of Education and Sports.

The Tusubira Report of 1999 recommended the merger of UNISE, ITEK and UPK into Kyambogo University. It also recommended that there would be two clear arms of the university namely:

    (i) The School of Science and Technology; and 
    (ii) The School of Teacher Education, incorporating special needs education. 

It was against this background that the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill 2002, whose object is to provide for the merger of the three institutions, has been brought before Parliament.

The Committee of Social Services is fully convinced that the merger, as proposed by the Bill and also as envisaged by the Task Force of experts who came up with the Tusubira Report 1999, is the best arrangement for these three public institutions located on the same hill of Kyambogo.

The Committee has visited the complex of institutions located on Kyambogo hill, and the infrastructure available could enable the establishment of the new university to start, as expansion continues. The Committee therefore appeals to this august House to support the merger.

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Staff and Students of Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo (UPK):

What were our observations? Whereas this Bill has clearly stipulated the transitional provisions in respect of students, academic staff and other employees of ITEK and UNISE respectively, it is silent about similar subjects for UPK. 

It is important to note, honourable members, that UPK was governed by the Education Act, 1964. The staff and other employees of UPK were hired under the Education Service Act, 2002 (Act 6 of 2002).  

The Committee has recommended that after the regularisation and validation exercise by the Education Service Commission, all qualifying academic staff and other employees of UPK be transferred to Kyambogo University in the same way as those of ITEK and UNISE. All other staff and employees who may not qualify for employment in the university should be transferred to the parent Ministry of Education and Sports for re-deployment, or paid retirement benefits, as the case may be.

Honourable members, perhaps I should highlight this. You may need to know that we have five similar colleges currently in Uganda, which are at the level of UPK, which we are transforming now. We have Elgon Technical School, colleges like Kichwamba and Bushenyi, and others; there are five of them. So, the Committee feels that staff that may not qualify to be transferred to the university could be re-deployed to such colleges. 

On the other hand, all students of UPK should also be allowed to continue under Kyambogo University, as is the case with ITEK and UNISE.  

University Councils and Senate:

Honourable members, the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, section 38 established the university councils for public universities. Under section 38(q) a representation of four persons of the affiliated constituent colleges or schools become members of the university council. 

It is important to note that on the establishment of Kyambogo University, the following institutions, among others, are likely to be affiliated to this new university. 

    (i) Ten National Teachers’ Colleges, 
    (ii) Forty seven Primary Teachers Colleges, 
    (iii) Thirty four Technical Institutes; and 
    (iv) Twenty-four farm schools. 

Therefore, a representation of four persons of each affiliated constituent college or school will make the University Council too big to function. 

Similarly, section 44(d) of the principal act provides for a representation of three persons of the affiliated constituent college or school, to become members of the University Senate. 

The Committee has proposed amendments aiming at reducing the membership of the University Council and the Senate respectively.  

Persons with Disabilities (PWD) and UNISE: 

In order to ensure that persons with disabilities are well catered for within the universities, and more especially within the new Kyambogo University where a whole sector was responsible for special education, the University Council should include some persons with disabilities to represent that concern. The Committee is therefore recommending two members of the academic staff, who are persons with disabilities, to be on the council.

Operationalisation of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001:

Honourable members, we did not only confine ourselves to the merger, but also had to look at how this law had been operationalised ever since we enacted it in this august House. A number of concerns were raised:  

The Committee noted with concern the slow pace at which the Act is being operationalised. Some sections of the principal act have been implemented, for example, the Constitution of the National Council for Higher Education. The Executive Director to this National Council for Higher Education has also been appointed. The office premises of the said body are located in the Kyambogo complex. The Committee was concerned that much more has still to be done, especially since the transitional period is over. 

The Committee noted that the Bill under discussion, when passed, would be part and parcel of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001.  

The Committee therefore was concerned that when established, the new Kyambogo University may suffer from the slow pace of implementation of the Act in the same way the existing universities are suffering. 

Some sections of the Act, if not implemented quickly, may affect the operations of the new university. Below are some of the sections and subject matter, which may affect the new university.

Charter/Certificates:

Under section 131(1)(a) all universities and tertiary institutions established by law were required to apply for a charter or certificate of classification within 12 months from the commencement of the Act. Honourable members, the date of commencement of the Act was 6 April 2001. Two years after the commencement, no charter has been issued to any university.

Registers:

Sub-section three of section 131 requires the National Council for Higher Education – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Sergeant, would you ensure that proceedings here are not disturbed?

MRS HYUHA: Am I safe, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Your proceedings were being disturbed. I was concerned. 

MRS HYUHA: I was also concerned about whether I was safe, Mr Speaker. Could I continue? 

Honourable members, sub-section (3) of section 131 requires the National Council for Higher Education to prepare and publish the registers of universities and other tertiary institutions properly registered and recognised, after a period of 12 months from the date of commencement of the Act. Two years after, no register is published. This could mean that all universities are not recognised, as at present, and this could have very grave legal implications.

Minimum Standards for Courses of Study: 
Honourable members, under section 5(1), the National Council for Higher Education has to ensure minimum standards for courses of study, and the equating of degrees, diplomas and certificates awarded by the different public and private institutions of higher education. This is to ensure that all degree and diploma holders from any university or institute would have the same qualifications for the same profession. Without this, institutions cannot be equated. Some may be taken to be of a lower grade than others, thus disadvantaging those holding their awards. The new university should start on a good foundation in all its courses.

Chancellor:

Honourable members, section 30 provides that there shall be a chancellor for each public university, who shall be appointed by the President, on the recommendation of the University Council.  

I need to highlight this. According to the old law, we used to have His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda as the chancellor of public universities. This law made the President a visitor, and yet a chancellor should be appointed for these institutions, as I have stated above.

Under section 30(3), the Chancellor shall be the titular head of the university, and shall preside at all ceremonial assemblies of the university; confer degrees and other academic titles of that university. Apparently, there is no chancellor for any public university appointed yet. Although section 31(b) gives powers to the vice-chancellor to preside at ceremonial assemblies and confer degrees and other academic titles, the absence of any chancellor leaves a gap still. Honourable members, the new university may suffer the same fate.

Governing Councils:  

Section 77 provides for the establishment of governing councils to all public tertiary institutions, which will be the governing body of the institution. Very few have been put in place. This renders the operations of public tertiary institutions difficult. 

The Committee, therefore, recommended that in future, the time factor within which an established tertiary institution should have a governing body in place should be included in the law. Absence of governing councils hampers the operations of the institutions.

Honourable members, we also noted some problems encountered since the passing of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions law. 

The Committee appreciates that the Ministry and the National Council for Higher Education have been faced with some problems in the implementation of the Act. Some of these problems were created by the law itself. The Committee wanted to ensure that such problems are not created for the new Kyambogo University. The most crucial of them arises from the affiliation of some institutions to Makerere University by law.

Uganda Management Institute (UMI):  

The Uganda Management Institute is one such case. Since the enactment of its law in 1992, UMI stopped conducting courses leading to the award of certificates, diplomas or degrees of Makerere University. However, the principal Act left UMI and ITEK affiliated to Makerere University, under section 131(7).

The Committee has recommended the repeal of that sub-section 131(7), since all the institutions concerned will now be at university status. 

The Committee was drawn to the attention of UMI being a special institute, which is training in-service persons and as such, does issue advanced or post-graduate diplomas and Masters degrees.  

The Committee looked at the definition of a university and did not find any specifics of the kind of diplomas or degrees that a university is required to issue. The Committee, therefore, considers that as an issue that has to be handled by the National Council for Higher Education when recommending the issuing of the Charter. The Charter will include the name of the university being issued with the Charter, the location of the university, the specific objectives and functions of the university, and any other matter that may be relevant to the operations of the university.

Makerere University Business School (MUBS):  

Makerere University Business School, popularly known as MUBS, is another institution that was affected by its being affiliated, by law, to Makerere University, making the operation of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 difficult, especially in the following areas:

    (a) Method of operation of MUBS as an affiliated school of Makerere University;
    (b) The title or name of Makerere “University” Business School;
    (c) The reflected downgrading of Makerere University Business School to a public tertiary institution after the enactment of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, when originally it was part and parcel of a university.

What did we observe about the method of operation of MUBS as an affiliated school? Honourable members, I will give you a bit of history. 

Historically, the Minister of Education and Sports established Makerere University Business School under section 5 of the Makerere University Act No. 32 of 1970, by Statutory Instrument 77 of 1997. 

The Statutory Instrument was amended in 2000 under which MUBS was made an affiliated school of Makerere University. This was confirmed by the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001. When the Act deemed MUBS to have been affiliated to Makerere University and assumed the status of an affiliated public tertiary institution, MUBS should have become independent of Makerere University. 

Under section 71(2) of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, an affiliated college remains an independent tertiary institution from the university and retains its status, administration and organisational structure. It only depends on the university to the extent agreed upon and in conformity with the Act and regulations made there under. The institution also has to abide with statutes and guidelines, which are issued by the university. 

Apparently, honourable members, to some extent this is not done by MUBS, as the Committee was informed. For example, the Committee was informed by Makerere University that all schools and colleges are affiliated to the university through relevant faculties for course or courses conducted jointly. For that matter, MUBS should be affiliated through the Faculty of Economics, but this is not the case.

Secondly, MUBS had continued to use the Makerere University logo in its communication and the certificates and diplomas issued by it. It should be noted that MUBS has courses that it conducts independently; that is, courses that are not Makerere University courses. But MUBS has continued to issue certificates and diplomas for those courses, bearing the Makerere University logo even after its affiliated status.

Under section 132(6), the National Council for Higher Education is to ensure that MUBS is established fully as a tertiary institution under the Act. This has not been done, hence the continued conflicts and unclear situation.

The National Council for Higher Education should have formalised the establishment of Makerere University Business School (MUBS) as a full tertiary institution, with the establishment of a governing council and academic board. MUBS should have then, after formalising the establishment, applied for a Certificate of Classification under section 131, to fulfil the establishment.

Honourable members, I am on page 16, the title and name of MUBS. What were the findings or observations of the Committee on this? The title or name of “Makerere University Business School” was developed under paragraph 3(1) of the 1997 Statutory Instrument. The reason for the name is what followed under paragraph 3(2) of the Instrument. MUBS emerged from what had been a Faculty of Commerce of Makerere University and the National College of Business Studies, Nakawa. The school belonged to and was part of Makerere University since it was a constituent college, thus the name of the school.

At the commencement of the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, and on full establishment as an affiliated school, the school should have found its identity. The National Council should have given it a neutral name that would have released MUBS from Makerere University. For as long as it uses the existing name, it is automatically linked to Makerere University.

Secondly, the school cannot legally use the word “university” in its title because “university” as per its definition in the Act, excludes tertiary institutions. Since the School is no longer a School of Makerere University, and it is not a university as per the definition, it cannot use the word “university” within its name or title.

The reflected downgrading of MUBS:

Given the functions of supervision and moderation of exams of all Uganda colleges of commerce by MUBS, the high standard of student enrolment at MUBS compared to other existing public tertiary institutions and having originally been part of a university, MUBS feels downgraded.

MUBS has expressed the desire before the Committee to be upgraded from a public tertiary institution to a public university. 

The Committee considered the desire justified. However, this should be the work of the National Council for Higher Education to recommend to the Minister, after it has been convinced of the justifications. Section 75(4) provides that the minister may, on recommendation of the National Council for Higher Education, and with the approval of Parliament, upgrade a tertiary institution to a public university.  

So, we leave it in the hands of the National Council for Higher Education and the minister to take that decision. However, we have the will to support it, just as we are waiting for a public university in Eastern Uganda - (Laughter).

Recommendations:  

Honourable members, under section 132(6) the National Council for Higher Education should ensure that the full status of MUBS as a public tertiary institution is implemented. 

Secondly, the tertiary institution should conduct courses leading to the award of degrees, diplomas and certificates of Makerere University as an affiliated school under standards provided by the Act and statutes and regulations of the university as may be agreed upon between the School and Makerere University under section 132(4) and 71(3), until it is upgraded to university status.

Three, MUBS should be independent of Makerere University in all other matters except the programmes and courses that would bring them together, as under section 71(2) and 132(3), until it is upgraded to university status.

Four, as long as MUBS is a public tertiary institution under this law, there is necessity for the school to drop the word “university” from its title.

Five, the Ministry of Education and Sports should be given a period of two months within which to address the above administrative concerns, and report to the Committee, as requested by the ministry. The Committee will then report to this august House.

It is further recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports should cause a comprehensive revision of the amendment of the Act in the near future, so that the new Kyambogo University, which has many affiliated institutions, is not faced with the problems faced by MUBS and Makerere University.

Honourable members, in conclusion, the Committee hopes that the problems that have been identified in the Act will be dealt with as quickly as possible so that full implementation can go on. Otherwise, the good intentions of the law will be frustrated.

The Committee recommends that the House supports the motion to enable the merger creating Kyambogo University. I beg to move, honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson of the Committee, for the report.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me time in this House to air my views. I beg you and the House to accept my thanks to the Committee for having scrutinized the Bill at hand. I should also thank the ministry, or the Minister of Education, for having been kind enough to attend to the issues that are pertaining to the proposed Kyambogo University. 

Yes, with 23 million people, we should be having 23 government universities. That is the situation in Japan. With 123 million people, they have got 120 technical universities. If we are aiming at changing this country or to modernise it, we should be talking in terms of the number of universities to match the problem at hand.

It is true, and everybody in the world accepts that the problems with Africa are the three diseases of ignorance, disease and poverty. The tools that are required to address those three problems are clearly locked in the issue of education. Therefore, the Minister of Education should at this moment measure up to it. And it appears he is measuring up to it by coming up with a Bill to straighten the entanglements existing in Kyambogo.

I would have liked to see the Committee come out with a report that we need so many universities, we need so many graduates or cadres of such quality to match development in the next 10 years or 20 years in textile, in fishing, in steel, in agriculture.  But it is unfortunate that the Committee did not come to that level. Perhaps the Committee did not talk to the Minister for Planning, because this information would be availed to it. I think that if we are going to prepare ourselves to really change the situation of disease, ignorance and poverty quickly, the way forward is through these universities.  

I would also have wished for this Committee to have addressed the issue that if we close Kyambogo for lower certificates, have we prepared the other colleges to do the work; to train the manpower? Who is going to address the problem at hand? As you close Kyambogo, certainly you will see the type of cadres who have been coming out of Kyambogo.  Some of them have been good cadres, and we need all the manpower because we do not need to get a professor to do the work of a technician.  But that does not mean that a technician is inferior to a professor. The two people cannot be done away with. You need the professor, yes, but you also need the technician because the two are playing two different roles in society. 

In some countries, a welder - a mere technician, and in fact a junior craftsman, earns more money, for example in Japan, than a professor in a university. Here we have got the scenario where we think a craftsman or a technician should be inferior in terms of rewarding him. Actually, the technician who is suffering in a welding plant or a shipyard in Japan is paid five to ten times more than a professor is! 

That is the type of evolution that I expected the chairperson of this Committee to have pointed out here. At the moment we are addressing our problems in a half-hearted manner. We are not bringing out the juice or the catalyst because basically, the chairperson who is supposed to catalyze us to address this problem seriously has given us half information.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, hon. Gagawala. While I was presenting the report and referring to what would happen to the students and staff of Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo (UPK), I clearly mentioned that we now have five colleges in Uganda. I mentioned some three: Elgon Technic in Mbale, Bushenyi, Kichwamba, and one in Masaka. The five of them are going to address that. I thank you.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, let me thank the chairperson of the Committee. The issue I am trying to bring forward to the House this afternoon is that there is need to seriously focus on this education sector. Education could become our speciality. If we are talking about competing with Kenya, education could be our centre of excellence. Makerere has already demonstrated it and I think Kyambogo could actually come on board to demonstrate it too. 

If anybody is going to respect us on this continent, it will not be via food! If we are going to conquer this continent as leaders and we have got points of excellence, the sub-sector to do it in is education. So, we must give good ideas to the minister and his team, that education is the thing that we could develop as something we are excellent in. 

Of course, we are naturally given food; we have good weather, and the history of Buganda, Busoga, Tooro, Ankole, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja shows that people in Uganda have got a chance to show excellence, particularly in education. You hear that one of the Bishops in London is a Muganda, a whole Bishop from here! A black man is preaching the religion, which was initially imported here! That means this area has got seeds of educating to sow in the whole world, particularly Africa.

Mr Speaker, I was not happy when the chairperson did not point out to us that in order for an institution to be turned into a university, it must have professors. If we are going to talk about professors being in a university, they must have the habit of writing. They must have the habit of researching. A professor who does not publish or do research is not making any impact. That means we are copying books from other universities to teach to our students and we think that is it. Publishing of works by professors and senior lecturers in these institutions must become part and parcel of the law for these institutions, if we are going to call them universities.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much. I would like to inform my colleague that in Makerere, it is now a requirement for one to be approved a professor to have published at least three publications. So, they are already taking up.  

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, that is exactly the point, which I was expecting to hear; that if this Committee visited the institutions which are being proposed for legalising as universities, has it already seen that the potential for this type of publishing and research is already on the ground? Have we facilitated them? If these facilities are not there, then I expect that in the coming budget we must show that we are financing Kyambogo University in a big way to match the job, which it is supposed to address.  Mr Speaker, for the time you have given me, I would like to thank you.

MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Committee for the report. I want to comment on two or three statements, which were left hanging. One is on page 6, which says, “The aborted UPK Bill, 1998 would have brought the Uganda Technical Colleges and Technical Institutes under the overall supervision of UPK in academic and professional matters.” 

Now that it did not, what has happened?  I would have wanted the Committee to tell me, and I am asking this because currently we have got the five Technical Colleges that the chairman has referred to. We are not sure whether the academic performance in those technical colleges is properly supervised from any real professional centre.  One would have thought that a university would be in a position to supervise these technical colleges. Currently they sit for examinations, get diplomas but one is not sure whether those diplomas are good, especially from the practical point of view.

Two; below, it goes on to say, “UPK has continued to offer training programmes in a diversity of technical and professional areas in engineering, science, technology and technical teacher education, having regard to entrepreneurial education.”  Currently, I do not think there is any place where we train teachers who teach in technical colleges. It looks like they were trained a long time ago, they were deployed at those colleges and they have been forgotten.  

In Masaka Technical College, as I speak now, there are only three or four teachers who are on the Government payroll, who are considered qualified to teach in that place. People who were formerly teaching at the institute level continue to teach at this same place when it has become a technical college. People who are at the level of teaching those people, who have got degrees, are not on the payroll.  

Recently the Education Service Commission went to the place to interview people whom they would deploy as teachers at that place. They told them that they had not been instructed to interview any other people. They only addressed them and the situation remains as it is. So, the quality of the people who teach at our technical colleges remains a problem, and I am told it is so because the Ministry of Education has not been given sufficient funds to recruit teachers who are qualified to teach at these places.  So, it is necessary, perhaps, as we are going into the budget process, to ensure that we put a budget in place to be able to recruit qualified teachers to teach at our technical colleges. 

Two, the facilities provided for technical colleges are not adequate. So, you get somebody who is given sufficient academic training but not sufficient practical training. I would have thought that somebody who wants to come out with technical qualification should have sufficient technical skills. But as we talk now, that is not available. 

As if that was not enough, only two or three days ago, a teacher from a technical institute came to my office to complain. He has been teaching at a technical institute since 1969, and he was qualified. He has the certificates; he has even been on the Government payroll. But recently he reached the age of 60 and they just stopped paying him. When he went for his terminal benefits, they told him he had not been recruited into the teaching service when the fellow has been teaching for the last 30 years! He was only advised two years ago to make an application through the Education Service Commission to join the payroll, and he has been laid off before it came. Now the fellow came and said, “I have been teaching, where am I going to get my terminal benefits?” 

So, it appears there is even no system through which teachers in these technical colleges are recruited, trained and promoted in the Civil Service. With these few remarks, I thank the Committee for this report. Thank you.

MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the well presented report. I have been very much encouraged when I heard the chairperson of the Committee recommending that Makerere University Business School (MUBS) should be autonomous and be given its own status.  

Mr Speaker, as you may recall, in the 6th Parliament it was a real tussle here for some people to convince this august House that Makerere University Business School required to have its own status, and at least keep some of the courses that are conducted at the institute, which are not conducted in Makerere University. This has deprived a lot of people from entering this tertiary institution because it has to follow the regulations set by Makerere University.  So, I am in support of the recommendation that Makerere University Business School should be given its own autonomy.  

Secondly, on the minimum standards, this is very important, and I am very pleased that the Committee has come up with this because we have seen a number of people who have been denied entrance to some universities because of their low grades. But within a week, they are recruited in some other universities and they will be also awarded the same degrees or qualifications like their colleagues who performed well.  So, when we talk of minimum standards, I am in support of this and I would like it to start being implemented as soon as possible. 

I request that maybe it would also require to look into the status of our lecturers. Much as some lecturers have the qualifications, but one sometimes fears even to respect them as lecturers because of the way they present themselves. So, being lecturers of high quality academically, I would wish to recommend that they also be given some standards of presentation to public. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS NVUMETTA KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the report, and the ministry for bringing up this bill, drafting it and putting it up. I have got a few comments. 

The first one is on the establishment of the cost per course per student. We already have private students at public universities. If we have not established the costs, how do we know that those who are already disadvantaged - because they have not passed well; they are disadvantaged from the regions where they come from; they do not have good schools – are not actually subsidising the ones who are in very good schools and who have already managed to pass and get to university on Government sponsorship? We do not know the cost! 

We are working in blindness and, actually, we are busy trying to look at a bill which we do not know the cost of because we do not know how much we have got to pay for the universities that will be formed, or even the ones we already have. We are just saying yes, we should have the universities. How are we going to look after them? Are they paying the right amount of money or other people are actually subsidising that? 

Then my other comment is on the different sections that have been established for the different departments for Kyambogo University. We have the School of Science and Technology, School of Teacher Education incorporating Special needs education. I wanted to see whether it is possible to separate the special needs education from School of Education so that it is given more prominence. I am worried that the special needs may actually be lost. As we heard before, UNISE actually did not want to be part of Kyambogo University. Maybe those were some of their fears. Now that they have agreed, I think it would be a good idea if their department were actually properly separated so that they feel more comfortable and looked at specially.  

Then on page 9, we have the different institutions: We have the ten national colleges, 40 primary teachers colleges, 40 technical institutes, and 24 farm schools. To me, farm schools are also technical institutes. But I do not know where these other different institutes like nursing colleges and meteorology, and some of these that have been worrying us that they are not being looked after, fall. Are they among the 34 technical Institutes or not?  

My final comment is on page 12, and that is the chancellorship of these universities. The public universities at the moment do not have chancellors yet, but then we also need to look in particular at the one public university that was the first in Uganda, that is Makerere University, Kampala. That even does not have a substantive vice chancellor and deputy vice chancellor and -(Interruption)

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: Thanks a lot, Mr Speaker. I wanted to inform hon. Ruth Kavuma that this list includes the colleges that would be affiliated to Kyambogo University. You will find that other institutions, particularly health training institutions, will be affiliated to Makerere University through the medical school. So, some other institutions are already catered for and affiliated to some other universities. But I think the institutes that are connected to teacher or technical education also include the five polytechnics, which are not listed here. Thank you.

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you very much for that information. I was just concluding on the chancellorship, that is, my concern about the fact that Makerere University does not have a substantive vice-chancellor. Somebody is there temporarily keeping the place - the Deputy Vice Chancellor. The Academic Registrar has been acting, I do not know for how many years! That sort of makes the situation a little bit uncertain, both for the workers and the students. They are not very sure of whatever is finally given out in form of certificates or even decisions, because these people are sitting here in acting capacity and they could easily not be very sure of themselves. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Committee for a good report. I thank also the minister and commend him for appreciating the work of the Committee, more so after appreciating that the Committee did not breach the bill.  There are very few cases where ministers come up with such statements.

Mr Speaker, the report of the Committee indicated that some people would certainly lose jobs. I am, however, interested in finding out how, especially the staff from UPK who may not be re-absorbed into the institution, may not be deployed in the polytechnics which may be created at sub counties or counties. I think this should be the first line of deployment of such staff. 

Mr Speaker, as the ministry re-organises the tertiary institutions, universities and so forth, they should seriously look at re-organising the secondary schools now, because these tertiary institutions are being fed by the secondary schools.

The performance of many schools in our constituencies, especially from the lost counties, is very poor. I would sincerely request the Ministry of Education to come to their assistance and re-organise these schools so that we can also push our children to these tertiary institutions.

Mr Speaker, that brings me to another point. That is recommendation of the quota in-take. How far have we implemented it? How far has the ministry implemented this quota system, so that even the children from these other marginalised areas can have an opportunity?

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Dr Kasirivu. Regarding the new policy of decentralisation of admission of government-sponsored students to public universities, you will recall that two weeks back, the Speaker, gave us a time schedule of business to this House. We are slated for 6th May to present our report on the quota system in public universities. The Committee has already discussed the guidelines by the Ministry of Education and Sports, and we are ready to present our report when we find time on the agenda. Thank you.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the chairperson of the Committee. Let me prepare myself for that report.  

In conclusion, I want to thank the Committee. Whereas this bill was for ITEK, UNISE and UPK, they had time to highlight the plight of 	MUBS. I want to thank them because much as it is somehow smuggled here, I think the relevant minister has taken serious note that MUBS should be given fair treatment. I thank you.

MR SIMON D’UJANGA GIW (Okoro County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for this very elaborate report, and I would like to confirm that the facilities at Kyambogo actually exist for a university because as a student in the early 70s, I benefited from the facilities at UPK. I therefore support the motion, but I would like to make just two observations.  

The first one is that it has been a practice in some universities in this country to send away somebody because his standard is not good enough to join the university. I think we are the only country doing this. What is done in developed countries is to introduce some bridging courses.  Some of these people who are yearning to join the university at the moment maybe did not join university during their days because of other reasons.   It is not that they were too dull. 

Of recent, I have heard that some universities are turning away people who want to join! They tell them they are too dull to be in the university. I would rather recommend that we find a way to bridge their level of education to the beginning of the universities. I hope those concerned with these institutions will look into this so that the universities are accommodative rather than exclusive. 

Mr Speaker, my second point is about Makerere University Business School. I would like to observe that it is the Nakawa institute, which needs the name Makerere much more because it is internationally known. So, the question of autonomy and whether it should be an independent university is not the material matter here. 

There is a school called Harvard Business School. It is autonomous; it gives degrees but it retained the name Harvard for a very obvious reason: that Harvard University is a well-known university. Similarly Makerere University is a well-known university all over the world.  Therefore, the Nakawa institution needs that name "Makerere" more than actually Makerere needs that institution! So, when we are discussing these issues, we should look into all of them. What I recommend is that we should have the autonomy for the school, but the name "Makerere" should be retained for the importance and the standards of the institution.

Finally, Mr Speaker, in as far as degrees and other certificates are concerned it is not possible to make the degrees the same level. Even in the United States, you find that the degrees from one university are slightly different from the other. But what we should see done here is that there should be a minimum standard. Therefore, I agree with the Committee’s report that there must be a minimum standard, which should be supervised by the body appointed to supervise. Apart from those, Mr Speaker, I support the motion and I thank you very much.

MS SINABULYA NAMABIDDE (Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those who have thanked the Committee for the good report, and also to support the motion.  

Mr Speaker, I hope that when this bill is passed into law, the performance of Kyambogo University will improve.  Why I am saying so is because, on page 5 the report talks about the national teachers colleges which are affiliated to ITEK and whose courses and programmes and exams are moderated by ITEK-Kyambogo.  

Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of this year, the country was treated to some shocking news when we were informed that results of the final year students of NTCs had been cancelled. This information came out after one whole year after the exams were sat. One wonders why it took that long for ITEK to realise that something had gone wrong!  In fact, the students had already received their results and then the announcement came out that results had been cancelled and they had to sit their exams again. Now that Kyambogo is going to become a university, I hope such anomalies will not happen again.

Mr Speaker, I also want to talk about the state of the national teachers colleges, which are affiliated to ITEK.  I will give one example of the National Teachers College, Mubende, which I know so well. When you go to this college, it leaves a lot to be desired. The structures are dilapidated, the students study under trees. You cannot believe that students who are studying for diplomas of Makerere University study under trees, but that is what is happening at the National Teachers College, Mubende! 

There is no electricity. Sometime back when there was still cost sharing, the college had tried on its own to rehabilitate the structures. But after the abolition of cost sharing, everything came to a standstill. So, I am urging the ministry to look into the development of national teachers' colleges, if they are to reflect the image of the university, which it will soon become. I hope -(Interruption)

MS JALIA BINTU: Thank you very much, hon. Sinabulya. I would like to inform you that even Masindi National Teachers College recently constructed a pit latrine but the church had to make them shift it. That is why you saw funny notes in the papers that the students now do whatever they do in papers. But all that is because we lack planning. Thank you very much.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. In fact, students at Kyambogo are lucky to study under trees. In Makerere, because of poor planning, students are learning by rumours! Thank you.

MS SINABULYA: I thank my colleagues for the information.  Mr Speaker that alone shows the plight of the students in these colleges. So I urge Government to improve on the status of these national teachers' colleges. I hope that when Kyambogo becomes a university, everything is going to improve to the benefit of the students of Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ANTHONY MUKASA (Buikwe County South, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues who have already expressed support for the motion. I support the motion, but before I fully support it, I am seeking these clarifications.

Clause 3 of the bill reads as follows: “The Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo, the Uganda Institute of Special Education, UPK shall be merged into one university to be known as the Kyambogo University, which shall be established by the minister by Statutory Instrument, under Section 22 of the principal Act.”  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, Kyambogo University has been in existence for almost two years now. I have read through the report and it has not made any hint as to when, assuming this bill is passed, this Statute will come out. 

I usually visit Kyambogo, and whenever I go to Kyambogo, the question that greets me is, “You Members of Parliament, when are you coming up with the statute?” It is against that background, Mr Speaker, that I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister. Assuming this bill is passed, when is this statute establishing the university likely to come out?

Secondly, upon the merger of ITEK and UPK - ITEK was a self-accounting institution; it was getting its funds directly from the Treasury. It had its special salary structures but UPK was under the Ministry of Education and Sports. This means, staff and other employees of UPK were paid slightly higher than staff in the former UPK. 

Now that the two institutions are working together as Kyambogo University, what steps have been taken to ensure that the former employees of UPK do not feel aggrieved over the better payment, which their counterparts in the former ITEK are getting?

Thirdly, I understand there is a council governing Kyambogo University. If I am not mistaken, this was the council, which was governing the former ITEK.  I would like the minister to clarify whether this is the same council that will govern Kyambogo University, if the bill is passed and Kyambogo is instituted as a university, or will a new governing council be set up?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I have read the first two paragraphs on page 9 of the report. The Committee is of the view that those employees, who may not satisfy the requirements as far as qualifications are concerned, would be redeployed or be given terminal benefits.

Mr Speaker, this is not the first time Kyambogo is evolving. As we have heard through the report, it has evolved through a number of stages, and it may continue to evolve. I know that in Kyambogo there is a staff development Committee. And when Kyambogo evolved from National Teachers College, Kyambogo to ITEK, there were members and employees who did not have the necessary qualifications to serve in an institute at that level. These people were given a five years’ grace period, under which to upgrade and attain the required qualifications.  

Whereas I appreciate that there are a number of polytechnics where these people who will be rejected by the university would be redeployed, I am of the view that these people have served these institutions diligently. They have laboured in these institutions, and they have seen them grow.  Now, they are going to reap the fruits of the daughters and sons they laboured for, with the coming university. Therefore, I am of the view that instead of sending these people who may not have the necessary qualifications to the polytechnics, these people should be given a grace period, say of five years, within which to attain the required qualifications. Those who fail to attain the required qualifications will then find their own level. 

And when they are given the five years’ grace period, these people should retain their salaries as person to holder. This will be a sign of rewarding them, other than waiting for them to die and then stand by their graveside and say, “these people worked so hard to see Kyambogo develop into a university”. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the members of the Committee for the good report they have presented. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister.

The merger of these institutions will automatically create an impact in terms of students’ enrolment.  What steps have you taken as Minister of Education to ensure that facilities, which will cater for that increment, are put in place?

Two, I want to comment on the issue of Makerere University Business School (MUBS). We have read in the papers, and it is true, that bad blood has been flowing between Makerere University and Makerere University Business School. The source of contention - as Makerere University authorities may put it - is the word “university”. 

Mr Speaker, we all know that the Committee has recommended that Makerere University Business School get autonomous status, but I would like to ask the honourable minister whether in the past, efforts have been put in place to ensure that the differences between MUBS and MUK are not put to the public. 

Mr Minister, I think you have the capacity of handling those grievances and differences without even attracting a lot of attention. So, it is my humble appeal that if this status has been granted to MUBS, we should see a continued good relationship between those two institutions.

Mr Speaker, during the presidential campaigns, His Excellency the President promised an increment in as far as students’ enrolment at MUK is concerned. During that time, he promised that 4,000 students would be government-sponsored. 

I would like the Minister to update us as to whether that pledge has been honoured, and whether Kyambogo University will really get many government-sponsored students. If so, we could really trim on the number of students eyeing, or struggling, to join Makerere University.

Lastly, as the Minister of Education, you have the responsibility to ensure that all students in these higher institutions of learning study under a conducive atmosphere. Have you ever gone around Makerere University to check on the hostels that accommodate students? I know that some hostels are not worthy to be called students’ hostels. I think that would be the case even with Kyambogo University as it gets a new status. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR BYATIKE MATOVU (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join those who have appreciated the report from the Committee. We are talking about something very, very important indeed. 

First, I would like to congratulate them because they are coming out with a solution to the MUBS situation, whereby an affiliated college would like to enjoy the benefits of a constituent college. If they have sorted that out, I think that is a very good way to move forward.

Secondly, if I recall properly, there was something to the effect of putting some emphasis on vocational training. In fact, I think two or three years back, we had a workshop on this subject. Everybody was excited to have this vocational training being upgraded. We were to come up with a kind of parallel system, whereby some people could join the vocational side of training early enough, and then probably they all join university level at the top somewhere. 

I thought that was a very good idea, and I had hoped that it would be picked up very fast. I do not know what happened to that idea because there are many people who are very weak in history, English and so on, who may find it difficult to go through the normal academic or formal education system. But if they were given a chance to go through vocational training, they could go right up to the top and become very good craftsmen, or engineers. 

That is why I am so happy that UPK, or technical colleges are now being elevated to the level of a university. I think that is a very good idea, and I welcome it and encourage the government to go ahead.

My last point, Mr Speaker, concerns the unit cost. Makerere being what it is - very good - they worked on this issue a long time ago. I think the former Secretary to the Council will tell us. They worked out the unit cost a long time ago. I think for the past four years, they have been having these figures. If only somebody could care to go and find out from them, they have them on their fingertips.  They will definitely give them to you. We know exactly how much it costs to train a medical doctor, a veterinary surgeon, a teacher and so on.  

So, I think this is a simple procedure, which can just be picked up from Makerere, and then we know exactly how much it costs to have a student trained at Makerere, or at any other university for that matter. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR SAM BITANGARO (Bufumbira South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who have thanked and commended the Committee for such a good report. I would also like to thank my colleague, the minister, for a well thought-out bill. 

I will address myself to the courses offered by Makerere University Business School, and I will seek clarification. Before Makerere University Business School was affiliated to Makerere - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But this issue of MUBS has come up - actually somebody mentioned it and but it is now featuring too much. I have looked at the long title of the bill and I do not see it. Is it part of this bill? But make your point.

MR BITANGARO: Before it was affiliated, it used to offer courses like ICSA and ACCA, which I am told, it does not offer now. I am aware that they offer such courses like B-Com, BBA and even a Masters in Business Administration. But employers keep demanding for people with ICSA and ACCA. 

May I know whether they have equivalent courses, which have the same academic content? If they do not, what could be the problems that they have? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NYEKO OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this chance. I would like to thank Madam Hyuha and her team for a job well done.  

Mr Speaker, from that part of the country where I come from, I think education is the only investment that government can give us and it remains with us. For that matter, when we are talking about public universities, I would like to emphasize the issue of access to these universities. 

Mr Speaker, since the early 1990s, there was a struggle for what is now called private sponsorship in universities. I remember at that time I was still a student. We had a very rough time as student leaders, arguing with government about the issue of private sponsorship. 

We thought that it would not be very fair to some people who come from some parts of the country, or some individuals who are poor. As we are talking now, this has taken an upper hand. I would like the minister to assure us that access to some of these universities by some students from poor societies will be made easy, maybe by reducing the fees paid to the universities and so on.  

Mr Speaker, during that same time, there was a government white paper on education, which gave rise to all these kinds of things. There was something, which was floated about a loan scheme for the students. The students were supposed to pay back this loan after getting gainful employment. That was the balancing point of argument at that time. But as I am talking now, it appears the issue of the students’ loan scheme has almost degenerated to nothing at all. I would like the minister to tell us exactly when this scheme will come into play. 

Mr Speaker, let me talk a little about the merger of ITEK, UPK and UNISE. The university has been in existence for about now two years, but up to now, there still appears to be discrimination on the ground. There still appears to be a little bit of discrimination between the students and staff of UPK, and those of the main ITEK campus. After passing this bill, I would like the merger to turn out to be real.  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I have a concern about the teachers who would wish to go for further studies on private sponsorship. The Ministry of Education has an archaic policy. Up to now, they do not grant study leave to teachers who would like to go and study on private sponsorship. 

I thought the minister should have been the first to come out with better policies to encourage people to access education. But up to now, those teachers who want to go for private sponsorship are not granted study leave.

I thought the minister should have been the first to come out with better policies to encourage people to access education. But up now, teachers who want to go for private sponsorship are not granted study leave. Actually, many have had their names struck off the payroll! With those few remarks, I thank you, Mr Speaker.

REV DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru south, Kayunga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Committee and the minister for this good presentation. I just want to make a few observations, and take this opportunity to make a few inquiries.  

On page 2 of the report, among the institutions that were approached, I see Gulu University, Mbarara University and Makerere University, but I do not see Mukono Christian University, Nkumba University or Mbale Islamic University. I do not know what kind of bias this could be. Are these not academic institutions? Have they got nothing to offer, in terms of opinion? Is the opinion of the Committee that these universities do not really count for much? I am just asking this question because it bothers me a bit.  

I have visited a few of these universities, like the Mukono Christian University. Its performance, the academic environment, the physical environment matches with many of these universities around.  But why is it not mentioned here? (Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Rev. Ssempangi, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I think we were very clear in our presentation. While we were observing the limitations of the operationalisation of this law, we clearly indicated that National Council for Higher Education by now should have prepared and published the registers of universities. 

How could we tell that there is Mukono University? How could we tell that there is Kampala University? We could only reach those public universities. They are public universities, in the sense that we have clear knowledge of them because we are voting money for them. But this weakness actually limited the Committee.  

Further, when you look at the memorandum, it clearly focuses on Kyambogo. These are tertiary institutions, and we could only reach those institutions that have been affiliated to ITEK or UNISE. We brought in Makerere because, in a way, it has been conducting and moderating examinations and curricula of the concerned university. I thank you very much.

REV. DR SSEMPANGI: I thank you, honourable chairperson. I do not know whether that also applies to Gulu University at this material time?  

Mr Speaker, I have the same question when it comes to government sponsorship. A Moslem student may have qualified in Mbale for Government sponsorship. He has to come all the way, probably to Kyambogo now, or to Makerere University. Why can’t this student be taken to Mbale, the nearest university around? Does Government sponsorship mean that you have to go only to Government sponsored universities? This is not very clear to me.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, now that Kyambogo is becoming a university, what will be the qualification for the professors? In Makerere University at the moment, I have seen many are running abroad to obtain PhDs.  But professors, who had research materials and publications, taught me, and they were good professors. 

I know some men who have taught at Makerere University and they have made good students, but they do not have PhDs! Why do people have to now rush for PhDs? Is a PhD the only qualification needed to teach at Makerere University? Mr Speaker, I will appreciate answers to those questions. I thank you.

MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to thank the Committee for the good work done. At the same time, I would like to thank the minister for enabling this bill to be brought to the Floor. 

I want to first and foremost thank hon. Mukasa, who elaborately submitted on issues regarding the workers. He seemed to have read my mind. I thank you so much, hon. Mukasa, for that endeavour but I want to further add that there are some workers who never had any appointment letters, basically from UPK. During the course of making this report, this was submitted to the Committee and the minister promised that something was going to be done to rectify the situation. 

I am happy these workers were given appointment letters but they seem to be a bit ambiguous, because instead of putting the date of appointment, they only mentioned, “assuming”. It is on assumption. So, it is not very clear to the workers.  

Secondly, there are a lot of anomalies that have been highlighted in these appointment letters. You find that a worker, who currently holds the post of senior hostel clerk, now is being appointed as an office attendant, despite having all the qualifications and testimonials attached to his application. So, there is a mixture. 

People are worried, they do not know what is going to happen in case Kyambogo University does not take them on. What will the basis for the calculations for their terminal benefits be? What is going to happen? Because, some have been getting a salary under scale 6, but with the new appointment they are being demoted to scale 3.  So, there is a bit of a mixture and people are really worried. I want to get some clarification from you.

Another issue is on the amendment that has been highlighted by the Committee, in regard to UNISE, to enable the disabled people to be represented on the university council. I appeal to you that at least let us also have two workers on the university council to represent the workers of those marginalised people, to air out their concerns.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MS JALIA BINTU (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices that have thanked the Committee for such a report. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Education. 

I represent the people of Masindi District. There is a national teachers’ college that has been in existence, I think, since that time when I was still a baby. Until today, they are still squatters on Church land. Recently, they were pushed from the land where they have been squatting. I do not know where they are now going. I am seeking clarification; what does the ministry have for such NTCs? Because according to the report I have seen, there are ten NTCs, and I am quite conversant that Masindi NTC is one of those ones. So, I want to know, what plan does the Ministry of Education have for such NTCs? This NTC has got 100 acres and that land is leased but there is no plan, and my people are saying they really want to be assisted. The Government should come up with a plan for the NTC.

Secondly, I want to know, ITEK is producing teachers and tutors everyday but to-date the ban has not yet been lifted. I want to know the fate of these other students because they remain students although some get their way to the private institutions. What plans does the ministry have?

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the minister and to seek for his guidance. Masindi NTC, during the specialisation programme, was actually made to specialise in Arts subjects, but the people around that region, especially Bunyoro region, most of them depend on that NTC and we were saying that at least if we would be given also the Science status, we would be so happy.  So, I wanted to be advised and assisted. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

PROF. MORRIS OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like also to join my colleagues in thanking the Committee for a very good report, and the minister for bringing in this amendment to the law. I would like also to recognise the fact that the Government liberalised tertiary education, and this led to very rapid expansion in university education.  Government and the country should be congratulated for this!  

Having said that, however, I would like to extend the concern that has already been expressed by my other two colleagues, regarding institutions below the university. The technical institutes, the teacher training colleges are institutions that are predominantly occupied by students coming from rural areas and poor families, who even when they have got good grades, are not able to sponsor themselves in universities. Therefore, I am very concerned of the neglect that Government or the lack of attention that Government has paid to these institutions. 

For heaven’s sake, if we want to help to alleviate poverty, let us have policies that focus on the poor, and most of those students who go to the NTCs, who go to the technical institutes, come from poor families. If you educate them, you will create opportunities for their families to move beyond their poverty.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I say this not out of mischief, but two days ago, when hon. Okulo Epak was contributing, he made a statement about Government not building secondary schools and hospitals. Obviously, that statement was not true and consequent to that, he was opposed. I also rose though you did not pick me. I wanted to point out that for hospitals for example, Adjumani Hospital and Kabong Hospital were built under the Movement Government, but looking at the history as outlined in this report, a lot of the reform of these educational institutions were carried out during Obote II. The NTCs were expanded under Obote II, the technical institutes were expanded under Obote II but – and I said this is not mischief. 

When you look at the dates, they will fix dates: In 1964, Kyambogo was reformed. Then what happened in the 1980s? You do not see the dates, and then you jump to 2000! I think for fairness, if the Committee wants to give a chronology of what happened, they should be brave enough to go through all the dates and to acknowledge the fact that under Obote II, many of these reforms that government should now and is now building on actually were instituted.  

I have just two points in the report before I suggest one or two things as a way forward – (Interruption).

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you professor, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would just like to inform the speaker holding the Floor that actually, governments are not built from scratch. We augment what is on the ground already. So really, if President Obote left something on the ground, I think we should appreciate the NRM Government to have maintained and sustained the present institutions that were in place. Thank you.

DR TUMWESIGYE: I wanted to inform hon. Prof. Latigo that when you look at the chronology, there is also 1993, 1986 and therefore, I think he was biased in choosing the year that he wanted to mention but even 1920s. So, I think all the decades where important events took place are captured in this report. You should not only pick out one.  

The other important information I also wanted to give is that, he seems to indicate that the TTCs and NTCs cater for the poor but may have been neglected in a way. But we have been informed that recently government abolished cost sharing in those institutions. So, do you not think that was a policy to make sure that the poor can access these colleges?  Would you rather support the fact that you would have wanted cost sharing in those institutions? That was information, but also a point of clarification for you.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much. I thank you for your information. You actually complimented what I had said, and my honourable colleague knows he tried to mention dates. He jumped from 48, 64, then to 93!  In all of them - I mean; I am just a keen reader of these things.  Also, what you said about the problems facing these institutions, I did not say, some of our colleagues said it. And I am going to mention something about that but there are two things that I want to mention in the report.  

The first one is the issue of representation of persons with disabilities, which is on 5.3.  The Committee is suggesting that two persons with disabilities who are members of staff be representatives on the council. In the Makerere where I come from, the representation of staff on Council is specified under its regulations. I therefore would suggest that instead of saying two members of staff, let it be two people with disabilities, not necessarily from the staff because the university has their own way of putting people to represent staff on the council.

Then the other point that I wanted to bring out is I think some error, which was partially corrected by honourable colleague. The institutions that are affiliated to Kyambogo University are not only technical institutions. In fact, technical institutes are much lower. You have the polytechnics and such and, therefore, since this is a report of the Committee of Parliament, and since the Committee interacts with the Ministry of Education officials, I think the information that they present should be accurate.

Mr Speaker, it is good to make laws but the laws in themselves are not ends, they are just means to some ends. Therefore, we must express our unhappiness that even where provisions of this law could be implemented without this amendment, Government has not taken the quick step to implement those provisions so that the law is operationalised.  

I speak, for example, for the appointment of the university council. I am now two years in this Parliament. When I left the university, I was supposed to be paid my benefits since I did not run away. But they said that the actuaries were working on what benefits to be paid to some of us, and the actuaries’ report could not be implemented unless council met. So, even for a personal selfish reason, I would have loved to see Government appoint a council months ago, so that I am saved from the kind of financial embarrassment that some of us go in.

The other thing linked to this law, is an urgent need, first for curriculum reform, and then secondly, for the kind of training approaches that we are implementing in our universities. It is true that university education has now been opened up to many people. Now, this means that the traditional training will become more and more irrelevant because most of these people will no longer enter traditional job opportunities.  Therefore, the curriculum that we develop should be creative enough to allow us train people who will get themselves either self employed or relevant, even in a very competitive world.

Secondly, somebody mentioned this from the perspective of lowering the university fees, but the common practice that is in America, for example, is that the universities have credit hours systems. Now, with credited hours, you can register to do two courses and go and work for six months, and you come back register do another two courses and your university education can be spread over five or six years. Now, that will allow many people who cannot afford to pay Shs 900,000, for example, for a semester in law school, to pay Shs 200,000, do two modules, accumulate credit hours and in the end graduate.  

Particularly in situations like where resources are lacking in many homesteads, I would urge the minister and the people concerned with university education to strongly consider restructuring the training modules that we now have.

Finally, without adequate funding, it will not be possible for many of these institutions that are beginning to develop, or even those that are affiliated to the universities, to develop and be effective centres of learning. We therefore urge the minister, and we urge Government, that the guidance for expanding funding for education should not be based on the framework of this Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). We should do it the way we are doing it with Defence; that this is a national imperative. We must put money there because when you build a laboratory, you do not build it everyday. Let us put some money there, build laboratories, and equip the technical institutions. 

If you go to these technical colleges, you do not find any equipment. Some of the equipments are so obsolete that the guy you train, if he went just across the border to Kenya, would be completely irrelevant because the equipment there he has not seen. So, it is important that Government should put money in making sure that our institutions have up-to-date facilities so that the training is done effectively and of course, pay our people.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill 2002, for many reasons, which have been stated, including the reduction of overheads. Because when you will merge UNISE, UPK and ITEK, you will have one vice chancellor, one bursar, one academic registrar, one council and that is extremely important, especially for institutions which enjoy geographical continuity.  This point is important for rationalisation and reduction of overheads.

A point was made - which was not very important, I think, to the discussion of this bill - as to why Makerere insisted that their lecturers, up to professors, should have Doctorates. I think this recommendation was made in good faith. If, for example, you are a professor and you do not have a Doctorate, you may not enjoy adequate academic legitimacy. But when you are enjoying that legitimacy, the right and the title to teach, the title to do research and also to assist people, to supervise and so on, then it makes work easy. 

What is more, it requires a lot of discipline. There are many bright people who got, for example, first classes degrees who find it very hard to get Doctorates because they lack the requisite discipline. I am speaking from experience because I also have a Doctorate.  It required a lot of discipline to acquire it. 

Be that as it may, I would like also to agree that there should be some exceptions. This is where I do not entirely agree with Makerere. There should be exceptions. For example, if you take some of these surgeons, their Fellowships may be more important than these Doctorates. A "Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons", that may be more important than a Doctorate. So, there should be exceptions. 

There are also some exceptional people like my former professor from Cambridge. He had got one first degree but he had supervised people with Doctorates. But the difference was this: that academician had done a lot of research, and had excellent publications in well-respected journals, and if you put them together, they are worth more than one Doctorate. So, those were exceptional people. We should be able to accept unique people who need not have Doctorates. Although we must encourage the bulk of the people to get their Doctorates, there may be exceptions.

Finally, I wanted to inform you that there is a World Bank study for a unit cost in Uganda, which will be very useful when handling costs of these institutions. Because, what is happening is that Government simply gives subventions but you need to know the unit cost. I support this bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank all my colleagues who have supported this bill and our report. However, most of the issues raised by honourable members, to me sounded administrative, which the ministry can take into consideration. I only have a few areas where I need to clarify. 

My sister, the workers’ representative raised an issue that we have noted that we are bringing at least two persons with disabilities on board on the university council. But I think she did not take keen interest to look at the principal law because the principal law, Section 38(k) already caters for her interest. Section 38(k) says - this is actually the composition of the university council - ”A member of the national union of education institutions support staff elected by the branch in that university.” So, it is already catered for. 

Given that we were looking at the size of these councils being too large, and we were looking at the means of reducing, we thought it was already on board; unless maybe I am clearly informed about the definition of “workers”, because when I look at “two members of academic staff elected,” those are workers. In addition to this, one senior member of administrative staff elected, those are workers.  So, your interests are already catered for, I feel so.  

The next clarification I wanted to make was raised by hon. Kavuma, who said that when we are considering the courses or programmes within the new Kyambogo University, there should be a separation between special education and the main education because when we leave it coupled together, special education may swallow the other one or vice versa. But I wanted to inform you that if you have noted, our observation was just recognising the recommendation by the Tusubira Report.  

It is just a recommendation, and I believe that whichever courses and programmes, the Committee and Parliament will have an opportunity to discuss this when the minister has brought the instrument under Section 22 of this law, as we recently received the statutory instrument laid before the House, of establishing Gulu University. That is when we shall have an opportunity to be told what package is to be offered by the new Kyambogo University. So, there is still room.

The last observation I want to make was raised by hon. Prof. Latigo, who says that the Committee was very biased when we were looking at the historical perspective. When it came to the contribution during Obote’s regime, we could not mention. But I want to inform you that that was not the keen interest of the Committee because these institutions, certainly when you look at their historical background, did not begin during Obote I or II. 

If you look at the historical background of Institute of Teachers’ Education Kyambogo (ITEK), it started all the way in 1948 and from then it has evolved. So, I do not know why you particularly singled out for us to recognise a particular regime. For us, we wanted to bring out the historical perspective of these tertiary institutions. When you look at Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo (UPK), it started all the way in 1921.  So, I do not know how we would bring in – it was not in our mind who was ruling then, it was not political science but issues of education. Uganda National Institute for Special Education (UNISE) started in 1988. So, there is no way we could mention that UNISE started during Obote I or Obote II. I did not want to raise a point of order for imputing wrong motives on the Committee, but I thought I would clarify.  

Otherwise, with those few remarks, I want to thank you honourable members for your support. The many issues, which I have not pointed out, are for the minister. They are administrative. He could be the one with the comment. I still seek that we overwhelmingly support this bill. I thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you, for this opportunity to clarify a few things. But allow me to thank the honourable chairperson of the Committee for her intervention, and honourable members for raising these concerns.  Above all, I thank the Rt. honourable Prime minister for coming to my rescue.  

Mr Speaker, please, I seek your indulgence, because some of the issues, which have been raised, are fundamental to understanding where we are and where we want to go. So please, Sir, may I take some time and explain a number of things? You see, in the past I would have been happy to accept these comments as recommendations and I just go and study them. But I think it is important to react to some of them.

The very first reaction from hon. Gagawala Wambuzi says that if we want to move, we must have one university per one million people, because this is what Japan has done and this is why they have made it. Now, why do you approach your picture from the top? You should approach it from the bottom! So long as the majority of the people cannot even read and write, they have not even gone through one cycle of the education system, primary seven to the universities, even if you have one to a million; even if you have one to 500,000, you will still have a problem. 

We did not bring UPE here for political reasons, to get votes. No! We brought UPE because the experts had advised us that investment in basic education is the best investment; begin there then move. With a poor foundation quality, higher education will not have linkages in the community - (Interruption)-

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to be clarified by the Minister of Education that if you address the issue of education and you say you are focusing on the grassroots, don’t you think you are preparing the people with best education to be only market unemployable? I think you have to have a strategy of both up and down in order to get the results.  I need clarification on this.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way.  I just wanted to assist my colleague, hon. Gagawala. Yes, his target is that by now, since we have about 23 million people, we should be talking of 23 universities. That is too high an ambition. But also, you should appreciate that where we are now is not where we were yesterday.  Currently, we are talking of 10 universities in the country, out of which 4 are public. For a very long time we have talked of only Makerere University as a public University, but now we are talking of Mbarara University of Science and Technology.  

Just this morning, as a committee, we have been debating, together with the Ministry and National Council for Higher Education, a statutory instrument of establishing Gulu University, which instrument was laid here.  Kyambogo University -we are talking about it now and already we are coming out to support the desire of Makerere University Business School and another one in the East.  So, I believe we are moving. I want my colleague to appreciate this –(Applause).

MR OGWEL LOOTE:  Mr Speaker, I would like to supplement on what the Chairperson of the Committee and what the Minister of Education have said. When you begin from down, you are laying a foundation for a literate society, which is very easy to manage.  It also analyses the issues of social benefit. When you analyse from elementary education, which is the first circle of education, it is wide spread to all the parts of the country, and all the grassroots.  So, when you are talking about fighting poverty, fighting illiteracy and fighting disease, then you are producing a complete person who is knowledgeable and who can fight all these things.  So, eventually you progressively go up to provide excellence. So the more you provide university education and excellence for the grassroots, you will be providing the greatest of present benefits than the social benefit that benefits our society.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please continue.

DR. MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, you will notice that those very interventions underline the importance of the subject matter.  There was the issue raised by hon. Kawanga, unfortunately he has left. In particular the validation exercise of UTC teachers and the fact that this person taught for many years and when he went to collect his pension, they asked him for his appointment letter.  This is really not an educational matter, and it is also important to bring out that that is international pension law. We cannot begin to talk about paying your pension if we are not sure you are ever appointed.  Certainly, there is nothing irregular about the pension authority saying "you want a pension, but did we ever give you a job?" It is up to you to produce your documentation.  

The validation exercise - I wish hon. Kawanga was still here, because this validation exercise is very important. The Education Service Commission goes out and then they find people on the ground in an institution and they say, “Ah, you show us that you are here legitimately". And they compare the record of that employee with their own records.  The fact of the matter is that there have been some indisciplined people moving up and down without seeking for authority and so forth.  

This validation exercise has been very, very, helpful to us. Employees in the system of education are now being called to order, which was not the case before.  You know, if the teachers themselves are undisciplined, how are they going to inculcate discipline in the people they are teaching?  Yes, that is the idea. 

Madam Lydia Balemezi raised the issue of Makerere University Business School. You rightly pointed out, Mr Speaker, that Makerere University Business School is not part of this amendment, but I think the committee did a good job to bring this issue out.  We do not have to spend much time on it because the committee recommended on page 17 that the Ministry of Education and Sports be given a period of two months within which to address the above administrative concerns and report to the committee. 

These concerns are about Makerere University Business School. So, I think we have agreed to deal with this matter, and we are taking many of these ideas which have been mooted here, and after sometime, this will be just part of history.  

One of the interesting things, which arises in this debate, has been raised by hon. Nvumetta Kavuma - and I hope she is still in the House - that we should separate special needs education.  You know, we are where we are on this merger because of the advocates of special needs education, who told us that we should leave UNISE out of the merger.  They advocated this position very strongly, and we left UNISE out of the merger.  

Then when the issue of the merger came up finally to be sorted out, the same people said, “Ah, you are now prejudicing us, put us in the merger”.  Of course, we kept our tempers, we did not get angry. We said we are acting in national interest, UNISE, come back in the merger.  

Now, Madam Nvumetta Kavuma, are you now telling us to drop UNISE from the merger and we go back to square one?  No, I think we have agreed with our partners in special needs education that it is beneficial for special needs education to be part of the university at Kyambogo. I think this should be the way forward because we are not going to write it in rock.  If after sometime people find that we need to revisit it, I am sure Government is here, Parliament is here and we can always revisit it.  But for now, I think consensus has been reached that special needs be part of the merger.

Dr Kasirivu Atwooki was concerned about the transition from these autonomous institutions to a new university; some people will lose their jobs.  But we have taken care of this and we are saying that the university should vet these people and if some qualify for immediate employment in the university, they should employ them.  If they do not qualify, they should refer them back to the parent ministry, which is the Ministry of Education.  

This is not the first exercise that we have gone through. We can make arrangements for them, including a good idea, which I herd on this floor, allowing them a period of grace for them to improve on their qualifications.  These are all open to us.  So, the short point I wanted to make is that no legitimate employee of any of these institutions is just going to be left in the air.

Mr Speaker, hon. D'Ujanga raised a very important point that if people are not ready to be admitted to university, there should be another service which assists them to get ready so that they can be acceptable to universities.  I know that some of the universities are running these bridging courses, and I think this is a good thing. I agree that we need to encourage it in a systematic and orderly manner.

DR NKUUHE: I remember I was on the committee which was writing some recommendations for the Open University, and this issue of people who may not have the necessary qualification to go to university be given that kind of opportunity was raised, and there was a whole set of recommendations.  Two questions: One, what is the status of the Open University? Two, are these recommendations that we made going to be included into the issue you are raising?    

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Dr Nkuuhe for his intervention.  The Open University is one of the active files in the Ministry of Education, but we are not yet ready to bring it to Parliament.  The proposals that were made by that committee are indeed the ones which made this file quite active because they are being studied with a view to seeing how we can carry them forward.  But, the point I was making is that even without waiting for the open university, the existing universities themselves can make arrangements for pre-university brushing up so that you bring them to the level they can actually admit you to their courses.

We have been advised to look into the state of NTCs.  We are actually looking into it but what this means is that we need to speed up our work in this area, and Mr Speaker, I promise to do so.

Hon. Anthony Mukasa asks: "When will the resolution for establishing Kyambogo University be brought?"  This resolution depends on what we are doing today on the enactment of the merger, and as soon as it becomes law, we will be here.  I can assure you that if it is within my power, as soon as I see their assent copy, I will come back here with a resolution.

Why I said this bill is urgent. The appropriate organs of the university will handle many of these issues that you have raised here.  Why?  Because according to the Parent Act, the minister has been taken away from micro-managing these institutions.  They have been given quite a wide range of autonomy and we expect that when they come, they will fix the terms and conditions of employees and the enrolment capacity, taking into account human resources needs of the country and the contribution of other operators in the area.  So, I cannot really answer directly to specificity because the responsibility to manage these institutions from day to day has been taken away from the minister and has been left to the organs of those institutions.  

Hon. Latif Sebaggala, I think he was saying that we promised to raise the people sponsored by Government from 2000 to 4000.    But we have done so, Mr Speaker.  This is one of the few promises where we can walk with our heads high - (Applause). 

Of course, you know I like listening to the contribution of members. And, Mr Speaker, I am very happy that people contributed in an open manner.  I would have liked to keep some controversies out of the public eye, but I am not alone.  You could call apparently serious minded colleagues and you sit and you say, let us agree that we disagree here, but, the public need not know; and you think you have agreed and then the next day, it is in the papers, what do I do?  I would have loved you to keep this out of the public eye, but the others think it must be transacted through the press and I have no control over it.

Private hostels at Makerere University: In the first place, Mr Speaker, I think I should congratulate Makerere University, and Government, on separating admissions from residential accommodation. I think this is very important.  In the past the only way you could get there, was if they could guarantee you a place in the halls of residence. And this one really was limiting the opportunities of our people because it is not done even in other liberal societies.  

They admit you to a university, they give you an admission letter, and all they expect of you is to appear in the lecture hall or in the laboratory.  Where you live is your business.  For us here we were saying, we must tie admissions to residential accommodation and we were really paralysing our operations.  So, the fact that we have separated admission from availability of residential accommodation on campus is a very progressive move.  

Of course, it comes with these problems that hon. Latif Sebaggala is saying, the quality of private accommodation and so on.  But there is something to say about Makerere University because they have established a system of vetting hostels before they recommend their students to stay there.  I think this is very important.  There must be some minimum standard.  I cannot go to tour these because that would be micro management. But at least what I demand from the university is a policy that you will vet these places and you will check on them every now and then, and that policy is in place.

The question of emphasis on vocational training by hon. Matovu Byatike as a parallel system: This is part of the post UPE arrangements, and we are now finalising the Post Primary Education and Training Policy Framework.  Government is finalising this for purposes of accommodating the so-called UPE bulge. There are many people who will be coming through the system starting this year at PLE level, and part of the provision of the Post Primary Education and Training Framework (PPET) includes technical and vocational education.

Hon. Bitangaro raised an important point but unfortunately I cannot deal with it directly because we have agreed to handle this matter of MUBS. Therefore, the courses that you are referring to, the ACCA and so forth will be part of that consideration.  But I appreciate the point because the institutions that offer these courses need a credible local institution to partner up with, and I think this one, when we have sorted it out, it will be a very good forum for them.

Yes, access to public universities and the question of the loan scheme.  About the loan scheme, we received some limited funds this financial year, but we can only be able to develop the institutional framework. We had a consultant, he has reported, we are examining the report. We may not be able to launch this immediately, but it is again one of those active files.  

This is extremely important because it emphasises the importance of beneficiaries of education investing they themselves.  They do not have the money upfront, but we think they will live for the next 30 years.  You can loan them the money; they will pay when they begin to work.  It is a very progressive approach, it applies in many jurisdictions. I agree it is long overdue here.  

No, the policy of controlled study leave is not archaic; I do not accept that it is archaic.  You know, teachers who want to go and study, first of all, they have an employer and again it is international law that you negotiate with your employer for leave.  You do not just walk off, whether you are a teacher, a doctor or what. No, no!  Yes, we want the teachers to upgrade but we want to arrange that when they have gone to upgrade, somebody is teaching their class.  You do not just walk off.  So, this policy of requiring you to take leave is not archaic, no Sir.  It is true you are going on private sponsorship, but you have employment with us and you need to arrange between the employer and the employee so that none of our interests are jeopardised.

Hon. Kefa Sempagi raises a very fundamental policy issue, which we are actually examining now, whether we should continue to tie Government sponsorship at university to public universities.  We are examining the pros and cons, and I am sure by the next financial year, we will have come to the conclusion.

I thank the Prime Minister for answering this question of PhDs, so I do not have to take your time on it.  The NTCs I have dealt with.  The representation of persons with disabilities, the chairperson dealt with it.  

Curriculum reform; yes, that one I must take it up, from Prof. Ogenga Latigo. Curriculum reform is critical because curriculum is a dynamic thing. It must respond to the changing needs of society and I am happy, Sir, that you have reminded us that we must be focused on updating the curriculum to tally and to deal with the changing needs of our societies. 

Secondly, I also think that this question of credit hours, modules and so on is very important. It promotes access to education generally, and to higher education in particular. It was also raised by Prof. Ogenga Latigo.

MR ERESU: I am sorry for interrupting the Minister, which I did not want to do. However, I have an issue with the post-graduate training, which he alluded to as having been answered by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to be clarified because there are stories and sentiments being expressed especially about Makerere University. They say when enrolment of a candidate for post-graduate studies is made, the supervisors of candidates for post-graduate studies, or their lecturers and professors tend to hold onto them and they stay longer than necessary. So, if a post-graduate course was to take for example one year, one may consequently get the Masters degree after four years. Can I be clarified whether this is true or not?

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, this is a very specific thing about supervision of post-graduate work at Makerere University. I have no personal knowledge of what hon. Eresu is talking about. But by the grace of God, we are still here. May I be allowed some time to investigate the matter and come to Parliament with the report?

Mr Speaker, as I was saying, this credits and semester thing is very important. What we need to do is to encourage universities, both public and private, to be flexible in the scheduling and the design of the curriculum, and encourage modularised training, credit hours and so on. This is to move away from some of the old models, which we have hitherto followed. And to put in a good word for Makerere, they have moved to the semester system. 

This was part of the consideration. It is more flexible, it is easier to take leave of your course than to take a whole dead year, and so on and so forth. So, there are signs that we are learning from other jurisdictions and we are learning positively. That is all, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion is that the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2002 be read a Second Time.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002.

Clause 1:

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4:

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In clause 4(1), the committee is proposing an amendment to paragraph (e) by replacing it to read as follows:
“All programmes and courses organised by Makerere University in respect of Kyambogo University shall continue as programmes and courses of Kyambogo University established by virtue of section 3 of this Act.” The justification, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear?

MRS HYUHA: I wanted to make the justification. There are no employees and staff of Makerere University in the Institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo, but programmes and courses. The amendment is therefore addressing the item. I beg to move.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want that the word “organise” to be substituted with “offered”. The same justification is that Makerere University does not organise the training of this course, but they offer it as a curriculum.

THE CHAIRMAN: Agreed. Well, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to clause 5, by deleting paragraph (a) of sub-section (2). This is because clause 7(a) is dealing with the same issue. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment that clause 6 be amended by numbering the existing provision as sub-clause (1) and adding the following new sub-clauses:
“(2) Subject to Section 5(1), of the principal Act, all qualifying academic and other members of staff of Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo before the commencement of this Act shall be transferred to Kyambogo University and their terms and conditions of service shall, on transfer, be those offered by the University to the respective grades of the staff.

(3) All other members of staff who may not be transferred to the university shall be transferred to the ministry responsible for education or paid retirement benefits.  

(4) Retirement benefits for those employees who may not be transferred to the university or the ministry shall be those determined by the minister responsible for Public Service in accordance with the relevant law relating to the retirement benefits for the public service.

(5) All students of Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo shall continue to be students of the Kyambogo University established by virtue of Section 3 of this Act.”  This is to provide for the employees and students of Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo who have not been provided for.  I beg to move Mr. Chairman. 

Before some comment, Mr. Chairman, I wanted guidance because there are other new amendments just before Clause 7, which I will have to move. But maybe we can dispose of this first.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thanks a lot, Mr. Chairman. In view of the recommendation by some Members of Parliament, and with no objection from the minister, I wanted to add or to insert in Clause 6 section (2), that those not immediately qualifying would be offered a period of five years of grace during which period they will be expected to attain the necessary qualifications. And also, in section (3) that all other members of staff who may not be transferred and will not have taken up the offer of the grace period shall be transferred to the ministry responsible for education for payment of terminal benefits.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, do you have a comment on that?

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, I have no problem with the question of a grace period, but I think that five years will be too long a period to keep a person in post. So I think that the period should really be left to the university rather than being prescribed by law. Otherwise, I have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you omit the period; you do not state the period, otherwise do you accept the amendment?

MRS HYUHA: I cannot clearly remember what hon. Elioda stated last concerning the grace period, but as the minister has accepted, I also want to appreciate that position. But when he talks of some staff who may not have been taken on or transferred, I thought (ii) and (iv) are taking care of that.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

PROF. LATIGO: I think that proposal raises fundamental questions. For instance, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister said that part of this reorganisation is to downsize, and definitely it means the posts that are duplicated in the three institutions will now be merged, and definitely not all the three academic registrars of UPK, UNISE and all these will have positions. Therefore, to even say that they should be there - UNISE had a program that was completely unique!  To say that they will be there and to disregard the requirement for being there under certain positions is, I think –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But they oversee! I think it is clearly provided for here, it is not possible to assimilate the three registrars.  I think it is provided for in the solution given.

PROF. LATIGO: Even then, that is why I wanted to amend what is given in (2), so that the reality of what will happen is taken care of. And if I may just read the amendment, "Subject to section 51(1) of this Act, all qualifying academic and non-academic members of staff of Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo before the commencement of this Act shall be observed..." Again I deliberately use “observe” rather than “transfer” to Kyambogo University where vacancies exist, and under the terms and conditions of service offered by the university for the respective grades of staff because this allows the university -(interruption)-

THE CHAIRMAN: What is in three caters for the situation that some employees will not be assimilated. It is catered for by the committee’s amendments.  

MR WAMBUZI: I need some clarification from the minister about the amendment on all students of Uganda Polytechnic College Kyambogo shall continue to be students of Kyambogo University established by virtue of section (3) of this Bill. I would like to be clarified about the issue of certification because I think the current certification under UPK has been by UNEB. But when you go to Kyambogo now, it will be a different style.  Will this part be picked otherwise you may have a crisis after the students have been absorbed.

DR MAKUBUYA: I am sorry Mr. Chairman, I do not see this crisis myself.  In fact we have put in this provision to avoid that very crisis, so that if they have found you in the middle of the course, and the examining body changes, the old examining body will not take you. You will have a new examining body. We provide that to avoid you finding yourself in the air. I think that is properly provided for.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on amendment, including the amendment which brought in a grace period but without specifying the years.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 6:

MRS HYUHA. Mr. Chairman, before we pronounce ourselves on Clause 6, there are some other two new clauses to be inserted after Clause 6 as follows - that is Amendment 7.

THE CHAIRMAN: Where? We are dealing with Clause 6, which we have amended and we do not – I put the question that Clause 6 as amended stand part of the Bill.

Question put and agreed to.

Clause 6 as amended agreed to.

MRS HYUHA: Mr. Chairman, new clauses to be inserted after Clause 6. This is amendment 7 to Section 22.  Section 22 of the principal Act is amended by inserting a new subsection (3) to read as follows_

"The National Council shall ensure that the University Council for the university established under subsection (1) is constituted within two months of establishing the university. 

Sub-section 38 of the principal Act is amended by replacing paragraph 1(q) as follows: 
“(q) Two representatives of the constituent colleges, schools and institutes elected by the chairpersons of the governing councils from among themselves. 
(r) Two representatives of members of staff who are persons disabilities, if any, elected by the members of staff who are persons with disabilities.”  

Then section 44 of the principal Act is amended – I do now know whether we can pronounce ourselves on this first and then I go on to 44, or should I complete?

THE CHAIRMAN: But this is a new clause.

MRS HYUHA: Okay. Section 44 of the principal Act is amended by replacing paragraph (d) as follows: “Two representatives of the Principals of the constituent colleges, schools or institutes.” 

This is because on establishment, Kyambogo University will have a good number of teacher’s colleges affiliated to it. A representation of four persons of each affiliated and constituent colleges or schools will make the council as big as about 200 members, which would be too big to function. The amendment is therefore aiming at reducing the membership of the council to have specific membership regardless of the number of affiliated or constituent colleges. 

This problem is already being experienced by the existing universities in relation to 8(q) and 9(d). Affiliated colleges or institutes are independent bodies and only require awards and therefore should not be on the council or senate as they are linked through specific faculties and schools or institutes. I do not know if this is another new clause –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: If it is new then we dispose of the other first. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to amend the amendment, to have the national councils’ titles complete. The National Council for Higher Education, I think that is what is being referred to. Unless you have said that in the Act you are going to refer to it as the National Council, you have to refer to it in full. 

Then, I am proposing that it be six months not two. Because even where everything is in place two months is a very short time.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you agree to the six months or you prefer to retain the months?

MRS HYUHA: I think the first observation is clear. In the principal Act the National Council is defined –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: He has agreed to that.

MRS HYUHA: The second one, given the presentation and experience we have had with these universities, we thought we should be specific.

THE CHAIRMAN: But the two months, is it realistic?

MRS HYUHA: Even the six months are too long.

THE CHAIRMAN: The committee is suggesting two months, others six months. I put the question on the six months.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, the other proposal is for the committee to again look at what I mentioned in my main contribution. That is in regard to (r), where I mentioned two representatives or members of staff who are persons with disabilities, if any, to be elected by the members of staff who are persons with disabilities. 

In terms of representation of staff on the University Council, this provision is restrictive. Staff members are recruited not on the basis of gender or physical status but on the basis of their qualifications, and they should have legitimate rights, in totality, to elect their representatives. However, a separate provision could be given so that people with disabilities are represented on the council.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, we were looking at this whole sector, UNISE, which is being brought on board. When you look at the composition of it in the principal Act, I think some of those could have leeway within the other sections. But a whole section of UNISE is coming on board. We thought the academic staff of UNISE could be brought on board the new university. That is why we were looking at two members of the academic staff for them.  

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to support the proposal made by the former speaker on the Floor. Instead of giving two positions for staff members alone, I suggest that we retain the two persons with disabilities; one selected by the staff and another selected by organisations of persons with disabilities. 

I am mentioning this because in the former repealed Act we had three persons with disabilities. These are the people dealing with people with disabilities down at the grassroots, and they will be the ones bringing their issues. So, I support the idea of one staff member with disabilities and another with disabilities elected by the organisations. I thank you.

MRS. HYUHA: I think we can take that position because it will cater for Prof. Latigo’s interest as well.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a new clause as proposed by the chairperson be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, there is another new amendment 10 to section 77. Section 77 is amended in sub-section (2) by replacing paragraph (b) to read as follows: 
“One person representing the public university to which the institution is affiliated.” 

This is because not all public universities will have business or interest in any public institution. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear?

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, this is amendment 10. I was referring to the last clause. I do not know whether I have jumped the gun but for consistence of the formulation, the earlier amendment from which we deleted something, we said that it is amended by deleting paragraph (ii) rather than sub-section 7, is repealed. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it the only amendment? I see another one. Is it not one clause? That will be another one. I put the question to this one.

(Question put and agreed.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the new clause stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, in clause 7 the committee is proposing an amendment by replacing paragraph (ii) as follows:
“Sub-section 7 is repealed.”

This is because all the three institutions that is ITEK, UNISE and UMI are at university status and therefore the sub-section should be removed because if it remains, it will be misleading. I beg to move.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, that is the amendment I was referring to. There was an earlier amendment where it was simply stated that that particular clause is amended by deleting paragraph (ii), but I was just suggesting that the same applies, rather than repealing here. 

THE SPEAKER: So you want to say “delete” instead of “repeal”? Okay? Any problem? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

The Title:

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title remains the Title of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2002 and passed it with some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report, which it has just received from the Committee of the whole House.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2002

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2002” be read a Third Time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I put the question that the Bill entitled “The Universities and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2002” be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2002

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations. (Applause). The Bill is passed.

Honourable members, this brings us to the end of today’s business. Thank you very much for transacting this business expeditiously, and I want to take this opportunity to wish you a good Easter weekend. Enjoy it with your constituents and send my greetings to them. Therefore the House is adjourned until Tuesday 22 April at 2.00 p.m., when we resume business.

(The House rose at 6.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 April 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)










                  







