Monday, 14 April 2003

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to the time allotted to the Land (Amendment) Bill, we were supposed to have completed it last week; but we were not able to. So, we are now encroaching on time allotted to other business. I hope we shall be able to expeditiously conclude business in respect of the Land (Amendment) Bill so that we start on other business.

There is need to adjust the Order Paper, because I understand the First Deputy Prime Minister wants to make a statement. Adjust it accordingly so that the First Deputy Prime Minister can now make a statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. As members know, we had an unfortunate incident in Kapchorwa District. The Pokot from Kenya attacked our people and caused a lot of destruction to life and property. The Government is handling the situation, and my boss, the Prime Minister, asked me to give a detailed statement about this situation; what happened and what steps we are going to take to ensure it is not repeated. However, he gave the instructions a bit late in the day, and I could not bring together all my team; that is the Police, security personnel and defence. 

Mr Speaker, I want to promise the House that tomorrow afternoon, I will come up with a proper, co-ordinated and detailed statement on this issue. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.
 
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

Clause 26:

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I remember very well - with reference to what took place on Thursday when we last met – that you assured me that my two amendments would come up later. I want you to allay my fears that these amendments will be attended to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Fortunately, I do not forget much. I remember what I said. I said that according to our rules, after we have finished considering the clauses, we shall come back to - there is procedure. I will definitely take care of your concern.

You remember, honourable members, that as we were considering this particular clause last Thursday, there was a motion, and it was carried. It was that we postpone the consideration of the proposed amendment by the Committee until today. Now we should start from where we stopped last week.

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mrs Loyce Bwambale): Thank you, Mr Chairman. The substantive chairman is out of the country, and I have the honour and pleasure of standing in for him.  

The Committee is proposing to insert the following new clause after clause 25, which is now clause 26. 

Perhaps to guide members, we harmonized positions with the minister again. There were some disagreements, and we made slight changes to the clause amendments you are holding. So, please listen carefully. 

“Section 77 of the Act is amended_ 

    (a) in paragraph (c) of subsection (1) by substituting the following- 
‘(c) determine disputes as the court of first incidence in all land matters where the subject matter does not exceed 2,500 currency points’;
    (b) by deleting paragraph (d) of sub-section (1);
    (c) in sub-section (2) by deleting the words ‘all the powers of a magistrate’s court Grade I, granted under the Magistrates’ Act, and shall, in addition and insofar as it is not provided for in that Act, have’; and
    (d) in sub-section (2) on page 71 by substituting the following as sub-section (3)-

‘Notwithstanding sub-section (1) of this section, a District Land Tribunal shall not make an order for cancellation of entries in a certificate of title and vesting title, but shall refer such cases to the High Court for the necessary consequential orders’.”

Justification: Mr Chairman, as a consequential amendment arising out of clause 27 deleting section 85, which provided for the jurisdiction; to provide for the proposed amendments to paragraph (b) of clause 23 of the Bill. 

The proposed sub-section (3) is to avoid contravening section 185 of the Registration of Titles Act, Chapter 205, which limits consequential orders to the jurisdiction of the High Court. I beg to move.  

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, I have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the proposed new clause be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26:

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, having concluded the new insertion, there is a consequential amendment that I wish to be recorded by so reading:

“Section 79 of the Act is amended-

    (a) in sub-section (1) by deleting the reference to sub-section (1); and 
    (b) by deleting sub-section (2).”

Justification: there is only one sub-section, therefore this is a consequential amendment arising out of clause 27, which abolishes sub-county and urban land tribunals under sections 81 and 82. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, if this is a consequential amendment arising out of section 27, have we reached clause 27?

MRS BWAMBALE: Not yet, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then, I think we had better hold it, because we do not know the decision on clause 27. Why do we not wait until we have reached it and we have agreed to it? 

MRS BWAMBALE:  Obliged.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In light of the new clause 26, I had a proposal to insert something new. I do not know whether the chairperson was referring to a new clause 27 or the old one, because I had a proposal, an amendment to the old clause 26.

THE CHAIRMAN: She was concerned with clause 26 in the Bill, which we have not reached.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you. Clause 26 in the Bill is amended by substituting the following:

“Section 80 of the Act is amended by substituting for it the following new section-
(1)	A district land tribunal shall have an Assistant Registrar who shall be a person qualified with a degree in Law and a diploma in Legal Practice.
(2)	The Assistant Registrar shall be in charge of the Registry of the District Land Tribunal, and in particular shall carry out the following functions:
    (a) receive and register applications, notices of decisions and all documents or things related to applications;
    (b) issue and serve notices and summons of the Land Tribunal;
    (c) issue interim orders in the absence of the Chairperson;
    (d) keep all documents, books, things or records of the proceedings of the Tribunal;
    (e) taxation of costs; and
    (f) perform such other functions as the District Land Tribunal may direct.
(3)	In the exercise of his or her functions under this section, the Assistant Registrar shall comply with the advice and guidance of the Registrar of District Land Tribunals under section 80(a) of this Act.”

Justification: the Assistant Registrar should be a person knowledgeable and skilled in court processes to facilitate proper records being forwarded to the High Court in the case of appeals. The proposed amendment also makes the functions of the Assistant Registrar more explicit, and the Assistant Registrar is made accountable to the Registrar of District Land Tribunals. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know the intention of section 80(1). It says: “A district land tribunal shall have an assistant registrar, who shall be a person qualified with a degree in Law and a diploma in Legal Practice.” I do not know whether you intended to restrict this work to people who have a diploma in Legal Practice, because this is a development that came later. There are many practicing advocates, including the Speaker, that do not have a diploma in Legal Practice. This is a development that came after many had been enrolled as advocates. 

However, I think your intention is to have a person who is qualified to practice Law in the country. That is different. I do not know what your policy is. Let us get this clarification first.  

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, this clause was discussed widely and the justification for it has ably been shown. 

Secondly, we anticipated that in cases of appeal, such qualified people were more competent. But more importantly, the members of the committee thought there are quite a number of people on the streets, from Makerere and other institutions - I am reporting the feeling of the committee – who have these qualifications and no jobs. That was the overriding factor.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we are legislating for purposes of finding jobs for people who do not have them! I am only saying that there are people who are qualified to do this work but have no diploma in Law. I was enrolled and I am still on the roll, with a practicing certificate. Suppose I want this job, what happens?

MR MWONDHA: I would like to help the vice-chairperson of the Committee by appreciating the position you are raising. I think it was simply an oversight. We did not think of earlier generations like yours, Sir - (Laughter). We did not have it in mind. But it does no harm. We could say, “or its equivalent”.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, there is no equivalent. What I am saying is, the learned Attorney General himself does not have a diploma in Legal Practice, because this development came later.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, from what has been going on, it is clear that the Committee was trying to specify the requirements for a suitable candidate. Can I, therefore, propose to the chairperson of the Committee that to avoid leaving out the people who do not have a diploma in Legal Practice, the amendment could be re-framed to refer to “a person qualified to be an advocate in all courts of judicature”? I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that okay, chairperson? 

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, if that is in accordance with the justification we have given, I beg to accept it.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA: I see there is a document which has just been circulated, with regard to the location of the tribunal. Apparently when we took the decision last week, we left the home of the tribunal hanging, and I think there is a circulated amendment to that effect. I do not know who circulated it or whether he is intending to move it, but I agree with it. So, I want to move it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it connected with this particular amendment?

MR MWANDHA: With 26.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not think I have seen the amendment. It had better come to me. However, the member who is raising the issue was perhaps not in the House when we passed the clause on tribunals. We even stood in the House and voted for their home to be in the Judiciary, and not in the Ministry of Lands. So, if the member is circulating an amendment, perhaps it will have to be at the re-committal stage, if so requested.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I do not think we need to wait for the re-committal stage. This amendment could be moved at this particular stage, because I think last week we did –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The point, honourable member, is that we had two positions. One was by the Minister, who wanted it to be under the Ministry of Lands, and the other was for putting it under the Judiciary. That one was carried. So, the position is that it is under the Judiciary. Therefore, reference to the Chief Registrar of High Court or the Secretary to Judiciary, these are all part and parcel of the Judiciary where we placed the tribunal.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Mr Chairman, my recollection was that the House pronounced itself on the issue of appointment, not the relocation or location of the tribunals - I am subject to correction. The minister could appoint people provided, as it was in the proposal, that he was so advised by the Judicial Service Commission. That is my recollection. As to where the system was to be located, the House did not pronounce itself on that. I remember it because I had something to say about that. But since it was not an issue, I decided to keep quiet.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, that is exactly what I had in mind. I thought there was vagueness as to the actual location of the tribunal. Indeed the feeling of the House was that this tribunal should be under the Judiciary. The assumption was that since the appointment was given to the Chief Judge, it was automatically assumed that it is under the registry. If that is the understanding, I do not have to argue the point. 

However, if the home of this tribunal is still a matter of doubt, then it would be necessary to move this amendment. But if it is not, and it is clearly under the Judiciary, then I do not have to move this amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then what we should do is this. As I see, yours is 80D and we are with 80A. However, the Committee also has 80B and also 80C. Why do we not wait until we dispose of these, and then you come - (Interjection)- No, yours is 80D. But we have A, B and C. So, I think it should come after we have considered other amendments.

MR MWANDHA: Most obliged, Mr Chairman.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman for that guidance. The committee proposes that we insert the following new clause after clause 26. 

“The Act is amended by inserting immediately after section 80 the following new sections: 

80A(1)	There shall be a registrar of the District Land Tribunals who shall co-ordinate and monitor the activities of the district Land tribunals.   

(b)	A person shall not be qualified to be appointed a registrar unless he or she is qualified to be appointed as a registrar of the High Court.”  

Justification: A more appropriate substitute to the proposed clause 29. This creates a registrar to oversee the affairs of the land tribunals generally.

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, is it part of the same clause that referred to the assistant registrar?

MRS BWAMBALE:  Yes, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay.

MRS BWAMBALE: What we have just passed was establishing the District Assistant Registrar.  At the apex, we are now having a co-ordinator, and this is the import of this amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Is it clear? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

MRS BWAMBALE: “80B(1) The Chairperson of a district land tribunal shall be appointed on a full-time basis and be responsible for managing the administrative affairs of the tribunal.
  
(2) In the management of the administrative affairs of the tribunal, the chairperson shall be assisted by the Assistant Registrar of the tribunal and such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of the tribunal’s functions.  

(3) The other members of the tribunal shall be appointed on a part-time basis.”  

Justification: To provide for the management of the tribunal.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Sir, I fully agree with the committee.

MR BEN WACHA: It might not be a big problem, but it is still a problem. If 80B is talking about administrative management of the affairs of the tribunal, why did you bring in 80B(3), which talks about appointment?

MRS BWAMBALE: Can I have the question asked again, Mr Chairman?

MR WACHA: Yes. Mr Chairman, 80B(3) is talking about the appointment of other members of the tribunal. 80B (1) and (2) are talking of the administrative management of the affairs of the tribunal. Why do you bundle up all two of them in the same clause?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think, as you see in 80B(1), the chairperson of a district land tribunal shall be appointed on a full-time basis. So, I think it has combined management and appointment - one on full-time basis and the other one on part-time basis.

MR WACHA: Then why do we not divide appointment and administration of the affairs of the tribunal?

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean the marginal note?

MR WACHA: No, even on the clauses. Because you are confusing two issues, and I do not know whether the Attorney General is comfortable with that.

MR AYUME: Mr Chairman, before I looked at the marginal notes, I was going to propose that we rearrange the numbering to take care of hon. Wacha’s problem. But then, unless we also look at the marginal note and maybe say, “the appointment of members of the tribunal and the management of administrative affairs of tribunal.”  

THE CHAIRMAN: Appointment and management?

MR AYUME: Yes, if you put them together. But then, it may create a problem. Why do we not break it up into two, as he was suggesting, so that you have appointment, and you also have another marginal note for management? And then you can renumber the sub-sections accordingly.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we get the formulation?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, my concern is that the chairperson of the districts, who is going to be appointed on a full-time basis, is responsible for administration of the tribunal. I do not know whether we understand what that entails. 

I thought that this would be the right place for enumerating the major functions, which go with the position of the chairperson of the District Land Tribunal. But simply to say that he will be responsible for the administration of the tribunal, to me, is too general, and it does not clearly bring out the functions, which this chairperson should perform.

MR ISOKE: Mr Chairman, the amendment has a side note that reads, “management of administrative affairs”, but it includes appointment. I have just examined clause 23 sub-clause (7) and (8) of the bill, which we passed on Thursday, on page 13 of the bill. 

Sub-clause (7) reads: “The Chairperson of a district land tribunal shall be appointed on full-time basis.”  Since we already provided for that, so we should delete it from 80B(1). 

And sub-clause (8), which we passed in clause 23, which appears also on page 13 of the bill, provides as follows: “Members of a district land tribunal shall be appointed on a part-time basis.”  That is exactly what the chairperson has brought up as 80B(3). So, since it was already passed, we should delete it from her formulation. 

If that is understood and acceptable, then 80B(1) will now read, “A chairperson of a district land tribunal shall be responsible for the administration of the Tribunal.”  

And (2) will read, “In the administration of the Tribunal, the Chairperson shall be assisted by the Assistant Registrar of the Tribunal, and such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of the Tribunal’s functions.”  

THE CHAIRMAN: I think he has explained why the others should be deleted, because we have already covered them somewhere.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, I have no problem with the deletion. I was just wondering as to whether the reference to the registrar assisting the chairman would be clearly understood, in terms of what extent the registrar will be assisting the chairman. 

I have in mind the possibility of the chairman wanting to take over the entire control of staff, the management of funds, the management of the assets of the Tribunal, which could actually lead to conflict between the two senior officers - the chairman and the person who is supposed to assist him. Unless I am assured that the –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Have we not dealt with the functions of the Assistant Registrar before? We did, when we passed 80(1). We did that in detail.

MR RUHINDI: On the same provision, Mr Chairman, of recent we had an impasse, when the chairperson of the Judicial Service Commission was not yet appointed, on a similar provision in the Constitution, more or less, pertaining to this one. 

I would propose that for the avoidance of doubt, we propose subsection (2) to read, “When a member of a tribunal is acting for the chairperson in his absence, he shall do so on a full-time basis”, so that that kind of impasse is avoided, because a person who is acting entails the running benefits of the incumbent.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it necessary to say so? Because if he is acting, he is acting in capacity of the person he is acting for.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, apparently it may actually look as if it is implied. But I can assure you that we had different interpretations, when the then acting chairperson of the Judicial Service Commission, Justice Oder, appeared before our Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

PROF LATIGO: Mr Chairman, the English is a problem, because if you are acting and you are acting on a full-time basis, to us, in plain English that is contradictory. If probably what he is trying to suggest is that he will have the full powers of the chairman and enjoy the benefits of the chairman, maybe. But to work and act on full-time basis, is –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we really put the question, because there is a formulation by the minister, which replaced the formulation of the committee? We can dispose of that, and then we again see whether it is necessary to deal with hon. Ruhindi’s amendment. I now put the question on the amendment by the honourable minister. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would take the Professor’s supplementary addition if we could specify the benefits, “shall do so on full-time basis, and have the same benefits as the chairperson during that time of acting.”

THE CHAIRMAN: But now, are we are not dealing with benefits? If he is acting and the other one is not there, definitely he will be doing the same work, which the chairman should have done. And if the chairman should be full-time, he will also be full-time until a substantive appointment is made.

MRS BALEMEZI: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether it will be out of place if we made a provision for a deputy chairperson? So that instead of talking of someone acting on full-time basis, we have a deputy.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, then they are going to say 93. You know, somebody here proposed to increase the number, and they said 93 and he had to sit down. Well, the suggestion is that we have a deputy chairperson.

MR ISOKE: Mr Chairman, the chairperson of a district land tribunal has different qualifications and is generically different from a member. The rules of procedure for the tribunals are very clear. I am conscious of them, although I do not have the text with me, but a chairperson is a chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson, the tribunal cannot be constituted, and cannot work as a tribunal. 

So, for a member to act in the name of the chairperson is against the rules, and the principle behind qualifying a chairperson to be as such, and a member to be as such, in section 75 of the Act. So, the intention is good.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we are not dealing with an acting chairperson. Somebody asked, “Can we have a substantive deputy chairperson?” That was the question.

MR ISOKE: There is also a precedent, Sir.   A chairman of a district is qualified as one holding an equivalent of an ‘A’ level certificate. By implication, a deputy chairperson LC V, who would deputise and act in that place, must also have that qualification. Now, to have a deputy chairperson of a tribunal in the like manner, would mean we re-open 75 -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: If we agree that there is a deputy chairperson and he must have similar qualifications, we can say so. But in your view, can we have that principle?

MR ISOKE: Sir, I brought this bill because I did not have enough money to finance the tribunals. Now to appoint a deputy chairperson, who will also be full-time, would increase my problem - (Laughter).

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, suppose - God forbid - the chairperson is bedridden for a long time, would the business of the tribunal cease for as long as he is not able to perform? What are we going to do?  There must be an opening whereby if the person is not available for reasons beyond his control, there must be somebody to carry on the functions of that office. So, I want some clarification, Mr Chairman.

MR ISOKE: Mr Chairman, again, going by the rules of procedure of the tribunals, the chairperson of the neighbouring tribunal would be invited by the central registrar to take pose.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, following your guidance, I have looked at the functions of the Deputy Assistant Registrar as specified in section 80. I find that, still the important function of accounting for the resources was left out. 

If we cannot accommodate it here, I beg that I recommit it when we come to the recommital stage, and we include it as one of the specified functions, to avoid doubt and possible clashes between the chairman, who will be less permanent than the registrar.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it’s home should be where the registrar’s functions are. And if you really feel there is sense in it, it can only come during recommital, if you so wish.

MR BASALIZA: Mr Chairman, I think the honourable minister is forgetting the spirit as to why we set up the tribunals during the Constituent Assembly.  We set up the tribunals to assist the peasants who have got a lot of land problems. 

Now, if I have the chairperson only working, and you have to invite a chairperson of another district or another place, it will bog down the peasants; it will disturb them. And the spirit behind the whole thing was to assist those people to act as fast as possible. So, I feel, Mr Chairman, that we should have a substantive deputy.

THE CHAIRMAN: That will be really rearranging the schedule of the chairman of a district to come and deal with this. Can we really go to those details?

MR ISOKE: Sir, my elaborate explanation was, it is in the spirit of accommodating this function in the money envelope.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we proceed, honourable chairperson.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you. “80C(1) A secretary of the District Land Tribunal appointed by virtue of the provisions of the Act as they stood at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be a duly appointed officer acting under the equivalent office under this Act.

(2) For the avoidance of doubt, subject to the provisions of this Act, every person who immediately before the coming into force of this Act held or was acting in any office established by or by virtue of the principal Act, so far as it is consistent with the provisions of this Act, shall be taken to have been appointed as from the coming into force of this Act, to hold or act in the equivalent office under this Act.”

Justification: To save existing officers of the tribunal, in view of the amendments on appointment of the chairpersons and assistant registrars under clauses 23 and 26. I beg to move.

MR ISOKE: Mr Chairman, the existing officers do not have the qualifications of a person qualified to practice Law. The Judicial Service Commission set up different terms, and they are in place. We are saving these individuals. I therefore support.

MR WACHA: I have a problem, Sir, under (2). I have looked at the bill, and under Part I, under the interpretation, I see, “This Act may be cited as the Land (Amendment) Act, 2002.” That, therefore, takes care of the phrase, “this Act”, as it appears there, and the phrase, “‘the Act’ means the Land Act, 1998.” I have a problem though, because I do not see, under the interpretation clause, anything called “the Principle Act”. What does it mean?

MR ISOKE: Mr Chairman, at the Third Reading of the bill, I will move a motion to recommit part of this bill to the Committee of the whole House, and I will bring in this necessary amendment.

MR WACHA: I still have a problem. Now that this particular amendment is not yet brought, what do we do with this phrase?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, the amendment came from the committee, and it is good. But a member with a sharp eye sees the necessity for interpreting “Principle Act”. Sir, guide us. I have already requested you to allow me, at the Third Reading, to recommit part of the bill – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But when you talk about the Principle Act, don’t you mean the original Act, which you are amending? Is that not the intention?

MR AYUME: Mr Chairman, I have just looked at the main bill, which the minister brought here, and there is a definition that says, “The Act means the Land Act, 1998.” Therefore, if I read the committee’s minds correctly, I think they are referring to the Land Act. So, the proposal to call it the Principal Act, I think, is not correct, because the Act is already defined. It is that expression, “the Principal Act”, which should be deleted.

MR WACHA: I would propose, Sir, to save time, that we remove the word “principal” and just leave “Act”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon Awori, do you have a further amendment on this?

MR AWORI: Yes please, Mr Chairman. I pray that we accommodate another insight as 80 D.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, why don’t we first deal with this D?

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Last week we made amendments to this bill, and I think the intention of the members was that we were removing the tribunal from the ministry to the Judiciary, for reasons, which members mentioned.   But, apparently, there was still vagueness as to the real home of the tribunals. 

I thought it has now become necessary to be very specific, so that the intention of the House last week is actually specified in the law itself. Hence the need to move this amendment, to provide for Section 80 D. I want to read the amendment: 

“80D(1)	The general powers of supervision over Land Tribunals and the office of the Registrar of Land Tribunals under this Act shall be exercised by the Chief Registrar of the High Court.

(2)	All assets, liabilities and monies for the operation of Land Tribunals and the office of the Registrar of Land Tribunals should be appropriated through the Secretary to the Judiciary. 

In other words, you make the secretary to the Judiciary the accounting officer, as opposed to having the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Lands as the accounting officer.  

(3)	All assets, liabilities and monies of the operation of Land Tribunals held under the management of the ministry, by virtue of the provision of the Act, as they stood at the commencement of this Act, shall be transferred to the Secretary to the Judiciary.”  

Again, giving the full effect of transferring the land tribunals.  

Mr Chairman, the justifications are many:  

    1. To provide for the supervision of the land tribunals under the Judiciary. 

As it stands, the Minister of Water, land and Environment is managing the land tribunals. In view of the consensus of the committee that the land tribunals be under the Judiciary, there is need to reflect this in the law, to avoid leaving the matter hanging or being ambiguous.

    2. It would also enhance the independence of the land tribunals. 

Mr Chairman, you remember that last week members saw that there was a problem because the principle of separation of powers would be compromised if these tribunals remained under the minister, and various examples were given.  

Mr Chairman, the administration of the land tribunal members by the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment would seriously compromise their independence. In the majority of land disputes, the Uganda Land Commission, the Registrar of Titles, the district boards, which all fall under the administration of the ministry, are potential litigants. By administering tribunals, the ministry would be the judge in its own court. Furthermore, the tribunal members will not be regarded as independent, since they will have to determine cases bearing in mind the interests of the Ministry. And there has been a case, I am told, where a decision was taken and within the department itself, there was some pressure exerted to allow the matter to be sorted out administratively. I think this should be avoided.  

    3. Members of the district land tribunals are judicial officers, by virtue of Article 151 of the Constitution. They are also judicial officers because they took the judicial oath, as provided in the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution. 

A judicial oath is only taken by judicial officers, and Article 129 vests judicial powers only to the Judiciary. 

4.	It would enhance separation of powers, as I have already said, between and amongst the three organs of the government - the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary.

5.	Lack of technical capacity by the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment to handle an institution like Land Tribunals providing judicial functions. 

    6.  District Land Tribunals are different from the tribunals which were mentioned here     last week, Mr Chairman, like the Tax Appeals Tribunal, the NPART Tribunal. Whereas the district land tribunals are judicial in nature, the latter are not only administrative but also arbitrate matters between the government departments and aggrieved members of the public. The latter also do not have apparent jurisdiction. In other words, decisions of NPART tribunals or tax tribunals are not subject to appeals.

    7. Lastly Sir, the fear that they are not user friendly and approachable by the public is cured by the simple rule of procedure already made by the Chief Justice, the Land Tribunal Procedure Rules, 2002. Mr Chairman, because of these very compelling justifications, I wish to move that we do what we intended to do last week and transfer these tribunals to the Judiciary. Thank you.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, I wish to make some comments about the justification for these proposed amendments.  

Sir, bullet 2 reads: “If the home of the tribunals is in the Ministry of Lands, the minister and the departments in the ministry would in a way affect the tribunals not to reach correct decisions”.

Mr Chairman, what is cited there as departments of my ministry are actually not departments of the ministry. The Uganda Land Commission is a constitutional body existing in its own right and appointed by His Excellency, the President. The registrars of title are individual officers appointed by the districts under Section 60 of the Land Act, even as amended. The district land boards also are created by the Constitution under Article 241. They are appointed by the district councils, and they are provided for by the Treasury through the normal way of disbursing grants. They are not under the control of the Minister of Lands. So what are the movers saying?

Bullet 3 says that members of district land tribunals are judiciary officers by virtue of Article 151 of the Constitution. Sir, I wish to say that no, they are not. Article 151 of the Constitution reads as follows: 

“In this chapter ” – That is the opening phrase. The chapter is on the Judiciary. “Interpretation: In this chapter, judicial officer means…” Now this is a chapter concerning the Judiciary.  

The Constitution framers were very wise. They created Chapter 15 on Land and Environment and in it there is Article 243 creating land tribunals. A distinction was made quite distinct from the administration of justice under the chapter on the Judiciary. In Clause 5 of Article 243, we have the following provision: “A law made under this law (the Land Act) may prescribe the practice and procedure for land tribunals….” 

There is a whole set of procedures made by the Chief Justice. Procedures which are being used by the tribunals; separating their mode of practice from the traditional practices of the courts of judicature as people’s courts, easily accessible. It goes on to say that it “shall provide for a right of appeal from a decision of a land tribunal to a court of law”.  

The chairperson of a land tribunal is a person qualified to be a magistrate grade I. There are also magistrates grade I in existence. Government would have only increased the number of these magistrates. As the case was in 1990 when NRC increased the number of judges of the High Court, the number of judges of the Constitutional Court and appointed Court – (Interjection) – Sir, if I could finish my point then I will get the clarification.

An appeal from a decision of a land tribunal goes to a court of law. These are two creatures; the tribunal blends customary systems of land dispute with – those are the two members who are not qualified to be lawyers, practising in the High Court with an input of the chairperson who is a lawyer. Now this is a new creature; we have got to understand it as something different from the normal courts of judicature.

Sir, the Judicial Oath: I do not know where it is stipulated that only judicial officers take this oath.  Recently, in January, the chairperson and the members of the Uganda Land Commission took an oath, the same as the judicial oath, as we have it in the Constitution, and these are not judicial officers. I could go on and on.

But lastly Sir, I want to submit that the movers of this motion should think more deeply about the matter that, the Judicial Service Commission and the Public Service Commission have been handling matters of putting in place this institution called the land tribunals. They are in agreement that this institution should be in the ministry for administrative purposes. A ministry responsible for land matters because of their unique generic nature. Really, it is the function of the Executive to determine the placement of its departments, under this ministry or the other ministry. I said so last week; I have repeated the same thing here today. I am persuading colleagues to see the position of the Executive and vote against this amendment. 

CAPT. GUMA: Hon. Baguma Isoke, bullet 3 under this justification asserts that members of the district land tribunals are judicial officers. I want hon. Baguma to help me with Article 151, paragraph (a) of the Constitution, which he quoted. That “ a Judicial officer is a judge or any person who presides over a court or tribunal howsoever described”. 

I seem to agree with the bullet 3 assertion that members of the district land tribunal are judicial officers, because it is in line with this paragraph (a) of Article 151. I would like to hear how you don’t think that the two are related; because the man is asserting that he is a judicial officer; he is a member of the district land tribunal, and that he takes the judicial oath as provided in the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution!

THE CHAIRMAN: I think his argument, as I followed it, is that Article 151 is restrictive in that the interpretation concerns what is mentioned in that particular chapter, because in this chapter, that is what it says. That is why he excludes this tribunal from tribunals mentioned in 151. That is his argument. But under the chapter, maybe we have to see what role these tribunals are going to play, because if you look at Article 257, judicial power means power to dispense justice among persons. So, a question may be put; what role is the tribunal playing, is it dispensing justice among people? 

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, I have not been to the Law School, but I have been around – (Laughter)- shaping for nearly two decades now. Sir, elsewhere in this Constitution, we have got officers who exercise judicial functions like the Human Rights Commission. These are not in this chapter. We have got the Inspector General of Government and indeed they are Administrative Officers in the Executive, the Permanent Secretaries who also exercise judicial powers and judicial functions. So, for this purpose, we can loosely call them judicial officers but they are not judicial officers as the Constitution has defined judicial officers in Article 151.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think, honourable members, you have heard the two sides. You have heard – (Interruption)

MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The tribunals which are established under the Land Act, indeed, perform quasi-judicial functions. I am not surprised that the movers of this amendment are concerned with the quality of justice that they expect these tribunals to provide.  But I think we should make a distinction in this particular case with the role or the function or the managerial act of supervising these tribunals. That managerial act can be done by any department of Government under which the tribunals are located, but of course if the concern is specifically to the quality these tribunals are supposed to provide, then my submission is that this is provided for. 

One is the fact that it is the Judicial Service Commission, which appoints the chairpersons and members of the tribunal. It is understood that when that happens, then the Judicial Service Commission will ensure that the persons who are appointed to undertake this function are people who are going to deliver.

Secondly, there is also the requirement of the appellate system. I think, in as far as supervising the tribunals is concerned, the provisions relating to the appellate system should be able to take care of any fears regarding the quality of justice the tribunals are going to provide. So, I think there is nothing wrong in the minister appointing the tribunals on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, and having their welfare and the managerial aspect of supervision being undertaken by the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, knowing very well that as far as the judicial aspect of it is concerned, the Judicial Service Commission will do its supervision.

I have consulted on this matter and I wish to say that the Judiciary is already over-burdened with two higher courts, namely, the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal. The High Court and more especially the Magistrates Court would prefer that their involvement in this matter be confined to the aspect of supervising the judicial functions of the tribunals. I thank you.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I think the independence of the tribunal should not only lie in appointment. I think the management of the tribunals has a bearing on the independence of the tribunals. It is not comforting to learn that under the current law, the tribunals are actually managed and supervised by the Commissioner of Surveys. 

You are talking of tribunals; the Chairman of the tribunal is an advocate qualified to be a magistrate under the law. But the current position is that they are managed by the Commissioner of Surveys. If we adopt Section 29 as it is here, which we are going to come to, of course, if we reject this amendment, it means that it will be adopted. It says, “The minister shall have general supervisory powers over the administration of district land tribunals in addition to his or her powers under the Act, and enjoins the minister to designate a director in his or her ministry to co-ordinate and monitor the activities of the district land tribunals”.  

I think this trend, Mr Chairman, will be very unfortunate. We must ensure that the tribunals remain as professional and as independent as possible -(Applause)- and this can only be achieved if we transfer them to the Judiciary. I would not see any harm if that were done.   We are running the same budget. The tribunals already have simple rules designated by the Chief Justice. After all, we have already pronounced ourselves on the fact that they will be appointed by the Chief Justice. So, I do not see any harm in transferring them to the right department.  

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Chairman for giving me this opportunity. I would like to beg my colleagues. If we remember, the reason why these tribunals were set up was really to handle land matters expeditiously and efficiently, and I would like to give an example, where in the process of re-structuring in the government, all educational institutions were taken to the Ministry of Education. But I can assure you, the Minister of Education does not take some of these specialised institutions as a priority and they are trying to have them shifted back to their mother ministries. 

As the Attorney General said, the Judiciary is already overburdened, and there is a lot of bureaucracy, and I think they will not take the land tribunal as a priority as it should be. Therefore, I would like to appeal to members; we could amend the amendment by hon. Adolf but let these tribunals be housed under the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment, just to avoid bureaucracy or even intimidation. You see, when you go – a peasant comes and goes to that court with – it becomes a little bit tricky, we would be doing ourselves and our people injustice to shift these land tribunals from the Ministry of Lands to the Ministry of Justice.  

I beg to plead with my colleagues that we leave these tribunals. And, in any case, you are worried about quality and what not, but already all the members on the tribunal are not lawyers. So we cannot really say strictly there will be judicial courts. They are just quasi courts to handle a specific activity, that is, the land disputes, and I believe it will be done faster if they are left under the Ministry of Lands. I beg to submit.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I just wanted to suggest to the House to adopt the argument raised by hon. Adolf Mwesige. I see two problems: one, the Judiciary and its related organs are highly professional institutions in their particular aspects.  They have a legacy to protect, and usually if such powers like issues pertaining to land are left to the discretion of politically appointed officers and their related structures, eventually, in the long run, this will cause problems.

I see a second problem in this sense. If it is about bureaucracy, my honourable colleague, you will realise that the latter office has more bureaucracy than the former. So, when it comes to issues like land, it would be better if we relied on entrenched institutions other than entrenched individuals. This would really help people seek justice and also get alternative justices. 

So, I really beg members to adopt the amendment by hon. James Mwandha that these powers be shifted from the minister to the judicial organs without thinking of what else the minister would do anyway. That one, we shall handle it at a later stage.  Thank you. (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the essence of the amendment is finding a home for this tribunal. One argument is that it should remain in the Ministry of Lands, after all it is in the chapter dealing with land. The other argument is that it is carrying out judicial functions, therefore, it should go to the Judiciary. I think you have appreciated the cases for both sides. I think it is high time we vote on that, but I would think that the "Ayes" should put up their hands and the "Nos" so that we dispose of this matter. So, I put the question. It is by show of hands -(Interjection). 

There is an amendment by hon. James Mwandha; that is the one we are voting on. Is it clear? The amendment is that it be located in the Judiciary. It is the amendment on 80D. I do not have to read it. I think it is clear. 

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The location of various responsibilities is a matter of the Executive. Whether you put this one here or there is a matter for the Executive. They look at these matters and decide that conveniently this will be performed in this arena or in the other one, taking into account various permutations.   So what I would suggest is that this matter should be taken back to the Executive to look at before a final decision is taken.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well honourable members, we are dealing with the law; there is a motion and an amendment. I think we have to dispose of it. I have no way of shelving it.

MR BAMWANGA: Mr Chairman, we must respect specialized areas in our professions. I am talking as a valuer and I think I can defend land surveyors, I can defend architects.  This matter we are discussing is a matter of land. We are not talking about the criminality, the legality of the administration of this Act -(Applause). But anything that touches the land, Mr Chairman, eventually is going to bounce back to the land office. You are going to appoint tribunals and they are going to attend to these cases. 

When it comes to sub-dividing a land title, when it comes to registering the people with interest on the land title, when it comes to issuing and surveying the land –(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, can I be allowed to educate hon. Mwandha?

MR MWANDHA: I thought, Mr Chairman, that we had reached a stage where we were to vote. Because if other members are allowed to debate when we are about to vote – I wanted the Floor because I wanted to reply to issues raised by the minister, issues raised by hon. Kabakumba and other issues. I never had the opportunity. I am the one who moved the amendment. I had a right to reply. But I decided to forego my reply because we wanted to vote on this quickly so that we go to other business. But now our colleague is going back to the same business and debating afresh. So, is that procedurally correct?

THE CHAIRMAN: I agree with you. We have reached a stage of making a decision one way or the other.  Those who support the amendment put up your hands.  Please, is there any doubt about the amendment? It is the amendment moved by hon. James Mwandha. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the new clause stands part of the bill. Honourable members, what we have been dealing with was a new clause introduced by the Committee. Is that the case?

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Now that you are putting a question to the whole clause as amended running all the way from 80, then 80A, 80B up to D where we are now, I beg to clarify that as a result of the minister’s amendment on 80B, by deleting “appointing the Chairperson on full-time basis and the other members of the tribunal on part-time basis”, I am putting notice that we shall be putting it for recommittal because the Committee’s position in making this appointment had deleted the sections that the minister quoted earlier. So, the minister’s quotations in 23, (7) and (8) will have to be reinstated because those are the ones that refer to the chairperson as being on full-time basis, and the members as on part-time basis, but had been deleted.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, on this new clause which we have been dealing with, I put the question that it stands part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27:

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, having reinstated the minister’s proposal in clause 25, putting the courts of first instance at LC II, we have no amendment on clause 27 as a Committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question that clause 27 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28:

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, the Committee wishes to insert the following new clauses after Clause 28.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Now I put the question that Clause 28 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29:

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, I had already given notice that we need to insert a new clause after Clause 28. May I proceed?  

Section 92 of the Act is amended -
    (a) by substituting the following subsection after subsection (1)-

“(2)	The commissioner shall, where a certificate of title or instrument -
    (a) is issued in error; 
    (b) contains a wrong description of land or boundaries;
    (c) contains an entry or endorsement made in error;
    (d) contains an illegal endorsement; 
    (e) is illegally or wrongfully retained; 
give not less than 21 days notice of the intention to take the appropriate action in a prescribed form to any party likely to be affected by any decision made under this section.

3)	The commissioner shall conduct a hearing, giving the interested party under subsection (2) an opportunity to be heard, in accordance with the rules of natural justice, but subject to that duty, shall not be bound to comply with the rules of evidence applicable in a court of law.

(4)	Upon making a finding on the matter, the commissioner shall communicate his or her decision in writing to the parties, giving the reasons for the decision made, and may call for the duplicate certificate of title or instrument for cancellation, or correction or delivery to the proper party.”

b)	by amending subsection (3) to be subsection (5) and substituting the reference therein to subsection (2) to read subsection (4);
c)	by amending subsection (4) to read sub-section (6);
d)	by amending subsection (5) to read subsection (7);
e)	by amending subsection (6) to read subsection (8) and substituting the reference to subsection (5) with a reference to subsection (7);
f)	by amending subsection (7) to read subsection (9).

The justification: Mr Chairman, subsection (1) is amended to delete the reference to the “tribunal” since the tribunal does not have powers to make consequential amendments. The other amendments are made to provide for a better sequence of events, since the original chronology was misleading. I beg to move.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, I agree.

THE CHAIRMAN: But the question is, what is the present position?  You mean we do not have a law to deal with the situation which these amendments are trying to address? You mean if the registrar finds that the title was issued in an error he has no power –(Interruption)

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, the amendment is re-organizing the sequence of handling the register by the registrar; what takes precedence before the other. It is only harmonization, and only removing a tribunal, which has no power to undo a land title. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You have heard the proposed amendment; any query?

MR NSHIMYE: Mr Chairman, I wish to move an amendment to the proposed insertion by providing subsection (5), which reads: “A party aggrieved by the decision of the commissioner may appeal to the High Court within one month from the date of communication of the decision of the commissioner.”

THE CHAIRMAN:  Where do you put that?

MR NSHIMYE: It would follow as subsection (5), because otherwise it leaves the commissioner to have the final decision, it does not provide for an appeal.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, is it a new one?

MR NSHIMYE: Yes, it is a new one I am proposing.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard this proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, continuing with a new clause, Section 94 of the Act is amended by substituting for subsection (1) the following:

“(1)	the minister may, with the approval of Cabinet, by statutory instrument, make regulations for the better carrying into effect of the provisions of this Act, such regulations to be laid before Parliament and passed within two months.”

THE CHAIRMAN: By passing you mean the approval by Parliament?

MRS BWAMBALE: Yes.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, she is continuing please, leave her to finish then you can come in.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The justification was to make the regulations subject to Cabinet approval and also have the acknowledgement of Parliament. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In nearly all the laws that we have, and we give authority to the minister to make regulations, it is very obvious that the minister does not do this himself. All these things will go to Cabinet and when Cabinet approves then he issues - this is the truth. You check all the law books; you will not find anywhere where they say “with Cabinet approval.” I do not know why they should particularly come here.

THE CHAIRMAN: What you want to delete is “Cabinet” because that is an internal matter. But how will you know if the minister brings here the regulation and yet had not consulted the Cabinet? Are you in Cabinet? (Laughter)

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, if you look at the 1998 Land Act, the minister was not to issue any statutory instrument without the approval of Parliament. So, what we are seeking here is the approval. It can be in Cabinet, but he must notify the Parliament immediately within two months, which is okay.

THE CHAIRMAN: There was no problem with that one. I think the problem was for you to direct the minister to consult Cabinet as if you will know whether he has consulted or not. Your concern is that these regulations are approved by Parliament.  So now, were you suggesting an amendment for a deletion?

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, all I was saying was that the insistence that Parliament is informed is the right thing, but for us to direct the minister to go to Cabinet I think it is procedurally wrong.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what is your proposal if any?

PROF. LATIGO: That we delete that component which is "with the approval of Cabinet".

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, the proposed amendment is being amended by saying we delete “Cabinet”, but we require approval of Parliament.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I am a bit not easy with the proposal made by Prof. Latigo in the sense that if we pronounce ourselves on this and we make his proposal to sail through, that will therefore mean that we have got to make similar amendments in all the laws. Because what I do know from my civil service background is that, once a parent law has been made and the minister responsible for that service is given the overriding power through statutory instruments to make certain provisions, it is always that from the technical ministry. And once the Minister has considered it, it goes to Cabinet for Cabinet’s blessing. And once Cabinet blesses it, it more or less becomes part and parcel of the law.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, nobody says that it should not go to Cabinet, but it is the question of putting it in our laws when we cannot know what actually happens in Cabinet.  In the normal procedure, the minister would definitely not go and make regulations without going to consult in the Cabinet.  I think Prof. Latigo's concern is must we put it in the law? That was his concern. He is not saying it should not go to cabinet.

MR WADRI: What I was still seeking your guidance on is, if we pronounce ourselves that we support the amendment moved by Prof. Latigo, what impact, what effect will it have on other laws which have got a provision that for a statutory instrument to be made, it must be approved by Cabinet and then later the Parliament is informed? What impact will it have?

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not think all laws say that, because laws give powers to the minister to make statutory instruments and regulations. Not all laws say that you must go - because that is an internal matter between the minister and his colleagues in Cabinet. (Prof Nsibambi rose_) I do not know, the Prime Minister may tell us.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I refer to Article 117 of the Constitution, which specifically refers to collective responsibility. How do you achieve collective responsibility unless you cause Members of the Cabinet to know what you are doing? So, it is a minister who is not imaginative who would not keep Cabinet informed of what he or she is doing. I must be mindful of Article 33 of the Constitution. But much more than that, there is also the system of caucusing.  Many of the problems we have faced in this Parliament are a result of failure on our part sometimes to caucus. As a result of which you get decisions, which essentially are not necessarily the best. So, the answer to your question, it will be in the interest of the minister to involve Cabinet unless the matter is trivial and he or she wants to move expeditiously.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: The question is, do you think it is necessary to put this in the law?
  
PROF. NSIBAMBI: No, Sir. It is unnecessary because when you are making a constitution, there are many things you put in the constitution and they affect flexibility and discretion. To me, I am against excessive legislation on such matters. Sir, my proposal would be that do not put it there.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I listened to the Prime Minister very carefully. The provision which we are seeking to amend, if you read it carefully, says, “the Minister may”. Now one option, “the Minister may by statutory instrument make regulations for better carrying out into effect the provisions of this Act.” This reading would lead the minister - to use the Prime Minister's words - If he is imaginative, he will consult the Cabinet. But you could also have a minister who is not imaginative! In that case, there will be nothing binding him to consult the Cabinet. He can make a statutory instrument without consulting the Cabinet. Therefore, we want to address both cases of an imaginative minister and non -imaginative minister, for both of them to consult the Cabinet, then we provide for it within the law.  This will be mandatory, this will be very clear.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, is it in order for the honourable member to suggest very openly that this Parliament can legislate for an unimaginative minister when in fact, we are all assuming that we are dealing with very imaginative people in positions of Government? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, honourable members, really, whether we put it there or not, the question is, must we tell the minister to consult with Cabinet? That was, I think, the essence of the amendment. It is an internal matter. You will not know whether the minister has consulted or not and therefore, so what?

DR OKULO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we have to remove the phrase “with the approval of Cabinet.” But then we have to change “may” because it will now have to read; “The Minister shall, by statutory instrument…”

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, if you put “shall”, suppose he does not want to?  It only comes when he thinks there are the regulations to make, then makes the regulations.

DR OKULO: No, the regulation ends up being approved by Parliament. Approval of Parliament cannot be optional.  To me, now he is referring to his approval of Cabinet. So, if we delete the phrase “with the approval of Parliament” then we must change “may” to “shall.”

THE CHAIRMAN: No, this “may” is not for approval because you see “…may, with approval of Cabinet…” you know it is for making the regulations. I suppose that was the intention. Because you can read “the minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulation for better carrying out into effect….” So, you can always leave out “with the approval of Cabinet.” But still you have “may” because it is discretionary.

DR OKULO: Mr Chairman, my argument is whether making statutory instrument should be discretionary.  

THE CHAIRMAN: yes.

DR OKULO: The minister need not prepare any regulations?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, suppose the minister thinks that the provisions in the Act itself are enough to enable things to function, he may not.

DR OKULO: Okay.

THE CHAIRMAN: But really, why do we not end this matter and move forward?

PROF. LATIGO: If you could allow me, Mr Chairman. When the upper bit is removed, the second bit of that sentence “and such regulations shall be laid before Parliament within two months of its promulgation, that is the “shall” that he was talking about.

MR RUHINDI: Yes, further clarification on that because we are tying the hands of Parliament if you say, “shall be laid before Parliament and passed within two months.” In other words, Parliament has no option but to pass.  So, I think it should be, “shall be laid before Parliament for approval within two months.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but Parliament may refuse to approve, if you take away that power of Parliament to approve?

MR RUHINDI: Approval means that Parliament may or may not approve.  But when you say, “Shall pass.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay; I see.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I was saying that there is a difference between laying before Parliament and approval.  The two are different.  I think the clause as it is now, we should amend it and say, “The minister may, by Statutory Instrument, make regulations for the better carrying into effect of the provisions of this Act, and such regulations shall be laid before Parliament within two months.”  I think that would be an appropriate amendment, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, but laying before Parliament, does it mean it is necessary that Parliament must approve?  Now, what do we want, do we want Parliament to participate in subsidiary legislation? No!

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, when anybody lays a document before Parliament, there is a purpose for that laying of that document before Parliament.  Therefore, nobody is going to lay a document here just for keeps; there has to be a specific action implied in the laying of that document.  I am not an expert on legislation but - I can see the Attorney General is pointing a finger at me. I don’t know whether I have fundamentally erred. Thank you Sir.

MR AYUME: I will not make any comment on that, but I wish to say that the present section 94 of the Act requires parliamentary approval. And I think the proponents of the amendment would like to remove that requirement, which is why they formulated that section in the manner they have.  Because this one reads: “The minister may, by a statutory instrument, with the approval of Parliament, make regulations generally for the better carrying into effect of the provisions of this Act.”  So, the option, which is being proposed that we bring in “approval of Parliament”, is already here. The proponent of the amendment would like to remove this requirement of having to overburden Parliament with making a statutory instrument by requiring it to approve.

THE CHAIRMAN: So it is just – okay.

MR AYUME: So, the amendment, I think, was intended to remove this requirement of parliamentary approval.

THE CHAIRMAN: So now what is the position of the chairperson?

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  In fact, it was at the request of the Executive, through the minister having informed us that it was cumbersome and it was one of the issues leading to the delays in the implementation of the Act, that we were convinced that surely, the approval should be removed.  But the committee insisted that having removed the approval, then they must be put in the know by laying the papers on the Table within two months. And that is the procedure which we follow. To answer hon. Kagonyera, when Papers are laid on the Table, it is up to anyone in the House to come up with a motion to redress or reassert the issue raised.

THE CHAIRMAN: So now what is the refined formulation?  

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, the refined one will be as moved by hon. Adolf Mwesige, and let me read it and then he can correct it since he is here. “The minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulations for the better carrying into effect of the provisions of this Act, and such regulations shall be laid before Parliament within two month.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, honourable, did you have any other amendment?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Yes, it is section 93.  I am sorry, I have got three amendments but we have passed Clause 11.  When you give me time, I will make this amendment.  This one is on 93(1)(a) and 93(2); can I move this amendment? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, but are your amendments independent of amendments by the committee?

MR LUKYAMUZI: No.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, why don’t we pronounce ourselves on this one and then you come in later. Are they related?

MR LUKYAMUZI: They are related and they are straightforward.

THE CHAIRMAN: Don't you think this is 93?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, 93.

THE CHAIRMAN: Therefore, yours is dependent on ours.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, are you suggesting that I come after – (Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Obliged.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the new 28 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29:

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that Clause 29 be deleted.  Justification: It is a consequential amendment since a registrar of the Land Tribunals has been created.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: For record purposes, the whole structure has – (Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question for deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, having deleted that, the committee however proposes to insert a new clause tackling section 97.  Insert the new clause after Clause 29.  
"Section 97 of the Act is amended as follows_ 

97. The Registration of Titles Act is amended-
(a)	in section 2 by repealing the definition of “Registrar” and substituting the following definition in the appropriate place-

“Commissioner means the Commissioner for Land Registration appointed under the provisions of Section 4 of this Act, and includes, Deputy Commissioner, Assistant Commissioner, Principal Registrar of Titles, Senior Registrar of Titles or Registrar of Titles, District Registrar of Titles so appointed to the extent that he or she has been authorised to exercise or perform any power or duty conferred or imposed by the commissioner.”

b) In Section 4, by substituting the following Section_

4(1)	A Commissioner for Land Registration shall be appointed to have charge and control of the Office of Titles, and to exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred or imposed upon the Commissioner for Land Registration by this or any other Act.

2)	There may be appointed Assistant Commissioner for Land Registration and such Registrars of Titles as may be required for the purpose of this Act.

3)	The Commissioner may delegate all or any of his or her powers or duties under the provisions of this Act and may, at any time, revoke or vary such delegation; but such delegation shall not be deemed to divest the Commissioner of any of his or her powers and duties.

4)	The appointments referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section shall be made in accordance with the provisions of any written law relating to the appointment of persons to the public service.

(5)	Any action taken or done by the commissioner from 1987 up to the coming into force of this amendment in exercise of the functions conferred upon the Registrar of Titles under this Act or any other written law is hereby validated.

(6)	Any reference to the Registrar of Titles in this Act or any other written law shall mutatis mutandis, be a reference to the Commissioner.”

    (c) By repealing Sections 69, 70 and Paragraph (a) of Section 178.  

Mr Chairman, the justification is to validate the existing office of commissioners in the Land Registry, and provide for the repealing of section 70 of the Registration of Titles Act, which was left in the law inadvertently since 70 is related to the repealed section 69.  I beg to move.

MR WAGONDA: Mr Chairman, I seem to have a problem with sub-section 3, which refers to delegation. It is about a commissioner delegating all his powers.  I find this a bit disturbing because the commissioner of necessity must retain the power to revoke the delegation. Besides, there is a cardinal principal in management that whoever delegates takes responsibility for what the delegate does.  So I find it impossible to accept that he can actually delegate to the extent of completely divesting himself of responsibility and of the power to recall the delegation.  So, I would propose that the words “all or” be deleted so that the amended construction would read as follows:

“The commissioner may delegate any of his or her powers or duties under the provisions of this Act, and may at any time revoke such delegation, but such delegation shall not be deemed to divest the commissioner of any of his powers and duties”.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: May I put the question about his proposed amendment?  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, I am kind of at a loss and I need guidance because in the proposed 97(a), second paragraph, there is reference to section 4 of this Act, and when I look at the Land Act 1998, section 4 is talking about incidents and forms of tenure.  

MR RUHINDI: I need a bit of guidance, Mr Chairman.  I am wondering whether the section 4 of this Act could have been a transplant of the provisions of the Registration of Titles Act.  The chairperson needs to look at section 4 of the Registration of Titles Act; maybe there is a reference to that particular Act.

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, I need your help.  When I look at 97, is it referring to the Registration of Titles Act, and are all the amendments that the Committee is bringing forward in respect to the Registration of Titles Act?  If that is not the understanding, then I would request the members to put in the appropriate amendment; but that is what we are referring to.  If you look at the old Act, at the Registration of the Titles Act, there is only one clause.  Maybe the minister could come in.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, let us clean our law. The reference to section 4 is actually (RTA) Registration of Titles Act section 4, which establishes the office of Registrar of Titles and the office of Titles.  Now, the Committee wanted to put in this new law the nomenclature adopted by the Public Service, that the Registrar of Titles who used to exist before the restructuring and renaming of these offices is now called commissioner and in so doing, I think there was a transplant.

THE CHAIRMAN: Actually, what you are saying is that under the law, what you call Commissioner is the Registrar of Titles.  That is right but now you want to adopt the Public Service language and bury the proper title, which is under the Act because under the Act it is the Registrar of Titles which you want to drop and replace with commissioner.

Honourable member, did you mean that the Registration of Titles Act is where the Registrar is appointed?

PROF. LATIGO: Yes, but, Mr Chairman, under the Land Act, the Registration of Titles Act is amended by repealing that Section 69 and paragraph 6 of the section.  The only confusion here is that one can misunderstand that section to mean Section 4 in the main Act, and that is how I also misunderstood it.  That is why I wanted clarification, but if it is clear to the lawyers, then there is no problem.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think you had a point that the appointment was not under the Land Act but it is under the Registration of Titles Act. And I think they want to refer to the Registration of Titles Act rather than the Land Act.  So I think we can amend it so that it is clear.

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, I had not seen the section.  Would the member be happy if we deleted this Act and said that since the Act has been referred to at the beginning of 41, section 97 of the Act is amended as follows? So, deleting this Act puts the right meaning because this Act is the Land Act but the Act referred to under that section - maybe it is better if we further amend, since we have not voted on it, to bring the whole Act we are referring to.  So I beg to move that we delete this Act and insert the Registration of Titles Act, Mr Chairman. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay that is clear.  Now I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question that the new clause 29 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 30 be amended as follows:
Section 98 of the Act is amended-

(a) in sub-section (7) by substituting the following-

“(7) In each district, until a District Land Tribunal is established and commences to operate under this Act, magistrates' courts shall continue to have jurisdiction in regard to land matters as they had immediately before the commencement of this Act”.

(b)	in sub-section (8) by substituting the following- 
“(8)	Subject to the provision of sub-section (7) of this Act, on the coming into force of this Act, magistrates' courts shall cease to deal with new cases related to land disputes, either as an original court or as an appellate court”.

(c)	by inserting the following new sub-section after subsection 8- 

“(9) Pending the survey and registration of land used or set aside for use by the Government or by any other public body before the coming into force of this Act by, or to the orders of the commission, the land occupied or used by the Government or any other public body together with the reasonable cartilage to that land shall remain vested in the commission for the same estate or interest as immediately before the enactment of this Act”.

Justification: To harmonise the amendment with the Land (Amendment) Act, 2001, and to provide for the areas where the tribunals are not yet in place.

MR KIZIGE: Mr Chairman, I remember in earlier amendments, it was specified that for registered land, the magistrates' courts are the first courts to which these cases must be taken. But this amendment here seems to cover both registered and unregistered land.  I therefore propose that there should be an additional clause at the end of the statement in paragraph 2, "except for registered land", because those will continue to go to the magistrates courts.

DR EPETAIT:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wanted to give some information to my colleague for the clarification he is seeking.  We did say that the District Land Tribunals shall be the first courts of incidence for registered land. It is not magistrates' courts, so I do not know whether that can help you.  Thank you.

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, I want to help my friend, the member of the Committee.  That was the wish of the Committee, but the House in its own wisdom, by reinstating the ministers proposal in Clause 25 of the Amendment Bill, made the LC II’s as the first court of -(Interjection)- yes! The LC II were courts of first incidence, we passed it in 25.  The Committee had proposed LC I, it was defeated; so we went back to the proposal by the ministry.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, we are here talking about registered land and unregistered land. In the case of unregistered land, the LC II court is the court of first incidence, and that one was passed.  In the case of registered land, it is the District Land Tribunal, which is the court of first incidence, and we passed that amendment in the Committee.  Any appeals from the District Land Tribunal go to the High Court.  

MRS BWAMBALE: This was brought about by reinstating the earlier clause: The District Land Tribunal, in our discussion to harmonise the positions, was also free - and we have passed it this afternoon - to handle untitled and titled land provided the untitled land is not below 250,000/= currency point.  We passed it this afternoon.

THE CHAIRMAN: But suppose I want to start my case in the High Court?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Sir, the Constitution has an express provision that the High Court has got original powers.

MR RUHINDI: What happens in the case of unregistered land, which is on registered land?  Like in cases where you have freehold, mailo, then you have got what we call squatters, or bibanja holders. He or she may come to you and say, “I have a small piece of land, it is not registered but I have problems with the overall owner who has a title.” What do you do with this jurisdiction we are talking about?

MRS BWAMBALE: I do recall the committee discussing something like that. If you have a kibanja on titled land, you own it by certificate of occupancy. This is a conflict we are trying to cure. You cannot own it by title, no. You own it by having a certificate of occupancy. That is why section 30 is talking about lawful occupants and bona fide occupants. And those are the registerable interests that we have tried to labour to define in this amended law.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: The question is; if the lawful occupant has a dispute with a mailo owner who has a certificate, to which court do they go to resolve their conflict?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, once land is registered, whatever interest any person holds, it is an interest on registered land. So, the law that will apply will be the law regarding registered land. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, I want to put the question on clause 30.

MR MWESIGE: I see a contradiction, Mr Chairman, in (7) and (8). Subsections (7) and (8) are trying to say that until district land tribunals are established and they commence operation, the magistrates’ courts will continue to have jurisdiction in land matters.  But (8) says, “…on the coming into force of this Act, magistrates’ courts shall cease to deal with new cases related to land disputes, either as an original court or as an appellate court.”  

I see a difference between coming into force of the Act and the establishment of the land tribunals. If (8) is taken as it is, then there will be a gap. There will be a vacuum between the time when land tribunals are established and when magistrates’ courts cease to handle cases.  

I would rather amend (8) to say, “Subject to the provisions of subsection (7) of this Act, on the establishment of the district land tribunals, magistrates’ courts shall cease to deal with new cases related to land…” I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is now clear. The accusations will come when the tribunals are in place.  

MR KIWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If we carry the amendment as proposed by my honourable colleague, we shall only repeat ourselves, because (7) takes care of that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you are saying that there is no need for (8), even as amended. You are saying that in (7), it is clear that until the district land tribunal is established and commences to operate, the magistrates’ courts will continue. So, it is subject to the establishment and the commencement of work, and then after that the necessary process will start. So, you are saying, actually, that (8) should be deleted? Let us dispose of that one first.

MR KIZIGE: Mr Chairman, would it not make a difference if (8)came before (7)?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but if (7) can solve what is in (8) and (7), and it serves the purpose, why do you have two? He is saying that (7) caters for the circumstances envisaged under (7) and (8). This is what he is saying. Is it clear, honourable members?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, (8) is talking about new cases. When the district tribunals are established, magistrates’ courts cannot entertain new cases. It presupposes, therefore, that cases that are partly heard will continue to be entertained by the magistrates’ courts even when district tribunals are established for purposes of completion. That is what (8) is talking about.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now what is the position? What do we do? Because leaving (7) and (8), as hon. Kiwalabye said, will just be repeating what is covered there.  But I think you are bringing in another dimension, that cases which have already been handled - maybe they have heard evidence and so forth - should continue, because it will not be good to take these cases to the tribunals. 

So, I think there is a need to provide for pending cases that have not been disposed of by the courts, although the tribunals have commenced.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, there is an existing Land (Amendment) Act, Amendment 1, on the same matter, as a law of this country. Sir, it states as follows, “Where any case relating to a land dispute was pending before a magistrates’ court, prior to the coming into force of this Act, the case shall continue to be heard by the magistrates’ court until completion.”  So, there is a saving.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, in that case, as hon. Kiwalabye has pointed out, we may have to delete (8)and only stay with (7).  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 30 as amended agreed to

Clause 31:

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, the committee wishes to amend Clause 31 by substituting as follows:

“The Act is amended by substituting for the reference to 

    (a) ‘Tribunal’ or ‘Land Tribunal’ a reference to ‘District Land Tribunal’; 
    (b) ‘Registrar of Titles’, ‘Registrar’ or ‘District Registrar of Titles’ a reference to ‘Commissioner’.”  

Justification: To provide for the office of the Commissioner as the proper designated officer who heads the Land Registry, and to correct the typographical error in Clause 31 of the bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I would like to begin by thanking you for giving me the opportunity to give my minority view. Since I have been following you steadily up to the end, permit me to begin with Clause 28 of the bill, which is an amendment to Section 93 of the Act.

Mr Chairman, I have got two small amendments.  One is to be inserted immediately after section 93(1)(a), and the second one is to be inserted immediately after 93(2). These two small amendments are inter-related and have a common justification, so you cannot speak for one without speaking for the other.  

Immediately after 93(1)(a), I would like to propose the following clause to be added: “A person who evicts a lawful or a bona fide occupant of land, or destroys property without a court order”. 

Then 93(2), immediately thereafter, the following sub-section should be added: “A person convicted of an offence specified in paragraph (b) of sub-section (1) of this section is liable to a fine not exceeding 1,000 currency points, or imprisonment not exceeding three years, or both”. 

Justification: In simple terms, Parliament recently, unanimously, passed two resolutions urging Government to do something about the on-going summary evictions of bona fide occupants of land in Kawempe and Busega, which have led to the destruction of people’s properties, including the digging up of graves in very tragic circumstances.  

These are the people, Mr Chairman, whom you and I predominantly represent. They are poor and weak, and only a strong law can protect them. If the law we are passing is good, it should be able to protect the weak, the poor and the marginalised.  I beg to move.

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, I would like to appreciate and follow the honourable member’s amendment and be able to respond to it as a committee, but I am incapacitated, I do not have his amendment. Can he make it available?  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, it was circulated, but I can make available a substantive copy.

THE CHAIRMAN: The only problem, honourable members, is that we have passed 93, 94, 98, 30 and we have come to the end. I think after we had passed the committee’s amendment, that is when you should have stood up to bring in an amendment. But that does not mean that you have lost the amendments. Let us follow the proper procedure - finish whatever business we are supposed to finish, and then we go back and deal with that. 

We also have one under 11, and now you are bringing in this one, I think it would be neater to do it that way. What I remember is, yesterday we stood over one clause, which we must finish, and then we shall go back and recommit. Do you see the point, hon. Lukyamuzi? 

Procedurally, let us finish and then we go back. Yesterday we stood over Clause 15; therefore, it is not affected by the other procedure. But we shall come to yours and 11.

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, as you have rightly put it, we stood over Clause 15, which was relating to family land rights. This was after members had raised issues, which the committee could not immediately respond to, in the drafting that had been presented to this House.  

The committee went back and had wider consultations on the drafting, taking into account the points and questions raised by the honourable members. Therefore, I beg to read the new formulation as made by the committee on Clause 15 and the next one. The new one clause has been circulated. Maybe I would request the members to listen if they do not have the amendment

“The Principal Act is amended by inserting immediately before Section 40, the following new section-

39A(1)	Any person who ordinarily resides on land with his or her family and from which he or she derives sustenance shall, upon application, be registered on the land certificate of the said land as a family member.  

(2)	For the purpose of this section, a family shall be deemed to be a legal person represented by the proprietor, from whom they shall derive their corporate name.

(3)	In the registration of a family on the land certificate, the corporate name of the family shall be used, and the details of the family members shall appear in a schedule to be updated from time to time.

(4)	Upon registration of the land in issue, the Commissioner or the recorder, as the case may be, shall endorse the land certificate with the words ‘no survivorship’ and these words shall have the same effect as provided for in sections 54 and 55 of the Registration of Titles Act.

(5)	A spouse’s interest as a family member shall be automatically extinguished when the person is divorced under the laws of Uganda, notwithstanding the appearance of his or her name on the land certificate.

(6)	In this section – 

    (a) ‘children’ include adopted children;  
    (b) ‘family’ means a spouse, dependant children of majority age, children below the age of majority, or orphans below the majority age with interest in inheritance of the land on which they reside; and 
    (c) ‘Spouse’ means a husband or wife as defined under the laws of Uganda.”

Justification: This provision, Mr Chairman, would put every third party on notice as to whom to obtain consent from, for purposes of Section 40 of the Land Act. Furthermore, this provision protects family land from any form of land alienation other than that specified under Section 40 of the Land Act, even beyond the death of the family heads.

Subsection (1) of this amendment enables a family member to be registered on the land certificate as a family member. That is the nature of the interest. This registration will be done upon the application of the interested party.  

Subsections (2) and (3) are to facilitate the registration process. A corporate name is necessary to avoid having so many names to register. This corporate name is derived from the proprietor of the land from whom the other family interests are derived. A schedule will ease the updating of the land certificates.

Subsection (4) means that it is not lawful for any person, other than the registered proprietors, to transfer or otherwise deal with the property without the order of the High Court. This enhances the protection of the family land.

Subsection (5) provides for the extinguishing of a divorced spouse’s interest. This is to avoid the possibility of spouses accumulating interests in property through several marriages. (Applause).

Subsection (6) defines children to include adopted children, since these are children attained through the legal process of adoption.  The definition of the family is derived from Section 40 of the Act, which protects the interests of those family members. It also means it is only those members of the family that can get registered on the certificate of title, and when they cease to fall under that category, the provisions of this section cease to apply.

Mr Chairman, on Clause 15, page 8 and 9, the proposed amendments are therefore dropped. Justification: They are consequential to the amendments made on the previous section.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, according to your ruling on Thursday last week, the Committee and I consulted each other, and I also consulted Cabinet on this matter. The outcome of my consultation with the Committee is this new formulation - (Applause).

The outcome of my consultation and the collective responsibility of Cabinet, or the Executive generally, is the following: Sir, the Executive considers this amendment as fundamental to our economy, to our family relations and also to the customs and traditions that have bound the various tribes and nationalities in Uganda, which are the building blocks of this nation.

The property acquired by one of the spouses form part of the GDP for this country. It is tailored in with the flow of development credit and the whole financial system of the country.  Therefore, when it appears that there is no outright consensus on registering other members of the family on this property, then paralysis can be caused in the economy.

Secondly, Sir, if this proposal is to protect the family, there are other members of the family that need protection. For example, my mother who lives in my family, and she is a widow, my grandmother, the mother of my father, who is also dependant, derives her livelihood from the land where I, Baguma Isoke, with my wife Norah and our children, live and derive our livelihood too. Sir, there are also other people with a right to inheritance of this land. Land belongs to our ancestors. Land belongs to the contemporary society and land belongs to those to come after us, the children of our children. This land is utilized and protected not by the individual or the individual family but by a social collective, which is a family, an extended family, a clan, and a tribe. 

In the instance where Baguma Isoke and my wife Norah may not beget children, the children of my brother have a right of inheritance to this land, but they are not provided for! 

Further, Sir, in sub-clause (iv) there is a phrase in line three that says, “no survivorship”. “No survivorship” was not interpreted here but I have consulted, and Cabinet has come to a position that “no survivorship” means that in the event that the individuals registered on this property all pass away one by one; there will not be anybody in the clan system to claim inheritance to this property and this will become state property. This is the full meaning of “no survivorship”, within the provisions of sections 54 and 55 of RTA.  

Having said all this, and in addition to what I said on Wednesday and Thursday last week, the Executive is of the following view –(Interruptions)- and I seek your protection, Sir. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You are protected. Order!

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Sir, the Executive prays that this House appreciates that a national consensus has not yet been generated on this matter. In the interests of those this provision is seeking to protect, it would be better that we generate national consensus, so that the provision is sustainable and implementable –(Interjections)- I am about to end my submission. Sir, the Ministry –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: The Ministry of Lands carried out some consultations. The Law Reform Commission also carried out consultations. Because of the importance of this matter, the Executive now says that a national conference composed of Members of Parliament and both male and female representatives of the LC III sub-counties, town councils and divisions, would bring the views of the people, men and women and children, who are not contemplated in this proposal, on board. I so submit.  

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Allow me to most sincerely thank the honourable minister, Baguma Isoke. Sincerely speaking, as much as we want to protect our family members, it goes without saying that much still needs to be done. This amendment does not in any way cater for the interests of polygamous men like myself. It does not! Let me explain what I mean. 

It caters for family members on a piece of land, but I for instance have four wives. I am a Muslim and I am supposed to have four wives. If for three wives I am renting houses, it means they are also entitled to the piece of land for which I have a land title. And even the children in the other three houses that I am renting are supposed to be catered for –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, sorry to interrupt you. The problem we have now is that there is an amendment by the committee, as read by the vice-chairperson. When she finished reading it out then we heard the position of the Executive, as stated by the Minister. I think that before we go to discuss the details and the merits of the amendment, we have to resolve what to do. Let us clear this.

MRS BWAMBALE: I seek clarification, as a member of the committee. This report and the amendments are part of the documents of the House. When the committee first presented this amendment, the response of the minister was in essence that the Cabinet had no objection to the amended clause. They accepted the principle and said they thought it should not appear in the principal Act on Land, but should go into the anticipated Domestic Relations Bill. Now the honourable minister has shifted goalposts! The Committee, in coming up with this amendment, sat with the minister over the weekend and harmonized positions with him. We are totally embarrassed to see him reach the Floor of the House and then shift posts. Can I seek clarification?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, clarification from whom, the minister?

MRS BWAMBALE: From the minister, Sir. And I request that you allow other members who were in similar consultations to fire further clarifications to the minister.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. For record purposes, I would like to put certain things straight. I am a Member of the Natural Resources Committee and since Thursday when we stood over this particular clause, the Committee on Natural Resources has never sat - (Applause). So, I want to express my surprise that the chairperson of the Committee, with due respect, is saying the Committee consulted widely over the matter. I am really surprised. When did the Committee sit to consult on that particular clause since we last stood over it?

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, either there is lack of communication or the honourable member has been absent for a very long time. He did not even sign the report because he informed us officially, through our clerk, that he was sick. We know he has been sick and sympathize with him. 

However, the minister will bear me witness, and I want to be honest and frank. On Friday we sat with the minister, with Eng. Kaweesi as the chairperson, myself as the vice-chairperson, the Legislative Counsel and all the interested members, in a consultation meeting because the issue had been referred to us. This meeting was advertised on both notice boards at the front and back reception areas. We can only request the honourable member of the Committee to excuse us because we executed duties he delegated to us when he appointed us chair and vice-chair.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, a simple clarification. I did state that I consulted the Committee over the weekend and I also consulted Cabinet, for collective responsibility. I said the outcome of the consultation with the Committee is this text, but this was not all that we had to consult about. There were other issues, particularly the jurisdiction of land tribunals regarding the currency unit and their being courts of first instance for handling titled land. 

The Committee knew the Executive position right from the beginning, and really the family members are citizens of this country. The mothers, if I may say so, the wives, the children or the dependants, are our people. They are not strangers, they are not foreigners. The Executive wants to make a good law when there is a national consensus and that much I communicated to the Committee on Friday. That is the clarification.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I must say I am very shocked about the minister’s statement. In one instance you agree with us and in the other you turn round in a funny way to say no! I would like to send a message to the women of Uganda that the people they elect, and the Government they elected, are not sensitive to their plight. 

The Minister knows very well that the Domestic Relations Bill, the draft that used to be, has even failed to come through to Cabinet because there was lack of national consensus on several issues including land, the polygamous people and others. Now, the minister is saying that we should organize a national conference –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Who leaked information? As you know, when we are discussing Bills in Cabinet, those matters are confidential. Is the honourable member in order to give us those who agreed and those who disagreed with it, without giving us her source of information? Can she indicate to us the person who leaked this information? Matters discussed in Cabinet are of a confidential nature. Is she in order to stand here and mention what took place without even indicating the source of this information?

THE CHAIRMAN: Could you clear this, honourable member?

MRS MASIKO: Yes, Mr Chairman. I said that at one point there was a draft of the Domestic Relations Bill, which was supposed to be presented to this Parliament. However, up to today it has not been presented and this is because consensus has not been generated. 

If he is disputing that, then he could tell this House where that Bill is. There was a draft of it at one time - and bring it to this House - (Applause). That is what I meant, honourable chairperson. Mr Chairman, I am a little perturbed -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: She has substantiated her claim. Proceed. 

MRS MASIKO: I am perturbed about the suggestion that there should be a national conference to generate consensus about this amendment. What consensus do you hope to derive from this national conference? One, you are talking of Members of Parliament who are here; and for sure if you want a vote to be taken here, we can do it. If you want to generate consensus, we can do it here.

Two, you have suggested that we bring in LC III chairpersons. Why? All the LC III chairpersons in Uganda are men; we may have one or two women. Two women only out of 700 plus chairpersons of LC III! If you men are here intimidating us women Members of Parliament, what will happen in that conference? Will two poor rural women come and try to put their case? I am sure you will not –(Mr. Ekanya rose_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we have to proceed with the business before us. We have an amendment read to us by the chairperson, and we have heard Government’s position. The decision as to what to do with this amendment must be made here. The only implication is, do we proceed or do we not, but the decision as to whether to accept the amendment or not is ours.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to suggest that we make that decision here and now. Let members make a bold step, stand up and be counted, and we know which side you fall. If there is a national -(Interjections) 

Lastly, Mr Chairman, if we are going to seek for consensus, I want to suggest that we stay over this amendment until consensus is generated on this very clause, and then we shall come back and vote on it. We should stay the amendment until the national conference and consensus is generated. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it your move that we stay this?

MRS MASIKO: There are two things. We should debate and decide this matter here and now. However, should the Government insist that they want to generate consensus, we should stay over the whole amendment until the consensus is generated.

THE CHAIRMAN: I have said, hon. Masiko, that the decision to postpone or not to postpone this is ours.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. First of all, I would like to say that I am one of the members who are very sympathetic to the cause of women in this House. Not only am I sympathetic, but I am also known to love the women so much, especially those in this House, and I am not ashamed of it. 

Turning to this amendment, 39(a) is proposing that any person who ordinarily resides on land with his or her family, from which he or she derives sustenance should, upon application, be registered on the land certificate of the said land as a member.

Mr Chairman, I have a father who owns land, and I last resided there, ordinarily, and derived sustenance from it over 20 years ago. Does that mean that I totally lost interest in the land? (Interjection). No. That being the case, it is the more reason that this amendment must be stayed until we get national consensus over the matter, and in particular deal with it when we are dealing with the law relating to domestic relations. That is my submission.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, one thing I need to note, before I put the point of procedure, is that we should stop turning this matter into a women-men affair. That kind of confrontation is actually not quite healthy in this debate. Worth observing, because I have been sitting in this House for sometime now, is that the Minister of Lands one time came and said, “Let this matter await the Domestic Relations Bill, which is before Cabinet”. Does that mean that before it went to Cabinet there was no generated consensus? That is a question I have. 

Another thing, I thought we would strike a fair compromise between the submission of the chairperson of the committee and the position of the Minister. Mr Chairman, we could agree on principles. However, putting this particular provision in the framework of the general law of the country needs better drafting and building.  

Let me give an example. I looked at the issue of divorce. I know for sure that it is not only the divorced persons who could cease having an interest in the family property, but also the separated persons. If a lady has been separated from the family for some time, under the succession Act, she ceases to have interest. These would actually have to be built in: issues of sustenance, issues of creation of legal entity, and issues of what hon. Wandera is saying. All those need to be considered.

We could agree in principle that, yes, we want this provision. I am not one of those who would actually say that we should wait for the Domestic Relations Bill. We need to resolve this matter as quickly as possible. There is no other time, and I believe that when this provision is finalised, the DRB will be here tomorrow. I believe this is the one that is holding up that particular Bill. Why this procrastination? 

I move, as a matter of procedure, that we should agree in principle. We need this provision and we should detail the Attorney General or a select committee, to work out a proper law, building it within the framework of the laws of Uganda. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: In view of what you are saying, should we proceed with considering this amendment? You see, we were supposed to deal with this Bill last week. We adjourned because this had to be considered, and now what procedure do you propose?

MR RUHINDI: The procedure I am proposing is that we agree in principle that we need this provision, and form a committee or detail the Attorney General's office and perhaps a few other colleagues to handle the drafting of this particular provision. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, what will agreeing in principle serve? We agreed in principle and we are dealing with the law. How are you going to write this principle? 
Will it be a general debate? I think we need either to pass the amendments or otherwise. But agreeing in principle, definitely, will not amend the law. That will postpone it and, therefore, you are may be agreeing with the Executive that we think about this matter. But I think the decision is ours. The bill came from the Executive; it is now our document. We are the ones to deal with it. So, the responsibility is ours.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, it will not be our first time to detail the Attorney General in this House.

THE CHAIRMAN: Therefore are you in support of the minister’s postponement?

MR RUHINDI: No, I am not in support of the minister going to cause a conference. I am only talking of even an adjournment. It can even be an adjournment of 10 minutes.  My worry - Mr Chairman, I have brought it to your attention.  We can go step by step. I do not know whether we shall finish because the issues raised are not for purposes of getting consensus from the public. Most of them are legal. A reflection of some of these provisions in respect of the other provisions of the law, are they in conflict or not, and that kind of thing could be avoided by a small team of honourable members looking at this and coming back with a redrafted provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what he is saying is that we set up a select committee to examine this matter   -(Interruptions). This is his proposal; I am just interpreting to you. This is what he says, and therefore, it means we shall not be able to pass this law until maybe the report comes. Or we pass the law minus this provision.  That is the thing. Is that what you want?

MS AMONGI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I think when the minister stood up last week to say that the DR Bill will come very soon and that this particular provision would be there, he knew that this provision had generated consensus, and at the Cabinet level they had a position and the position is that it should be shifted. Therefore, whether we defer it today or not, if the decision of the Cabinet and the minister is that it should not support this provision, it will remain so. Therefore, for me, considering the view of the Minister of last week that supported this to be deferred, and shifting goal posts today, I would rather be defeated or not defeated today and I know that this is the position. I would go with this and if the minister says that it will paralyse the economy because of the type of land tenure system and ownership and all that, who will paralyse the economy? The women who till? Over 70 of the people who till this land are women. Now, if these are women who are supposed to be protected, do you expect them to riot? These are the labourers on this land! I do not agree with the assertion that if you pass this, it will paralyse the economy. It is the women who till the land, it is them who weed, it is the women who produce and, everything.

Two, the issue of national consensus: I want to be clarified. What is representation? In a democracy, representation means there are certain people who have been delegated to come and make decisions on their behalf -(Applause). Now, if that were the case, we would have never made all these laws that we have been making. We would have been deferring them for consensus. But the purpose that Members of Parliament are delegated by the majority of Uganda to be experts on their behalf is good enough for you to generate consensus on their behalf! I do not agree with the assertion that we wait for a national consensus. Let us make a decision now; let us be counted; let us be defeated if we are going to be. I thank you.

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the question be put.

THE CHAIRMAN: The question is that I put a question to the proposed amendment.

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, very pertinent additional questions were raised to the mover of the amendment such as our definition of "survivorship" including divorce and excluding separation and others, and the movers of the motion have not been given an opportunity to answer those queries.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, as a mover, you want to answer the queries and then I put the question?

MRS BWAMBALE: Yes, Mr Chairman. I appreciate the contribution of the members. We shall not respond to all the questions except four. 

One, on "survivorship" which is included in the amendment, I would like to read from the Registration of Titles Act, which guided us; Section 54. The effect of insertion of the word "no survivorship" in the margin: 

“Upon the transfer of any land, and upon the lease of any freehold land to two or more persons as joint proprietors with the words “no survivorship” endorsed thereon, the Registrar shall enter such words in the memorial of such a transfer or lease, and also upon any certificate of title issued to such joint proprietors pursuant to such transfer and signed his name thereto.

Two or more joint proprietors of any land or of any such a lease may by written under their hands –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, what we need, what is the significance of inserting  "no survivorship"?

MRS BWAMBALE: It is the last one. In any case, after such words have been signed - this is the significance – by the registrar, whether under this or any preceding section, it shall not be lawful for any persons other than the proprietors registered to transfer or otherwise deal with the property without the order of the High Court.  

Members were saying that after all those on the title have died, for example, what happens to the piece of land? Does it revert to the state? No, it does not revert to the state; it remains in the corporate name and, therefore, governed by the inheritance laws, governed by your will, governed by the traditions and customs. That is what we had in mind. Can I go to the next? (Interjection) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order!  Please, allow her to complete.

MRS BWAMBALE: The next one was, why did we omit “Separated”? “Separated” was in the first amendment.  “Separated” is not included in the definition of the land we are talking about. When you are separated, you are no longer ordinarily residing on the land and deriving sustenance. So, it would have been self-defeating to define the land we are referring to, and again include “separated”.  That also answers hon. Wandera. In addition, the definition of a family, yes, that I of majority age, I still have inheritance interest in that land, on which other people are registered, you are not catering for me. No, we are catering for you by not referring to you because you are not ordinarily residing there and you are not deriving sustenance from there, but your traditions and customs accessed you in accordance with how you inherit your land -(Interruptions). Finally, - can I be protected?

THE CHAIRMAN: You are protected, hon. Member.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much. Finally, hon. Latif Sebaggala, who declared himself a polygamist, and as Members of Parliament we hail that because traditionally it is okay. The question is answered like this; that actually this law even caters for the situation which hon. Latif Sebaggala pointed out. If such a wife is ordinarily residing and deriving sustenance, it does not say one spouse; it could be more than one. So, we took care of that. His interest is already catered for, especially in the justification.  

But hon. Ruhindi says there are technicalities of drafting.  Mr Chairman, how do we deal with technicalities of drafting in this House? How have we dealt with it before? We have gone section by section, sub-section by sub-section and the members who do not agree with that type of drafting have stood on the Floor of this House and we have done such amendments and improvements in this House. So, to say that this very one should be subjected to further scrutiny, technically, is to leave the decision, as you have rightly put it, to this House to vote on it. But we deplore the Members that given the clarifications we have given, this clause is for you; it is for the marginalised; it is to improve the socio-economic situation and make the family more united, more focused and more productive. I beg to clarify. Thank you very much.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have to resolve this matter in such a way that it brings harmony in this country. In my constituency, in my own sub-county, for the last four years, I have been losing a woman. Women have been dying because of land and property management resulting from death. I therefore would like to propose a way that can bring domestic peace and the way forward. 

I had initially supported wholistically the proposal of the chairperson, but when the minister said that if all these three people died - God forbid- in a car accident, the land leaves the clan members.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the procedure?

MR EKANYA: That is very dangerous. So, Mr Chairman, we need to harmonise the proposal of the chairperson, which I supported, with the one of the minister. Therefore, I propose that this matter be stood over as hon. Ruhindi has proposed, and then we discuss it as the minister has proposed. I beg to propose.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of procedure.  There was a motion on the Floor and it was supported; that you put the question.

THE CHAIRMAN: I had not put the question. It was proposed but the chairperson said, before I do, let her make clarification.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, now that the chairperson has given us her submission, I now move a motion that you put the question.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, now I want to put the question -(Interruption).

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Sir, we shall proceed to decide, but before we do so, we should not give a signal to the people we represent and lead by deciding either way. I would hate a situation where Parliament would defeat this motion because that will give an impression that this matter cannot be brought up, and we are informed that elsewhere the consultative process is in place. 

Mr Chairman, I am really persuading the chairperson of the Committee to rather withdraw this motion other than take an unfavourable decision on it.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, this is a long-standing matter which somehow generates emotions every time it comes for discussion. To me, the matter need not generate emotions.  I think, Sir, before we decide either way, we should be sure in our minds that we are going to give this matter a decent send off. 

In the format in which it has been brought before us, a number of people might decide against this matter, not because they disagree with it, but because they disagree with the format in which it is brought. I think this is fundamental. I do not think, Sir that it would be doing ourselves any justice if we were to rush and decide this matter in the manner in which it has been brought. 

I therefore propose, and very sincerely, that this matter be sent before a small group of experts who should recast this motion and then bring it before us with clear explanation as to why it should be there. Let me explain.  Matters of land are not necessarily only legal. Matters of land affect a lot of laws. For example, an area affected by the provision, which is now brought before us, is the matter of succession. How do you handle it when you bundle it up under this new motion? The matter must be clear in our minds. There are lawyers who deal with succession who could assist us. I would propose, Sir, and very sincerely - (Interruption)

MR NSHIMYE: Mr Chairman, I have been trying to catch your eye many times. But I agree with the speaker on the Floor, because we need to make a law that fully protects the people we want to protect. For example, the Committee does not seem to have addressed the situation where a man buys a piece of land, registers in the name of the company and then builds a residential house - be it commercial - where sustenance would be coming from, but when the property belongs to the company. I do not know how the member families are going to register as members of a family of this company. So this is a situation that would avoid the protection that we intend to give to these family members.  So I agree with the member on the Floor that this needs further re-thinking.

MR WACHA: I am proposing that we choose a small Committee of lawyers in this House, give them up to tomorrow afternoon. I really do not mind whichever way it goes so long as it comes before this House in a manner which is reflective of the possible consequences. It is absolutely necessary that we should understand what we are accepting or rejecting. I still insist in my proposal that you appoint a small Committee, give them up to tomorrow 2.00 O’clock to report to this House with a motion which reflects our intention and the intent of the people who are proposing this motion. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, you see, this same proposal was made, I think, by hon. Ruhindi. You were not here and they rejected it. Now I do not know what we should really do, because the decision -(Interruption)

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, hon. Ruhindi’s proposal was not put to a vote. So it has not been rejected.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, if I had put it - in fact it should be a sort of select Committee, not to do it in one or two hours but to study it and make - that was his view. He said, let us pass the principle but let us again have this matter. So, honourable members, what do we do?

MRS BWAMBALE: The Committee, Mr Chairman, is in agreement with hon. Ben Wacha’s proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it is our decision now.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Honourable Members, this government has taken deliberate steps to handle problems afflicting women in this country -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: This is not – you see if you prejudice – “spouse” has no gender. It is common.

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: I agree. In addition, it has also dealt with matters affecting men, and therefore, it is concerned with spouses. But what is now afflicting you is this, that when we say the matter is being addressed under the Domestic Relations Bill, we have not given you a timeframe. I think that is causing you anxiety. I have been discerning these matters and also discussing very, very closely with many of you. I want to make a proposal that when this matter is postponed, we have a timeframe, we go back to the timeframe and we say the Government brings you a timeframe in which to bring the Domestic Relations Bill.  That is going to be much more realistic. 

Let me also finally say that whenever you make a bill which is very contentious and becomes an Act, it does not work on the ground. It is defied with impunity and it causes loss of life. I entreat you to remember the advice that let us make a law where there is more consensus and where we have a timeframe. That is my advice to you. As you know, I am a good listener. We are all anxious, but we must not rush it. What has been missing is the timeframe and since we are due to go to Gulu on Wednesday - we have a Cabinet meeting - we shall now demand that a timeframe be given –(Interjections)- from ourselves, so that we have a timeframe for bringing the Domestic Relations Bill –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman and the Prime Minister.  There are two positions of Government as per now on this issue. There is the position that the Minister brought on of a national conference, and now you are bringing the position of Domestic Relations Bill. Before we think about the timeframe, which position should we go with? That is the clarification I want.

MRS BIGIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am really confused and I need this clarification from the hon. Prime Minister. When the minister stood here on Thursday and said they were waiting for the Domestic Relations Bill, members felt that this thing has been long overdue. We thought we should be able to bring this issue up under this law. But today, I am even more suspicious that this particular clause is not being considered in the Domestic Relations Bill, because of what he has just said. 

Therefore, to me, that would be postponing a problem. We would rather pronounce ourselves on it and know whether the women of Uganda are being taken seriously, or not. But this question of postponing is really confusing.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I was here when the Land Act was passed. It has not been implemented fully simply because of the way it was passed. We are trying to amend it but we are still doing it in the spirit we did – I was sitting there where hon. Biira is, and I saw what happened. We have failed to implement that Act because of the way we passed it; it has failed miserably.  

Now we are amending the law and again we have this spirit, which I see among you now; I really see a serious problem. Are you saying that you are going to give us a timeframe after your Cabinet meeting tomorrow? Instead of passing it in the way – because some people willsay, “I was here, I was seated where hon. Biira is, we passed it but I think the ministers failed to implement it.” So, what do we do?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Let me conclude by reiterating the fact that those who have lost faith in Government should not. A lot of good work has been done. I want to inform you that when the minister stood here to speak, he was reflecting government’s position. Even when you mention conferences, they have a timeframe.  If you pass this Bill when there is so much conflict, it will be a Pyrrhic victory. A victory won at an excessive price is not a victory. 

I entreat you to defer this matter and we shall try to get a timeframe for bringing a wholesome Bill called the Domestic Relations Bill, which will grapple with matters that are causing a lot of disharmony. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we have before us the Land (Amendment) Bill, which is supposed to amend the Land Act. There is some tension that I sense here. My view is that we should postpone this for two weeks, and we set a date for when it should come back. This will help you to reconcile your differences. We shall dispose of this Bill on a date which I will give. This matter should be dealt with before Parliament is prorogued. 

Therefore, it will come in the first week of May. That is my view. So, you go and reconcile. Even if the Cabinet does come up with anything, we have to dispose of this amendment.  Otherwise, if I put it to the vote now, as some of you insist, we may have a divided vote on this issue –(Interjection)- defeat what?

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I seek your clarification. When this Bill was brought to this House, there was a very urgent need to address the problems that related to it, the ones hindering the Act from being implemented. On this Floor we have had two motions from members expressing concern about the way our people are being treated in the absence of this law. We have had a minority report on this Bill, again addressing the same issue. 

If we keep on postponing this, it means the whole Bill will not be implemented until only one item is handled. But there are so many concerns in this Bill, Mr Chairman. In fact, if I take it from the Leader of Government Business and the minister, this contentious issue on the Floor is not given away outright. We are going to reconsider this amendment. 

However, let us pass the law so that we save our people who are suffering, who are being evicted, who are sleeping outside simply because this law is not implemented. Our people out there are awaiting our decision here. All those disputes are there because the tribunals are not in place; they are not functioning, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, I have been listening to your wise counsel and I accept your proposal – (Applause)- that we harmonise in the interest of teamwork in this House, respect of the authority of the Executive, and our response to the demands of the families we represent, I accept. Thank you.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, the principle of postponement is acceptable, but the timeframe we are giving this matter is not practical for the Executive. It is too short. Really I have said much about Government intention to provide for some of what is here and much more. My statement of Wednesday and that of today are not in conflict. I did mention last week that Cabinet considered the principles behind the other law - (Interruption). 

THE CHAIRMAN: We are not debating now. Honourable members, this bill was printed on 21 June 2002 and then it had its First Reading. We have considered it, and we are dealing with it now.  When we have an adjournment, it will be an adjournment so that we come back and consider this bill. 

So, you cannot say that it is a short period. Short period for what? Because the bill was tabled, we are processing it, and of course subsequent amendments can be brought and another bill can be brought. So, I am just suggesting that we adjourn this matter up to the first week of May, and we do business then.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, for us to arrive at a compromising position, I would propose that a special committee be set up. Because if we leave it open-ended to the Executive, even the two weeks we are proposing – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I have not left it to the Executive. I am just adjourning the House for us to organise ourselves. It is not for the Executive.

MRS OGWAL: Okay, fine.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I strongly support the view that the timeframe you have advocated for be granted. Save that as the mover of the minority report, I would like to know the status quo of my amendments - (Laughter). Are they equally carried on?

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, before I really finalise this matter, is it your view that I set up a select committee?

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Chairman, I totally agree with you. We should select a committee of wise men and women, and I think two weeks will be enough to come up with a compromise, because this is a contentious issue and we need to generate consensus so that we do not really hurt our women.

MAJ. KATIRIMA: Mr Chairman, these two weeks should be able to give us time to arrive at a consensus. As a matter of procedure, while you have the prerogative to appoint this select committee, I wanted to propose to you that first of all, you call for volunteers among the members. Two, you also use your discretion to appoint a committee which should not exceed 10 people, so that they consider this matter.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, if this is the view, then I will not definitely select it here. I will go and think about it in depth. I have heard the different views, I will combine them so that you can go and look at this.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would be inclined to think that the committee handling this subject has already done a lot of work; they have the background and they have the current issues. I thought that you would strengthen it by adding some other people you think may be of help to that particular committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: I can get some members from the sectoral committee, but not necessarily all of them, and then get other members from here, to form up the team. So, is there a motion now that we set up a select committee? Who is proposing it formally?

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we form a select committee on this contentious issue. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, of how many people?  

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, I sense that this is a very contentious issue. I am of the view that the composition of the committee should have an equal number of men and women, so that the views of the women are carried. 

I have seen the members who are on the committee, and the women appear to be few. I would wish to propose that we increase the number of women.  Please, we better take this seriously. We should increase the number of women, so that the views of the women can be carried in this committee, because that is where we are having a problem, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: You know, honourable member, this select committee is not going to be executive. It is not going to decide for the House. They will just make a report, and then we look at it and then decide. And I think, as members said, let us not take this as if it is a women issue. If you do, then you may prejudice it.  

Therefore, have we agreed upon 15 members? We have agreed on 15. Okay, now I put the question on setting up a select committee.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: We should resume dealing with this bill on 5 May 2003. We shall have to adjust our programme as earlier agreed on. So, we shall set up the select committee tomorrow, or the other day, and then members can embark on this work.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I am really of the considered view that even having set up a committee, the terms of reference are very important. There are some of us who think that the principles embedded in the proposed amendment are not necessarily principles under land law.  

So, we should consider whether that committee should decide whether this is the proper forum where the amendment should be accommodated, or whether –(Interjections)- yes, the principles in the proposed amendment are more of domestic relations and succession, than land law. So, I would propose that we agree on the terms of reference.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we should set up the select committee and we get the names. When these names are read out, then somebody will have thought of the terms of reference. Between now and the date when the names will be announced, you think about the terms of reference of this committee, because now, it may not be possible to rationally draw out the terms of reference.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, you did not give me a reply. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Reply to what?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I stated that you have already alerted me to be ready.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we cannot now deal with this.  It will be after.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Much obliged.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the bill entitled, “The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2003” and passed clauses 1 to 31, and referred one proposed amendment from the Committee of Natural Resources to a select committee, for two weeks.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Now we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 April 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)








 


 


