Wednesday 14th April, 1999.     

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
  
PRAYERS 
  
 (The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.
 
The House was called to order.   
  
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mr. Akika Othieno):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, permit me to take this opportunity to inform the House about the development on Lake Albert that has of late hit newspaper reports but before I do so, permit me to take this opportunity to categorically refute the allegation that came out in The New Vision of yesterday to the effect that His Excellency the President grilled me over the matter of the pollution of Lake Albert.  

That was categorically wrong and irresponsible reporting. I do not know what is happening to the press of late, but I wish that they could report what is correct and not just misinform the public for the sake of making money.  In the quest for making money, I believe people or Ugandans as such should be correctly informed. So, I was not grilled in any way and the President never said anything about Lake Albert.  What simply happened was that the Chairman of Nebbi District pointed out the development on Lake Albert and the Albert Nile. So, permit me to give background information about the pollution on Lake Albert and Albert Nile. 

There have been recent reports in the press about the pollution of the waters of Lake Albert which have caused concern, fear and panic in the public, especially for the communities around the Lake, living in the districts of Masindi and Nebbi.  The public reports and statements have speculated that the problem in Lake Albert could have risen from oil sippages or from massive fish poisoning by unscrupulous fishermen.  The Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment through the Directorate of Water Development responded to the concern as follows:-

1.  The Ministry established a multi disciplinary, multi institutional team of experts to investigate the problem and causes and advise the Government on follow-up action.  The team is composed of environmental experts and water scientists from NEMA, the Directorate of  Water Development, the Fisheries Department and Farm Development Department of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.   The team is coordinated by the Commissioner for Water Resources Management of the Directorate of Water Development, under the  Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment.

2. Three monitoring teams have been sent to Lake Albert at regular intervals since November 1998 when the problem first emerged.  The most recent visit was early in April 1999, where water samples were collected and analyzed to establish and quantify the problem scientifically. 

3. Monitoring is continuing as a routine activity of the Directorate of Water Development as part of their Water Resources Management mandate.  Now, what is the problem?

From the above investigations, it has been established that the problem of Lake Albert which has been manifested through severe de-coloration of the water, foul smell, unpleasant taste and fish kills have been caused by factors related to the national aging process of the Lake.  Over the lifetime of the lake, the rivers feeding it such as river Semliki, river Muzizi, Wambabya and Waiga have carried silt and organic materials into it from the surrounding land.  Poor sanitation practises in the villages surrounding the lake and in fishing villages does also contribute nutrients into the lake.  The materials have accumulated and their abundant availability is now triggering seasonal explosive growths of minute microscopic plants called algae.  This process by which the lake is enriched with plant nutrients is called eutrophication.  

How eutrophication is affecting Lake Albert:
The effects of severe eutrophication can render a water body unsuitable for many uses.  The explosive growth of the minute plants gives a greenish colour to the lake water.  Another natural phenomena called mixing or overturn worsens the change in colour initiated by the algae -  Mixing is the process by which lake segments and other materials which accumulate at the lake bottom are stirred and dispersed in the water body.  

In the case of Lake Albert, energising by wind is the cause of this mixing.  The subsequent death and decay of algae imparts foul smell and bad taste to the water.  The decay of the algae consumes so much of the oxygen dissolved in the water that fish and other living organism suffocate and die.  Further, fish-gills result from clogging of the fish gills with slimy algae substances and from the fish consuming toxic algae or toxic secretions of the algae in water.  

Eutrophication upsets the entire lake eco-system and affects virtually all population of all living organisms in the water body.  The outflow from lake Albert contains the dead algae and fishes as well as some of the sediment load from the Victoria Nile.  This is the reason for similar effects as described above being reported in the areas of Panyimur and Pakwach around Nebbi district and extensive complaints have come as far as Arua as well.  The discolouration, smell and algae secretion in the water that come about as a result of eutrophication render the water unattractive and unfit for human use.  Algae secretion in the water may cause skin irritation when the water is used for bathing.  After passing of the explosive algae growth, the water clears and once more becomes fit for human use. This may take about a month or so.  

The phenomenon of eutrophication is not unique to Lake Albert alone.  It ranks as one of the most widely spread water quality problems around the world.  At certain times of the year, lake Victoria develops a similar problem of dirty, green appearance and exudes a fishy, nauseating smell.  At such times, dead fish may be cited littering parts of the shores of Lake Victoria.  

Technical Evidence to Explain the Phenomena:
Lake Albert and some of the rivers feeding it are on the National Water Resources Monitoring network operated by the Directorate of Water Development.  Scientific data collected from the lake in the recent months when compared against historic measurements made in the 1960s and 70s show a clear change in the lake characteristics.  A selected few parameters presented in Table (1) serves to demonstrate this change.  The parameters are seiche depth transparency, chlorophyll and nutrient concentration and the Table is there. Those who have the paper I am reading from can go through it and more especially, we intend to benefit more from those with a science background.  

So, seiche depth transparency is a measure -  these are some of the definitions - seiche depth is a measure of the penetration of sunlight into water.  The more dirty or turbid the water, the less the penetration and the lower the value of seiche depth.  The Table that you see above there shows that the seashore depth transparency or penetration of light has dropped from five metres in 1963 to less than three metres in 1999.  The measurement of chlorophyll provides a means for quantifying the density of photosynthetic algae suspended in the water column.  The more photosynthetic algae present, the higher the chlorophyll value.  That Table shows that each value has increased from 3.5 grammes per litre in 1978 to 56 grammes per litre in 1999. This is a very big increase.  The Table also shows the plant nutrients such as phosphorous and nitrogen that are on the increase on Lake Albert.  In addition to the above quantitative descriptions, there are key biological features to detect eutrophication on a lake based on the types and extent of algae growth and oxygen concentration at different depths of the lake.  

Now, what can be done to address the problem of this eutrophication? One; the Lake Albert problem is a natural occurrence but the process has nevertheless been accelerated by human activity on land surrounding the lake and the rivers feeding into it.  Practical steps that can be taken to slow this trend are those that are geared towards reducing export of silt and other materials from surrounding land.  For example, through catchment afforestation, improving range management and also soil and water conservation and proper sanitation practices.  

Solution number 2; Lake Albert is an international fresh water resource shared by Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo and is part of the River Nile system.  Any conservation endeavours by Uganda cannot meet much success without active participation of the riparian states, particularly the Congo.  It is desirable at some stage, therefore, that the two neighbours work out a basin wide conservation plan.  However, if possible, this may have to be initially started on the Ugandan half of the catchment, more especially given the present happenings.  So, this is an approach that personally I may not rely on so much, given the present trend.  However, on our own, we could also cooperate with the riparian states that share the waters, especially those in the Nile.

Three, the public is informed that the situation is not all that desperate.  The lake through natural processes will cleanse itself with time through the Albert Nile outflow.   

Four, improved land management in the catchment will reduce substantial silt and the nutrient loading into the lake and this will control algae blooms.  There are no short-term measures like clearing the lake of the algae.  

Now, what are our next steps in the Ministry of Water, Land and Environment? One, the team of scientists and environmentalists will continue to carry out field surveys all around the lake to quantify and document the extent of the problems and major sources for concrete recommendations on time bound actions for the different stake holders. Two, the Directorate of Water Development will continue to monitor the water quality and provide the information to the public and the affected communities to take the necessary precautions. Three, visits will be made, including those of political leaders, to explain to the affected districts the nature of the problem.  The Minister of Water - that is my senior Colleague - myself and the technical staff were supposed to leave this morning for Lake Albert but because there is a seminar on the management of Lake Victoria Environment Project which is ending today in Jinja, we are unable to leave.  But anytime next week, we shall leave, both the political leadership of the Ministry and the technical staff, to further assess the magnitude of that problem.
Now, what are the long term measures to be taken by the Government? The Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment will work closely with other relevant Ministers, especially that of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to do the following:-
1.  Take practical measures to implement the Environment Statute of 1995 and the Water Statute of 1995, both of which have full provisions for the protection and management of the environment and water resources in the country.

2.  Disseminate widely the findings and follow up the implementation of the Uganda Water Action Plan which, among other things, identifies key water resources management issues in the country and make recommendations including those on the role of different levels of Government and communities in the water resources management and protection.

3.  Through the on-going water sector reform studies, we shall examine and indicate actions for setting up water catchment administration, working closely with the affected district administrations and NEMA, given the decentralisation setting we now have. We cannot do much without collaborating closely with the district administrations.

4.  We shall also work closely with the concerned local Governments and donors to improve sanitary facilities in the communities surrounding the lake with special emphasis on fishing villages.  

5.  The Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment will work closely with other relevant Ministries, especially with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to identify key sources of pollution loads including fertilizers going into the lake and stop or reduce them as appropriate.  Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and NEMA have to focus on water and land management and protection of the eco-systems.  

The idea here is that, we feel there is heavy usage of fertilizers in the districts of Masindi and Hoima, especially among the tobacco growers; Kinyara Sugar Works and also maybe a bit of tea and if I may tell you, there are some rivers around, say, Kinyara area that actually flow into Lake Albert.  So, they could be causing a problem in the sedimentation in Lake Albert.

6.  To continue dialogue and cooperation with other river Nile co-riparian on short and long-term measures and programmes for integrated seismology management development and use of the river Nile waters with special attention to major lakes in Uganda which are the major natural reservoirs of the Nile system.  There is need to extend the current efforts of Lake  Victoria to cover the other major lakes especially Lake Kyoga and Lake Albert and the River Nile reaches.  

The idea is that, although we have cooperation with other countries, especially East African countries, on the management of Lake Victoria and also we have cooperation with other countries on the management of the River Nile e.g TECHONILE, we have the riparian States like Egypt, Kenya, we have the riparian states like Egypt, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Sudan even Rwanda and many others on the cooperation along the Nile.  We need also to address specific cooperation on, say, Lake Kyoga and Lake Albert since the River Nile waters cannot reach, say, Sudan or Egypt without passing through these lakes.  It is pointless managing or having a cooperation on the Nile alone without any regard to joint effort to manage Lake Albert and Lake Kyoga.  So, we are trying to move in that direction to include other people to manage this water,  after all, we do not use it alone.

Now, the conclusion is as follows, hon. Members.  What is occurring in Lake Albert is a natural occurrence exacerbated by the increasing environmental degradation of the lake and River Nile catchment in general and triggered off by the high overland run-off water and floods caused by the el-nino rains.  Monitoring parameters clearly show the trend in deteriorating quality of the lake.

Conclusion number two: Although a lake of the size of Lake Albert has capacity to cleanse itself periodically and with time, practical measures are needed to hold the degradation of the lake catchment and reduce the import into the lake of additional lots of silt and plant nutrients.

Three; the water is not poisoned - and here I would like to repeat and emphasize that the lake or the water in Lake Albert is not poisoned but caution has to be exercised while using the water and we should be mindful of the bad smell, taste and high LV content. For instance, those who have been drinking this water should stop forthwith.  Then we organise programmes for drilling boreholes around the communities that have been using this lake.  

Then four; the fish that is dying.  This is a question which has been raised, that now, can one consume the fish that has died on Lake Albert, because the communities around there are collecting the fish and drying them and they consume this fish?  They should be warned that this fish is contaminated.  Since the water is contaminated, the fish is equally contaminated.  When I talk of contamination here, I am not talking about poisoning.  So the fish poisoning which has been happening in Lake Victoria is very different from the death of fish, crocodiles and hippos on Lake Albert and the Albert Nile.  This has been purely the cause of suffocation in the lake as a result of eutrophication and not a case of poisoning.

Then finally, Mr. Speaker, what is happening to Lake Albert is happening to Lake Victoria.  Other major lakes and water bodies in the country exacerbated by poor land use practices and environmental degradation have been of serious concern and there is, therefore, urgent need to put in place proper catchment protection measures to stop destruction of our water resources.  The lake cannot be cleaned at the present algal bloom.  

Finally, now that we have a sector Minister in charge of Environment, we shall be working jointly and closely - we have been reinforced in terms of staff by having a Minister in charge of Environment so we shall be working closely with NEMA and other stake holders to address these issues but to clarify on the water, those who stay around Lake Albert should not drink the water, but in case they are to drink it, they should make sure it is properly boiled and filtered in order to avoid any waterborne disease.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you are aware of our Rule 37 that we shall not have a debate on the statement, but a few questions for purpose of clarification.

MR. LUKUMU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to, by way of clarification, inform the hon. Minister that following the long silence from the centre regarding the phenomenon of eutrophication on Lake Albert, the local authorities - that is in Nebbi, Arua and Hoima and I think partly in Masindi - have interpreted this phenomenon in their own way.  As a result, there have been some directives, for example, to ban the marketing of fish from Lake Albert so much so that fishermen in Lake Albert, because of the communication breakdown from the experts at the centre, are experiencing problems in marketing the few fish they have been able to catch following this phenomenon.  May I get clarification from the hon. Minister whether arrangements have been made to make sure that this position is clarified to save the fishermen who are stuck with their fish. As a result, they are experiencing economic hardships.  Thank you.

MR. ADOME LOKWII: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Members say there is no water in Jie but I am concerned for Ugandans who are affected by this phenomenon.  The Minister has worried me with a statement which is saying that people must first stop drinking water and then he looks for boreholes later.  And I am wondering how that can work!  I just need some clarification over that one.  And then secondly, Mr. Speaker, the Minister has all through this paper which, to me, is more academic than practical, referred to "the Ministry in conjunction with others."  And on page 4, number two is the Democratic Republic of Congo which presently does not really take care of anything that takes place on Lake Albert, it is Uganda which is more concerned but most of the steps to be taken the Minister is saying are practical steps but I do not see any practical step apart from the visit which he says he will start by the 14th of April 1999.  Apart from those visits, other scientific practical steps to avert the eutrophication of Lake Albert and other water bodies in Uganda seem not to be clear to me and I need to be clarified over really practical and scientific steps.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to ask the Minister on a few points - about three.  I take this as a national disaster.  One of our major resources has been affected in such a way that it is a disaster for the people living in that area or near that area who are affected directly or indirectly, especially those who are also using the water that comes out of that on the River Nile.  Therefore, in this statement I would have wanted to seek Government - not just the Ministry but Government to take it and lift it from just being a mere sectoral problem to a national problem on the forefront of its national agenda. I am glad the Prime Minister is listening.  

First, moneys should be found to urgently dig boreholes near those areas for communities that have been relying on the lake for their water and this should be done urgently. Two dams - again going back to dams -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga, are you asking questions?

MR. KARUHANGA:  No, I am making proposals to help the Minister to say -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Maybe you are asking whether the Minister is doing that?

MR. KARUHANGA:  I am asking whether the Minister is contemplating that since he has not indicated that there are going to be dams built in that area for people and animals because it is not just a question of saying we have told people not to use water from the lake. What other alternative is there?  

Thirdly - and this is critical - what is happening in Lake Albert is happening in Lake Victoria and that now they are going to start working with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, which means they have not been doing so before.  Which now brings me to ask the question of poisoning of fish which has made Uganda lose its share market to the European Union.  What amount of research has been done to establish the cause of fish poisoning on our lakes?  What solution has been found?  
When we were discussing the valley dam problem, hon. Mukisa, the Minister in charge of Fisheries promised that instead of giving a personal statement on the matters affecting the Ministry, he was going to address us on the question of fish poisoning.  We have been waiting anxiously.  The people involved in this industry are suffering. We would like to know from the relevant Minister and the Minister in charge of Water, and also from the Prime Minister, what steps are being taken by the department of Water because these are all national catastrophes?  Thank you.

DR. NKUUHE: I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like some clarification from the Minister.  First of all, if this matter is of such a national importance - our Friend hon. Lukumu has been crying in the lobbies of this House, why was there no prompt response? I have had an opportunity to ask Professor Okedi and Doctor Orach Mezha - one from NEMA, one from Lake Victoria Environment and Management Authority and all they tell you is, these are possibilities.  So, nobody seems to be sure what the causes of death on Lake Albert are!  So, could the Minister clarify whether a specific study has been carried out rather than circumstantial evidence;  because all we have here is circumstantial evidence?  

For instance, could the Minister rule out other causes of this like, for instance, volcanic activity, sulphur dioxide, hydrogen sulphide, the sort of things that happen before a lake dies?  Could he rule out biological warfare?  Because, from this table, if you think that the cause is nitrogen and phosphorus, all an enemy needs to do is to drop those tablets in the lake and promote algae growth and then you have a disaster!  Could you rule out that?  Because, from what the Minister is telling us,  organic phosphorus has gone up but you have not measured it on the rivers where it is supposed to come from.  So how do you know that this did not come from the lake, that it came from the river?  What evidence do you have that it came from the river?  
Mr. Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify on Table (1) on Page 3.  If you look at it in depth, the mini-annual level is between 1.5 to 3. The normal level for this lake is 5.  Now, in September, 1998, it was 1.6 which is bad - the lower it is, the worse it is but it improved in March 1999.  So, the situation improved.  Then the chlorophyll level went up in September 1998, then went down more or less to normal by March 1999.  So, from this table, we should not believe that this is the only cause unless we see further evidence of other studies. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I was asking our technical people down there in the internet office in the basement to be giving us more information.  But I would like clarification. The Minister has not done enough.  Even these so called boreholes and what have you, suppose what you are giving us is not true, the money in boreholes might be wasted, it is supposed to something else!  So, could the Minister clarify what further studies he is going to do to establish the real causes to rule out all other causes of death of fish and hippos on Lake Albert?  I thank you.

MISS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to seek clarification from the Minister if he is not too much taken by the Minister responsible for Lands.  Could the hon. Minister clarify to this House and the nation whether we actually have technical teams to monitor the health of the water bodies?  Do we have technical teams in those locations which would have been giving you regular reports, because you seem to have been taken unaware about this catastrophe?  And if they are there, what disciplinary measures is he hoping to take against them?  

Secondly, there are a lot of proposals given towards averting the situation, has he made local consultations with the people who are using these water bodies?  Why has the Minister and the Ministry not considered a biological control in this respect?  Because, algae can be controlled by herbicides.  And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister why a scientific analysis has not been made on the quality of fish?  You are standing here and saying people should not eat the fish, why should they not eat the fish?  What toxic materials are in this fish?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. CHEBROT: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to seek clarification from the Minister whether he is aware that actually, Lake Victoria now is becoming one of the biggest sewerage systems in East Africa.  And my understanding of the geography is that Lake Kyoga is a sunken river Nile itself and whatever affects Lake Victoria will also affect Lake Kyoga.  One of the biggest problems that we have now is that the factories which are in Kampala here, like the ones which produce paint, are discharging a lot of lead into Lake Victoria and this is eventually finding its way down to Lake Kyoga.  

Number two, for the advise of Members of Parliament who eat coco yams from either the river side or from the swamps, some of these coco yams, and even the cassava yams, have got lead of up to  8.3 grammes per litre.  So, this is going to cause liver problems to you if you are eating coco yams, not only the fish. So this is a big problem.  So, if you have been eating coco yams which are coming from anywhere along the basin, then you are in for problems of liver complications.  It is a big problem. One of the issues that the Minister should address together with NEMA is the need for him, together with the Ministry of Environment, to address those issues.  Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I put it to the Minister that the statement he has read to us is not only theoretical, but speculative because I do not see any scientific experimentation - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Lukyamuzi, in accordance to Rule 37, you are just supposed to seek clarification not to make contribution. 
 
MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is, assuming that this is a natural disaster, why was it not predicted ahead of time?  Two, Mr. Speaker, in the statement made by the Minister, he does not deny that this calamity would have included dead fish or poisoned fish.  Is it by coincidence that as we experience these calamities on the lake, we also have another calamity of people poisoning the fish? Lastly, where in the world has a related scenario as reported by the Minister occurred?

My impression, Mr. Speaker, is that until the Government of Uganda tells us what has been done with the toxic chemicals initially stored in Entebbe and intended to spray the water hyacinth, we have suspicion that these very chemicals are being used rampantly by bad people for poisoning our fish.  We need explanation as a matter of responsibility.

MR. OTAGE: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity.  First of all, I would like to get clarification from the Minister.  In his submission on the practical steps to implement the Environment Statute and the Water Statute, I seem not to see  whether the Minister is considering it prudent and important not to examine the fundamental position of developing a land use policy  because what is being stated here is the issue of the degradation of the environment. This should have focused on the matter of land use as well.  

Could I know whether the Minister or Government is going ahead to develop a land use policy, because this is the main point through which environmental policies, agricultural development policies and any other policies regarding the development of land should be addressed. I do not know whether the Minister considers this important or not. I thought it could be quite important to examine this aspect.  For too long, we have not heard any attention given to the development of a land use policy.

Secondly, I wanted to find out from the Minister about the El-Nino rains. I think this is not the first time this phenomena has happened in this country. Has the Minister got any proper results of a previous E- Nino to predict a situation similar to this one which we are experiencing now in the future?

Thirdly, I think five years ago, hon. Members will recall a Lake in Cameroon had a similar phenomena.  What has the Ministry done to get information from a sister country like Cameroon on how they handled this matter?  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it appears this statement has generated a lot of interest and concern and it is not a matter which I think can be disposed of by the answers which the Minister will give to the questions put to him.  I suggest that the Minister tries to answer those question that have been put to him but this matter be taken up again by the appropriate body for more thorough study and maybe a remedy will be found.

MR. AKIIKA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I may not answer all the questions adequately but from the onset, permit me to mention and to promise you that my Ministry is ready and is going to give periodic reports about Lake Albert and also, I have been considering giving you a report about Lake Victoria Environment Management Programme over the Shs.28.2 million that you approved here. I was considering bringing that tomorrow.  If I can be accommodated on the Order Paper, I will give you a progressive report of the Lake Victoria Environment Management Programme.

Now, before I go to hon. Lukumu's question, we should bear at the back of our minds from the statement I have read to you here that the step we are taking as a Ministry is that the Directorate of Water Development will continue to monitor the water quality and provide the information to the public and the affected communities to take the necessary precaution.  I do not think we can have a permanent solution at ago.  So, those of you who have been living with science - the scientists, the doctors - you know scientific investigation is a continuous process and a solution is not found overnight.  

Hon. Lukumu's question: You said, "Due to the long silence, the districts have made their own interpretation and have taken their own steps how to deal with the situation".  Now, you want me to clarify whether they can now allow people to eat the fish but I think common logic will tell you that anybody who goes to collect fish that has died on the lake, dries and takes it on the market should be very careful because you do not know why the fish has died.  Like I have said, it may be contaminated.  So, I would not encourage anybody to eat contaminated fish because you did not go to trap it in the water and took it out live.  So, I would not encourage that.  

Hon. Adome, you said no practical steps are being taken and you are saying that I told people to stop drinking the water.  Then you said the Democratic Republic of Congo does not care.  That is exactly what I said that given the current situation around that area of our would-be co-riparian state, it is not possible to cooperate with the Congo in the management of Lake Albert.  However, on our own, we should take an initiative to manage the catchment of Lake Albert and the waters of Lake Albert but I hastened to add also that we shall interest other riparian states with whom we have been cooperating on the management of River Nile and Lake Victoria to take up Lake Kyoga and Lake Albert.
I want to state again that, should anybody drink the water of Lake Albert, it should be properly boiled to avoid contracting any disease.

Hon. Karuhanga - this is a disaster! Yes, I agree with you and I wish to inform Parliament that the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness communicated to us their preparedness and immediate response to this calamity that has befallen the people living around the waters of Lake Albert and they are delivering some assistance to the community around there.  There is a communication to that effect in my Ministry.

Now, building of dams:  Well, I cannot promise that we are going to embark on galvanising into action and start building dams in Masindi and Hoima because one, we do not have that money in our ministry.  The only money that we have in the Ministry for dam construction is with the respect to valley dams in Karamoja.  We have specific instructions and money approved to construct valley dams in the Karamoja region.  Other areas will have to come later - you will have to approve the money in the Budget next financial year to cover other districts in this country.  

Hon. Karuhanga was wondering whether the Ministry for Water, Lands and Environment has been working in close collaboration with Agriculture.  Definitely yes! We cooperate in work closely in very many areas. In the Lake Victoria Management, we are the lead Ministry but Agriculture is also there.  We are working closely with Makerere University for instance; we are working closely with NEMA.  So, it is not true that we are working in isolation.  Even the scope of cooperation on the Management of Lake Victoria is wider than Uganda only.  We cooperate with Tanzania and Kenya on the management of Lake Victoria and since some in-flows of water come even from Rwanda, we want to involve Rwanda in the cooperation of the management of Lake Victoria water because they have a stake in it.

Fish poisoning: I am not in position to answer questions about fish poisoning since the responsible Minister for that sector is here. Really, I am not able to comment on that - he will do that at an appropriate time. You were wondering whether a specific study has been carried out. There is some study but as I said, this study will continue.  This is not the end of the study.   Parliament should trust me that this is not a fabricated information.  This study and this table here, these are results that I got from -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, could you address the Chair. (Laughter)

MR. AKIIKA: Mr. Speaker, these are results got from studies.  May I inform Parliament that we have a very very modern laboratory for water quality assessment and water testing at Entebbe.  At an appropriate time, we shall invite the Committee responsible for our Ministry to visit our laboratories at Entebbe.

Hon. Babihuga - is there a technical team to monitor the water quality?  Yes, there is a technical team.  The constituents of the team that went to Lake Albert was inclusive of water quality engineers from the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment.  So, my answer is yes, there is a regular monitoring of the waters within Uganda.  

Why stop people from eating fish without scientific analysis of the quality?  I have answered, Mr. Speaker, that I will be the last person to advise anybody to pick a dead fish and eat it without properly understanding what could have been the cause.  If anybody wants to eat fish, it must be caught live from the lake and until a statement comes from Fisheries, we do not know whether we can now eat fish, whether the ban on fish has been lifted or not.  That one you will have to hear from another sector altogether.

Dr. Chebrot on whether I am aware that Lake Victoria is now a sewerage in East Africa, I am not aware that Lake Victoria is a sewerage in East Africa but all I know is that the sewerage that is discharged on Lake Victoria is supposed to be treated at the Bugolobi Sewerage Treatment Plant and also, through the biological natural filters like the swamps.  Unfortunately, given the poor practice of our land use, the swamps have been encroached on for growing of yams and other crops and this is a threat, therefore reducing on the ability of the natural filters, the swamps, to absorb the sewerage or the contamination that go into the lake. However, your drinking water which comes from Lake Victoria is very safe.  My only fear is that there is heavy use of chemicals and increased cost in the treatment of water that comes into Kampala.  But the Gaba I and Gaba II water treatment plants are functioning very well and your water is safe.  So, the answer is, I am not aware that Lake Victoria is a sewerage island in East Africa. Also, I would like to mention that NEMA conducted an environmental audit on the Nakivuubo Channel and NEMA advised people not to eat the yams that is grown there.  That is the statement that was issued over one year ago by the NEMA.

Hon. Lukyamuzi: why was the disaster not predicted?  I remember  before I was elevated to be a Minister of State, on the very Floor of this House, there was a statement made predicting that we were going to have an unusual weather coming and that was El-Nino. It was predicted right in this House and indeed, the El-Nino came and we have been suffering the consequences of the El-Nino which has now lead to the eutrophication of Lake Albert.  Partly, those are the results of the El-Nino.  So, hon. Lukyamuzi, the El-Nino was predicted.

As to why I did not foresee that Lake Albert would get eutrophicated or get contaminated, I am not an angel, neither am I soothsayer to foresee the future or to predict the future whether the Lake will get contaminated or not.  So, as to why I did not predict that the water would get contaminated, I did not have the capacity, Sir.

Hon. Otage: Is Government going to develop a land use policy?  Yes, this is a very very important point and this matter is going to be addressed.  It is there in the Budget line for the next financial year.  Next financial year, we have a Budget line for a land use policy and your fears are going to be addressed.

Now, still to hon. Otage, this is the greatest effect that we have had in living memory within the country.  You see, somebody asked whether this situation is only peculiar to Uganda or has ever happened in Uganda. We have had cases similar to this on Lake Rudolf in Kenya, Lake Rudolf is now dead. The dead Sea and Lake Chad have all suffered as a result of eutrophication and eventually died.  So, without any scientific prediction or scientifically analyzed prediction, it will not be a situation peculiar to Lake Albert alone if in future it is reported and confirmed that the lake has also died.  

DR. NKUUHE: I think the deaths of lakes that he is referring to, is true, it can happen and most of those lakes died of hydrogen sulphide, mostly from either volcanic activity or from these hot springs and you can even see the yellow sulphur. The sulphur kills the life in the lake and the lake dies but in the case of Lake Albert, the fish dying due to lack of oxygen is a temporary phenomenon. If we cannot believe what is happening here, this is a temporary phenomenon because once the algae go, then the lake can become normal.  But the death is more serious, that is why we want you to rule it out because other lakes around - lake Katwe and so on, where you see sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide, those lakes are dying.  So, we want you to rule that out as the cause of death.

MR. AKIIKA: Thank you very much, Dr. Nkuuhe, and all those who have enriched us with their contribution.  However, I will invite anybody who has proper knowledge to help us solve this problem to come and do so. If possible, if there are any people who may wish to express their interest to travel to that side, I will organise transport and we go there so that the Ministry is helped.  So, all the information, the contributions that you have made are enriching us and like I said, we are promising that we shall be coming back to you from time to time to report on this matter.  So, Dr. Nkuuhe, I would like to include you in that team to come and report to Parliament since you have a lot of information and knowledge about this.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.


BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 1999

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, "The Referendum and other Provisions Bill, 1999", be read the First Time.

	QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe we need guidance from the Prime Minister, hon. Nsibambi, because I see the question which the Member intends to ask is directed to the Minister of State for Defence and I do not see him.  

THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Miss. Rebecca Kadaga): Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying how happy I am,  in my new assignment, to be able to work closely with Members of this House, and I pledge my time and cooperation to all Members of the House without fear or favour.  

With regard to the questions raised by hon. Lukyamuzi, Government would like to respond as follows:-(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he had not made it - I was only trying to find out whether there is an arrangement for the Minister of Defence.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I wish to assure you that we have made deliberate arrangements to answer this question and any other questions which may arise.  Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister of State for Defence aware that a French built Falcon Jet 900, Registration No.TC CAG carrying Turkish commandos popularly known as "Maroon Berets" landed at the Entebbe International Airport in February this year and stayed there for a whole five days?  

If so, is the Minister aware that the said commandos used the Ugandan Airport as a base to hijack one distinguished freedom fighter, Ocalan Abdalla from Nairobi, Kenya?  
Is the Minister further aware that the aforesaid action was a violation of the UN Resolution on non-interference in internal affairs of another country which Uganda is known to have ratified?  

In the circumstances, can the Minister of State for Defence substantiate and explain to this august House the circumstances that led to the above situation?

THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Miss. Rebecca Kadaga):  Mr. Speaker, government would like to respond as follows:  The Right hon. Prime Minister will respond to this question at the next convenient sitting of Parliament for the following reasons.  Part one of the question touches the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications which is responsible for the Civil Aviation Authority and Entebbe Airport.  The same question touches the Ministry of Defence which is responsible for protection of the Ugandan air space.  The same question touches the Ministry of Internal Affairs which is responsible for admission of people into Uganda.  Part II of the question touches the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  

For the above reasons, Mr. Speaker, government would like to prepare a comprehensive answer and it is a request of government that this matter be deferred to the next meeting to permit the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to answer comprehensively, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First and foremost, I would like to know whether the hon. Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs is aware of rule No.10 of our Rules of Procedure.  In other words, in the event that this House is prorogued tomorrow, there will be no way of continuing the same question. In accordance with  our Rules of Procedure, it collapses immediately.  So,  are we trying to preempt answering this question by postponing it to the next session?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think my understanding is that the nature of the question was directed to a Minister that would not competently answer it because this is a question that affects many Ministries and the proper person to answer this question - the question should have been addressed to the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business.  That is what I understand from the answer. As for rule 10, I think this matter should be raised at an appropriate time when we come to it.  At the moment, we are still proceeding with the session.

MISS. BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Right hon. Prime Minister.  This question, to me requires a substantive answer and, therefore, one coming from a substantive Minister for Defence.  I have asked this before, Mr. Speaker.  Every time there is a reshuffle, I look at the list and I want to see the name of the Minister for Defence but it is always absent.  I really want to know why we do not have a Minister for Defence yet security is one of the topmost issues on our national agenda.  Mr. Speaker, if it is a problem of having the right person for this job, Mr. Speaker, I am available - (Laughter).  I am so tough and uncompromising on the corrupt, and if necessary, I could be with the rebels.  But then you see, Mr. Speaker, really taking it away from the funny side of it, I am growing concerned that we do not have a substantive Minister for Defence to answer this very important question.  Maybe the Rt. hon. Prime Minister could clarify to me why this office has not been occupied and remains so.  
 
PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to draw to the attention of the hon. Member, Article 99 of the Constitution.  Article 99 of the Constitution says: "The Executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with the Constitution."  I would like also to draw the attention of the hon. Member to article 114 of our Constitution whereby in article 113, the President appoints ministers and under article 114, the President appoints ministers of state, and article 114 sub-article (4), the President assigns the functions to the Ministers.  So, I do not see any problem.  

The President who has fathomed the workload of the quality he has been appointing has to begin with a minister of state for Defence. And we also know that under article 99, he takes charge of the whole system.  He interfaces with all the ministries and he makes sure that we deliver.  So, I do not see the problem because the issues concerning defence have been amply dealt with.  What is the problem?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I do not know why you are standing.  The item that was being addressed was the question raised by the hon. Member for Lubaga South.  The answer was given that this question was directed against a wrong minister namely, Minister for Defence.  This is a matter which is touching many ministries and the proper person to address the question is the Prime Minister.  Now, it is up to the Member to address the question to the proper person, that is the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister.  For the time being, there is no  answer to the question - (Interruption).

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether you could accept a point of order at this stage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Directed to who?

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Directed to the Right hon. Prime Minister and the Minister responsible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Make it

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, may I draw your attention to rule 27 (3) of our Rules of Procedure which says that a minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question from the House.  Mr. Speaker, the minister shall not take more than two weeks.  Now, as far as I am concerned, this question was asked about a month ago, or forwarded to the minister or the government a month ago by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi.  Now, the Prime Minister and the Minister responsible for Parliamentary Affairs are coming here after two weeks and asking for an indefinite period to answer this question.  Mr. Speaker, is it in order without the Prime Minister, or the Minister responsible for Parliamentary Affairs asking us to suspend these rules to enable them to exceed two weeks simply to come and read something in front of us which is, to me, very irregular that they are not ready and so on?  So, Mr. Speaker, my point is this: Is in order, in view of this rule 27 (3), to allow the Prime Minister and Minister responsible for Parliamentary Affairs to get away with their request for an indefinite period to come back and answer this question?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, in the first place, I have no sufficient material to use to rule on that particular point  because the question, as you said, is raised by hon. Lukyamuzi, and I do not see any date as to when these questions to the Minister were raised and I do not know whether it was this week or last week.  So, I am not in position to agree with you there but secondly, if that was the point, I think the hon. Member himself should have raised it appropriately when the two weeks expired, he did not. So, I take it that he knew the circumstances why the Minister was not answering but what we have got today is that we have been told, in fact, that this question should not have been directed to the Minister for Defence, but the Prime Minister or the person who is in charge of government business, and this is what has been done.  So, I think we rather leave it, and proceed.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, for record purposes, I wish to lay on the Table the first edition of this question which was - (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the point is that we have already passed that! I have ruled that an answer has been given that this question was directed against a wrong person, but a proper person will answer it if you raise it to him. 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to be recorded that I am not satisfied with the government answer  because I know that a government is a collective responsibility.  Whether or not hon. Kavuma was not present, I expected an answer from government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Lukyamuzi,  they have not said this is because the Minister of State is not here, the gist of the answer given by the hon. Minister for Parliamentary Affairs - I think maybe she was holding the portfolio of the Minister of State for Defence - was that this question was directed against a wrong minister, it should be directed against the Prime Minister who is in charge of Parliamentary Affairs so that we do not get piecemeal answers to one question.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I just ask for your guidance.  Many questions have been put to various ministers and we have been promised answers to these questions.  I recently put a question to the Minister of Lands and he circulated to the House some kind of written answer where we have no chance to raise questions which he left unanswered because most Members got a printed copy of his answer.  Now, I do not know whether he is going to get a chance to answer it orally here on the Floor of the House, or this internal communication to me is going to be enough. So, I am wondering when we are going to have the other questions because I put another question to the Minister in charge of Public Service on pensioners and I tried to generate some answer from one of the ministers of state, and she did not have a clue about my question.  So, I do not know what is going to happen; and these questions are going to expire when we finish our business tomorrow or, are we going to get a chance tomorrow to have these questions answered? 
Having said that, I must say that I was impressed by the Leader of Government Business and the Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs with the way they showed us team-work, coordination and I thought it was a winning team. Although they did not answer the question, but I felt that something was happening, and I congratulate them.  I hope that Thursday, tomorrow will be a day for them to answer Members' questions including my own on Land and Pensions.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what I can suggest here is that, hon. Members should be vigilant.  If you have forwarded your question to a minister and the Minister does not answer, then you can always stand and quote this rule 27 (3) which hon. Omara Atubo quoted so that it is not a harassment but just to remind the ministers that they have obligation under our rules to answer these questions.  So, from now, be vigilant to follow up these questions and I think the ministers concerned will respond positively.   And as for questions which you ask and you think they are going to expire, you may be at liberty to raise this matter tomorrow or any day when it appears that Parliament is going to be prorogued.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, in your capacity as chairman of the Business Committee, generally we expect to be told in advance the programme on Order Paper at least for a period of a month.  Now, we are hearing these rumours in these corridors that this House could be prorogued tomorrow.  Could you confirm, in your capacity as Chairman of the Business Committee that we shall be here tomorrow and next week, or not at all?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, what I am going to do after we have exhausted the business of today is to adjourn the House to tomorrow.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT REQUIRING THE PRESIDENT TO EXPEDITE THE PROCESS OF CONSULTATION IN ORDER TO GIVE EFFECT TO THE RECOMMENDED PROPOSALS FOR THE MINIMUM WAGE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE MINIMUM WAGES ADVISORY BOARD AND COUNCILS' ACT, 1964.  
DR. SAM LYOMOKI (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I stand here to move a Motion for a resolution of Parliament requiring His Excellency the President to expedite the process of consultation in order to give effect to the recommended proposals - (Interruption)

MISS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether some of us are hard of hearing, or whether there is something wrong with the audio system.  Could you direct that they rectify it, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you.  We can hardly hear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the Member try then we shall see.

DR. LYOMOKI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I stand here to move a resolution of Parliament requiring His Excellency the President to expedite the process of consultation in order to give effect to the recommended proposals for the minimum wage in accordance with the provisions of the Minimum Wage Advisory Boards and Wages' Council Act, 1964.  

This Motion was moved in October last year and it has been on the plate for all that time.  It is a Motion which covers a certain sector of the population which is present in all our constituencies throughout the country.  Mr. Speaker, we have been having a minimum wage ever since 1900 - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Incidently, is your motion seconded?

DR. LYOMOKI:  Yes it is seconded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So it is seconded? Then you can move.

DR. LYOMOKI:  Mr. Speaker, the motion was seconded and even the text for seconding the motion was circulated. Mr. Speaker, I was saying that this concept of the minimum wage, as far as Uganda is concerned, dates as far back as 1900 and throughout all the generations up to 1984, there has been a periodic setting of the minimum wage.  Mr. Speaker, the last such process took place in 1984 when a minimum wage was set at 6,000 Uganda shillings and because of the devaluation of the shilling that took place, currently the minimum wage stands at 60 shillings per month. 

Sometime in 1995, a Minimum Wage Advisory Board was set up as required under the act of 1964. The membership of this board comprises representatives from the employers, representatives from workers and also from Government.  The board did its work for some time, having taken into consideration all the facts - (Interruption)

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure.  The document which was circulated on the 30th of October, 1998 is very clear and seems  not to rhyme with what hon. Lyomoki is presenting. Could he inform the House whether or not he sent a new submission for the House or is it that we are following the document he distributed on 30th of October, 1998.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, that document was circulated some time ago and I thought hon. Members of Parliament have read through.  It was not my intention to go word by word because it is a long text and, therefore, I am trying to summarize so that we do not have a lot of time trying to discuss what Members have already read through, analyzed and studied.  So, Mr. Speaker, with your permission, I would like to continue to summarize and where necessary, I will read through the text but I will try to summarize so that I can give my presentation as briefly as possible.  

As I was saying, the Minimum Wages Advisory Board, 1995, was appointed under general notice No.176 of 1995 in accordance with a provision of section 3(1) of the Minimum Wages Advisory Boards and Wages Council Act, 1964.  Mr. Speaker, the Board was required to investigate into the wages of unskilled labour throughout Uganda and submit recommendations that have regard to the social and economic conditions of the country. It was further requested to examine the need for a differential in rates of wages as between different areas, the need for a special wage rate and other attractive conditions of work for the large agricultural estates, as well as separate rates for learners other than apprentices and, finally, the hourly rates for part-time workers who are employed for four or less consecutive hours each day.  

The terms of reference of the Board as contained in the General Notice No. 176 of 1995 were generally to inquire into and make recommendations subject to and in accordance with section 5 of the Act on wages and conditions of service of those employees coming within the boards terms of reference and the terms of reference, Mr. Speaker are:- 
(1) To inquire into wages of unskilled labour throughout Uganda
(2) To recommend referential if any.
(3) To consider, in accordance with the powers under section 5 of the Act, the need for special minimum wages rate and attractive condition of work for large agricultural estates.
(4) To consider the need for payment of separate rates for          learners.
(5) To make recommendations relating to part-time workers.

Mr. Speaker, the board was inaugurated in December 1995 and commenced work in January 1996.  The Board made extensive and intensive consultations with the employers and workers throughout the country and the recommendations were widely discussed and underwent all the systematic procedures required by law and a report was prepared which was presented to the Minister in charge of Labour by that time.  The recommendations were studied carefully and gazetted in 1997.  Mr. Speaker, the Minister studied the recommendations and submitted them to His Excellency the President in February 1998; that is almost over a year now!  

Mr. Speaker, as you may realise the Board took all factors into consideration and consulted all the stake holders that were supposed to be consulted and it made its proposals, passed through the hon. Minister in charge of Labour and these proposals were passed to His Excellency the President.  But, Mr. Speaker, up to now these proposals have not been put into effect. That means that as things stand right now, the minimum wage for workers is Shs. 60 per month and now you are aware, Mr. Speaker, of what is taking place concerning the workers in this country; there is exploitation of workers by various employers and, Mr. Speaker, you also know the relationship between the wages to income and to development and to the issue of eradication of poverty.  
Uganda is a signatory to Convention 26 which was ratified in 1963 which requires each member-state to have a minimum wage.  Mr. Speaker, for now 12 years, the minimum wage which was set in 1984 has never been reviewed and yet as you are aware, there are a lot of things that have taken place relating to the growth of the economy and many  other factors pertaining to the environment under which workers participate. 

In the view of the foregoing, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 12 years have passed without a review of the statutory minimum wage, it was timely for the Minimum Wages Advisory Board to make inquiries and recommend to Government an appropriate minimum wage, taking into account the existing social and economic condition of the country.  The main objective and criteria for fixing a minimum wage is to ensure that the worker is adequately rewarded for his services to enable him attain a decent standard of living through the provision of basic necessities of life.  In this regard, the Board took into account evidence at their disposal in respect to the cost of the basket of goods and services needed to keep the body and soul together.  

It is disheartening to note at this moment that we have employers in this country that pay as low as Shs. 6,000 per month for workers who work over 12 hours per day.  And, Mr. Speaker, it is so disheartening to note that in some sectors, we do not even have trade unions that can be able to negotiate for workers because if we had trade unions in all the sectors, Mr. Speaker, we could have had an issue whereby the workers' leaders and the unions would assist the workers in order to fix a proper pay level for that particular sector.  

A minimum wage is taken as a wage sufficient to cover the workers normal material, moral and cultural needs and to enable him or her carry out his or her duties as a head of a family.  Minimum wages are urged for a variety of grounds and, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to summarize about five reasons why we feel that there should be a minimum wage.
(1) The minimum wage prevents the exploitation of workers.
(2) A minimum wage ensures fair or decent remuneration.
(3) It acts as a means of pay determination where collective        bargaining is absent or weak.
(4) A minimum wage prevents competition between firms on the        basis of forcing wage rates down to very low levels.
(5) A minimum wage reduces poverty
(6) It improves a distribution of income without making those at      the lower end over-dependant on the state benefits
(7) It increase economic efficiency.

The impact that minimum wages can have on poverty is almost as controversial as the impact on employment.  It can be argued, Mr. Speaker, that the low wages are a major cause of poverty, whereas the overlap between low pay and family poverty is small, Mr. Speaker, owing to many persons on low wage living in families with other earners of which low level of need arise.  A minimum wage, Mr. Speaker, will therefore reduce poverty to the extent that poor families contain low paid workers which is the case in the majority of poor working families in our country, Mr. Speaker.

The reason why we have come here to request the Members of Parliament for support is that for over a year now, as I have said, we have got information that there is no serious process of trying to fix this minimum wage. Of recent, we had discussion with some members from Finance who apparently are trying to advise His Excellency the President that we do not need to have a minimum wage and yet all countries around us - Kenya, Tanzania and the rest - have got a minimum wage. So you cannot argue and say that because we have a liberalised economy, we do not need a minimum wage.  

Of course it becomes pertinent that in cases where we have an economy to be set by market forces, we need to set standards; we need the law to cover certain categories of people; we need certain standards under which the market forces can now operate.  If Uganda continues with having the minimum wage of Shs. 60, this really cannot in anyway assist the drive towards development.  I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, call upon the hon. Members of Parliament to support this resolution so that His Excellency the President can be able to finalise the consultation as quickly as possible and then he can be able to fix the minimum wage.  Mr. Speaker, I therefore move the resolution as follows: 
"WHEREAS in 1995, a Minimum Wages Advisory Board was appointed 
under General Notice No. 176 of 1995 in pursuance of section (3) of the Minimum Wages Advisory Boards and Wages Council Act; 

AND WHEREAS the Board which was principally charged with investigating into the wages of unskilled labour completed its work and submitted its report and draft of the minimum wages order to Government through the responsible Minister some two years ago;  

WHEREAS the Constitution in the National Objective and Directive Principle of State Policy number (XIV) requires the state to fulfil fundamental rights of all Ugandans to social justice and economic development, and in article 40 empowers Parliament to ensure payment for equal work and reasonable working hours and remuneration to every worker;  

WHEREAS the statutory minimum wage for the unskilled labour stands at Uganda Shs. 60 per month as was uniformly said by Statutory Instrument No. 38 of 1984; 

AND WHEREAS a basic caloric intake by a family of 4 for minimal low cost foods required to provide adequate nutrition costs Uganda Shs. 7,000 per month excluding the cost of sugar, salt edible oil, fuel, water shelter, education and clothing; 

AND WHEREAS in the last 14 years there has been a progressive growth of the economy, an increase in the cost of living and continuous increase of unskilled labour leading to an adverse effect on the living conditions of workers with a negative impact on development;  

WHEREAS fixing a minimum wage is in line with the ILO convention No. 26 concerning the creation of a minimum wage fixing machinery and is in co-operation with other countries in the region with adequate minimum level standards;  

WHEREAS a minimum wage has certain implications on the economy, employment investment and development; 

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that H.E the president be required to expedite the process of consultation in order to give effect to the recommended proposals for the minimum wage to unskilled labour by the Minimum Wages Advisory Board." Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

MR. DAVID KAMUSAALA (Jinja Municipality East,Jinja): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the motion.  Hon. Members, while Government should be commended for its periodic reviews on wages and salaries as a move towards achieving an adequate wage, its failure to come up with a minimum wage has made the numerous previous reviews inconsequential to the workers of this country.  This failure has no doubt adversely affected the workers and it has far-reaching implications to our economy.  

Failure to define the minimum wage has sent out wrong signals to the business community, especially the investors of Asian origin who have continued to pay Ugandan workers tit-bits while at the same time subjecting them to inhuman treatment.  Some time last year we were reading about one Asian businessman by the names of Tahir Shakil of Gift Electronic Centre who grabbed his employee by the names of Angela Nabawesi by the neck and forced her to clean the carpet with her tongue yet he pays her only 35,000 shilling per month.  

It seems that these people think that the Government does not value them and they say that the Government does not value their contribution to the national economy, why then should they pay them and treat them well?  It is, therefore, clear that without a statutory minimum wage, Government is abandoning the workers to a horrible fate.  These workers are the very people who have contributed to the country's economic growth but they have been left mercilessly exposed to massive and senseless exploitation.  I want to cite an example of Jinja. There are three known business concerns which pay workers 1,000 shillings per day of eleven man-hours work with no proper defined overtime and allowance -(Interruption)

MR. PAJOBO: I would like to inform the Member that the three who are paying Shs. 1,000 for 11 hours per day are Picfare Jinja, also the people who are working on the new dam and Kiira Saw Mills, so at least we should know them.  Thank you.

MR. KAMUSAALA:  I thank you for that information. Out of these three industries which I preferred not to name but have been named by one of the workers' representative, only two provide lunch and medical allowance but these two allowances are so little that they are negligible. The result has been that each of the 900 workers in these three business concerns ends up with  an average take-home package of roughly 35,000 shillings  per month.  

Sometime last year, a mini household survey coupled with several interviews with a number of workers revealed that these poor workers spend their little money as below: We assume that one consumes 4 bunches of matooke in a given month and each bunch costs about shs. 4,500 that gives us a total of 18,000 shillings.  Rent - that is of one room - is 10,000 shillings without the cost of water and electricity; then purchase of items like paraffin, sugar, salt, cost about 5,000 shillings a month and then the purchase of 2 jerry-cans of water on daily basis costs about  50 shillings per jerry-can for 30 days gives us a total of 3,000/=.  This means that, in order to have shelter a few basic necessities, each of these workers spends 36,000/= per month.  

At a take-home package of 35,000/=, this means that each worker spends 1,000/= more than what he actually earns a month.  But what is more interesting is that, each of these workers neither knows exactly where the additional 1,000/= comes from nor how they manage to scrap through.  The implication is that most of the workers are either perpetually in debt or have been forced to employ some not so clear methods in order to obtain some additional money.  If not tackled here now, hon. Members, such a scenario can only lead to two things; either the workers turn  to outright corruption or they establish some small income generating activities to supplement their monthly take-home packages.  But like I said earlier, this spells doom for the economy of this country as it will adversely affect their productivity.  

Hon. Members, without a defined minimum wage, we are going to find it practically impossible to implement certain legislations made in this very House and where we shall implement, we are bound to cause so much undue pain and suffering.  A case in point is the Children's Statute of 1995.  The Children's Statute of 1995 states in no uncertain terms that children have a right to education and that denying children education is a criminal offense which is punishable by imprisonment. Now, to compel a worker who earns 35,000/= per month to take a children to school yet he has a family of four children of school going age and not to mention other orphans and other members of the extended family who are under his charge, is to ask for blood and more than blood!  Despite the introduction of Universal Primary Education, the reality is that a worker who earns 35,000/= per month and has four children of school going age will not be able to send his children to school. 

Hon. Members, it is more than clear that without a defined minimum wage, the majority of workers will be found guilty of grossly violating their children's rights and that means imprisonment.  The same Children's Statute also states that children have a right to proper nutrition and high standard of health facilities, the right to clean water, the right to shelter, the right to clean environment, the right to protection against indiscrimination, abuse, neglect and all forms of harmful practises.  On paper, these are good to children of this country but without a minimum wage, these and many other legislations can never be put into practice because all these can only be provided by a worker who is economically empowered.  

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, it is based on such views and convictions that I second the motion for a resolution of Parliament requiring His Excellency the President to give effect to the recommended proposal for the minimum wage in accordance with the provision of the Minimum Wages Advisory Board and Wages Council Act of 1964.  I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, as we see from the text of the motion, it appears we are urging the President to take appropriate time. I think it is proper now to know the position from the Ministry of Labour.   

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  (Philemon Mateke):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, as the hon. Members may be aware, Uganda joined the International Labour Organisation in June 1963.  In the process, we acceded to 17 international labour conventions, that had been ratified on our behalf by the colonial administration.  One of these conventions was Convention No. 26 concerning the creation of a minimum wage fixing machinery.  Article (1) of this Convention states: "Each member of the ILO which ratifies the convention undertakes to create or maintain a machinery whereby minimum rates of wages can be fixed for workers employed in certain of the trades or parts of the trades and in particular, in home working trades in which no arrangement exists for the effective regulation of wages by collective agreement or otherwise, and wages are exceptionally low".

The provisions of this convention were translated into our national law, namely; the Minimum Wages Advisory Board and Wages Councils Act 1964.  Consequently, we have had a Statutory Minimum Wages all along.  The last such minimum wage was by Statutory Instrument No. 38 of 1984.  In 1995, Government established a Minimum Wages Advisory Board in accordance with Section 3 of the Minimum Wages Advisory Board and Wages Councils Act 1964 which provides as follows: "The Minister may, from time to time by notice duly published, appoint a Minimum Wages Advisory Board for any specified area or for any employees or groups of employees in any occupation in which he considers that it may be desirable to fix a minimum wage and to determine other conditions of employment.  The Board shall inquire into wages and conditions of service of those employees coming within its terms of reference and after complying with the provisions of Section (4) of this Act, shall submit recommendations to the Minister which may specify the minimum wage or conditions of employment which in the opinion of the Board should be observed in regard to all or any of those employees and thereafter, any such recommendations shall be deemed to be wages regulations proposal." 

Now, in consultation with the Federation of Uganda Employers and the National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU), Government established the Minimum Wages Advisory Board under General Notice No. 176.  The Board was constituted in accordance with the law comprising representatives of Government, employers and workers.  The terms of reference of the Board were as indicated on page 3 of the Resolution, that is:-
(a)  Inquire into wages of unskilled labour throughout Uganda and submit recommendations having regard to the existing social and economic conditions of the country.
(b)  Recommend differentials, if any, which should apply as between different areas.  
(c)  Consider, in accordance with the powers under Section (5) of the Minimum Wages Advisory Board and Wages Councils Act, the need for a special minimum Wages rate and other attractive conditions of work for the large agricultural estates as inducement to labour.
(d)  Consider the need for payment of a separate minimum rate for earners other than apprentices and make recommendations.
(e)  Make recommendations relating to part-time workers so as to ensure that an employee who is employed for four or less consecutive hours each day is paid at an hourly rate.

The Board made extensive and  intensive consultations with a representative number of lawyers and workers including local government authorities.  The recommendations of the Board were widely discussed and underwent all the systematic procedures required by the law.  The report was carefully studied by the then Minister responsible for Labour who submitted the report to Government which authorised him to gazette the report in accordance with Section 64 of the law under reference.  The report was gazetted in April 1997.  

The Board was re-convened  in May 1997 to reconsider its report in the light of public comments.  The report was then re-submitted to Cabinet.  Cabinet made its recommendations to the Presidency in 1998.  This was in accordance with Section 6 of the Minimum Wages Advisory Boards and Wages Council Act 1964 which provides: "The President may, on receipt of any wages regulating proposals under the provisions of sub-section (5) of this section, accept or vary such proposals and give effect to such proposals as accepted or varied by him by Statutory order duly published from such a date as may be specified therein."
 
Mr. Speaker, as you may note from the foregoing extract of the Minimum Wages Advisory Board and Minimum Wages Act, the prerogative to announce the statutory minimum wage lies with His Excellency the President.  Therefore, before His Excellency the President takes a position on this important subject, he is empowered by the law to make his own independent consultations.  His Excellency the President is still making extensive consultations with the stake holders.  

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, as it may be appreciated, this motion has serious implications on employment, investment and the whole economy in general.  It is, therefore, my hope that the outcome of his consultations will be good for the workers and the country as a whole.  I, therefore, would like to appeal to hon. Members to give Government a chance to complete these consultations. 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I should like to assure this hon. House that Government is very sensitive to the plight of the workers and therefore, Government is doing everything possible within its limited resources to ensure the protection and promotion of good employment conditions in the country.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. TOSKIN BARTILE (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank, first of all, hon.Lyomoki, the Member for Workers, for bringing up this motion. I also want to thank the Minister who has also given us the way Government has been handling this matter.  But, Mr. Speaker, the way I see resolutions - how they have been passed, is an expression of a demand, an expression of action to be taken.  As has been stated in this paper, it is quite clear that Government has taken a bit too long.  It is true that Government is aware of it, but how long will it take?  From 1997 when it was gazetted, it is now 1999, Mr. Speaker! Our people need to be assisted, they need to be rescued.  

This is a time of investment; we are calling for investors to come and it is good they are coming and the economy is growing, but let us also think of the workers who are going to be employed by these investors, we need to protect them.  Gone are the days when most multi-national corporations were moving around the world and one of the choices where to go was to look for cheap labour.  The cheaper the labour, the better the incentive or investment. It is good they bring us investment but then we must also think of how we can uplift the livelihood of our people because as investment comes in, as small factories are put here, of course many of our people will get jobs but let them get jobs that will satisfy their needs.

One of the biggest problems now that we are facing as a Movement Government is fighting poverty.  People are now moving from the rural areas coming to the towns, looking for jobs.  Agriculture which is the backbone of the economy of this country would have saved our people but because of the poor marketing system that exists in the country, people are not benefiting from Agriculture.  People have grown crops; they have produced maize, they have produced beans, but at the time of marketing them, they do not get the money. They now run to the towns to look for jobs and they are given a very low pay, the minimum of course is 60. Anybody can pay anything beyond 60/= but is this fair for our people? So, much as the Minister is saying, let us give Government time, I think what the Resolution here seeks to say is that can we, out of this Parliament, expedite the process so that the President may also lift this paper from the lower level where it is and put it slightly up so that our people can be saved?  

Illiteracy is what we are fighting, it is an enemy.  How do we fight illiteracy?  People who have come here and got jobs should earn a salary which can also give them some money to educate a child.  All of us know that education is now very expensive.  We now have UPE, it has helped, good enough, but the other things which go together with UPE when a child goes to school, he needs to have a dress, he needs to have a pen, he needs to have the books.  Otherwise, UPE itself would not be useful.  So, we need people to be assisted with a minimum wage - a wage which can reasonably make them live above the poverty line.   

We have all categories of people; we have the porters, we have the guards, we have the house girls, we have the house boys.  These people are working for 24 hours, they are on duty, for 31 days of the month, they do not know Sunday!  So, we must have a minimum standard.  It is just reasonable that we give a minimum standard so that they may be able to gain from the efforts they give in the jobs where they are employed.

MISS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Toskin for giving way.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that even within the home, there are numerous husbands who overwork their wives in unpaid labour while they sit around doing nothing, loitering and they subject them to such hard labour and I would like to inform him that even this sector who are the majority within our community would need to be paid for this labour.  I thank you. 

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for an hon. Member of this House to stand up and say that there are numerous husbands who are loitering and exploiting the labour of their wives in this country and life, when in a marriage relationship the activities between husband and wife are not equated to labour services?  Two, when the hon. Member is not married, does not have a husband to exploit, does not know these matters and is just spreading rumours and is trying to disrupt those of us who are married and are getting on very well?  Three, when in fact I know also many men including myself who work so hard in order to bring our family together and we contribute towards the well being of a family?  And four, is she aware that in our Constitution we protect a family from allusions and innuendos of this nature so that we can build clean and healthy families in Uganda?  Is the hon. Member in order to bring family disruptions to the country using the Floor of this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  First of all, I think the Member was speaking in her capacity as a representative of people of Rukungiri.  So, the question of her status is irrelevant.  At the same time, I think the essence of the motion is enumeration so what type of enumeration that takes, is different but I think she was not talking in terms of money. I think she was talking in terms of appropriate enumeration for the services rendered.  

MR. TOSKIN:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As I said before, Mr. Speaker, I did not think I was so competent to explain as to whether our marital relations also equal to employment but of course, in some other cultures like where I come from, we pay a dowry at the time of marriage and anything which happens after that is a matter between a wife and a husband.  

I was trying to emphasize that the import of this resolution is that it will help Government, it will bring it to bear upon the President to come up expeditiously and announce the minimum wage for our people.  The thing at stake here is that, each one of us of whatever level, whatever educational status or standard of living, each one of us has responsibilities which are equal: Each of us has to educate our children, each of us has to provide medical services or medication for our families, each of us has to provide shelter, each of us has to ensure that people are living happily in our families including any level of worker, even group employees.  It is only Government as a state which must give the guideline so that everybody can live happily.  
I might also say that some of the problems we are facing now as a country are as a result of poor enumeration, poor payment of the lower groups of people.  Problems of rebellion now - people are being lured into war because there is lack of money, people are being led to robbery. The numerous robberies you have now could be a result of this. The increasing number of children on the streets or youth on the streets could be a result of this.  Their parents are here, they earn a salary but they cannot provide for these children and it could be partly why they are increasing on the streets.  And of course, as you know, Uganda now has got one of the lowest life expectancies and the reasons are that the people cannot provide for themselves, they cannot feed themselves at the right time.  So, Mr. Speaker, I want to support this motion and I appeal to hon. Members also to support it so that it can save us as Members of Parliament and as citizens of this country.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (Workers Representative):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, having read the contents of the motion and also from listening carefully to the contribution made by the hon. Minister of State for Labour and also, personally being a concerned citizen of this country, Mr. Speaker, I stand to second the motion.  

Many Members have expressed concern about the delay of this minimum wage and I would like to remind the Members that it is not an issue of yesterday whereby you could give the Government more time to consider as it has been proposed.  For some of us who were in NRC, it is an issue which started way back since NRC.  You can see how patient the workers of this nation have been and how reluctant the Government has been.  So I think it is prudent that we recommend this Resolution so that maybe His Excellency can know that there is something burning that needs to be worked on.  

I would like to request you that let us not enslave ourselves under the disguise of the friendly investor laws.  What is happening and what is delaying all these laws is because of the term "investor friendly." How will the investor look at it?  We have visited so many countries where the minimum wage has been an issue and it has been solved and those countries also have got investors!  Let us welcome these investors when we have established the law in place.  Why do you wait for the investor to first come and under utilise the labour we have and then you put the law in place?  I think this is a viable time when we should put the law in place so that whichever investor wants to come in Uganda can come knowing under what laws he is going to operate.

A minimum wage is not going to be a burden to investors as some people may speculate, it is just going to be a bottom checkpoint whereby citizens of this country are not again exploited as it used to be in the 50s and 60s.  We are trying to go away from that mentality and that is why we are concerned about the minimum wage.  

In this country, to be a graduate is like now wasting your time.  You will be employed by an Indian who will in turn give you about 40,000/- shillings per month.  Is that equivalent to what you are putting in?  Is that how we are going to protect the citizens of this country?  I think it is our duty as Parliament to see that what is paid to any labourer is viable.  And I think that is why we are campaigning and we are saying let us pass the Resolution whereby the President can know that a minimum wage is very important, it should be put in place to countercheck those investors who have come just to exploit but not to contribute to our economy.  

If I have been seeing and following the trend, these days investors are just interested in "casualization".  Instead of employing permanent workers, they employ "casuals" for years and years, and yet the existing law is clear; you employ somebody on casual basis for not more than three months but what our investors are doing  now is that whether you are a graduate or not, they deny you even an identity card so that you can be put on a small sheet as a casual.  Whenever he sees you in the morning is when he regards you as an employee of that particular day.  Are we going to liberate our country?  Are we going to protect our citizens in that fashion of employment where workers are "casualised" for years and years and given minimum pay?
DR. MWEBESA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you hon. Member for giving way.  I am seeking clarification. Would you tell me the percentage employed by the investor and the percentage employed by the indigenous Ugandans concerning the casual labourers or the unskilled labour?  Because it seems you are talking about investor, investor, yet most of these unskilled people are employed by Ugandans.  So I want some clarification on that.  Thank you.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think when I mention the word "investor", I do not necessarily mean a foreigner.  An investor can be local or foreign.  So I have used the word "investor" in its broad sense.  Whoever is investing is an investor.  My concern is, how much is he paying?  I think this is what we are trying to set up and our concern is, how much should be the bottom checkpoint for giving any person wage or salary.  As for a data of how many are being employed by the local ones and the foreigner ones, we can come to it after we have passed how much they should pay as a minimum.  

I was talking on the point of "casualisation" which we need to discourage. It is old fashioned, it is an exploitation method of labour and we cannot encourage that!  Mr. Speaker, when I was listening to the Minister, he rightly quoted the ILO convention number 26 which for some years now has been ratified by this country.  So, in fact what we are going to do is to remind His Excellency the President that much as you are sitting on these papers, you have already committed yourself internationally that you are supposed to obey convention number 26.  And I think this is the role of this Parliament and this is what we are seeking, that we should pass this Resolution so that His Excellency the President can know that it is a burning issue and it should be passed.  I thank you very much.

MR. PAUL ETIANG (Tororo County, Tororo):  Mr. Speaker, since I rise to speak from the Back Bench for the first time, may I first of all take this opportunity to congratulate the newly appointed Members of the Front Bench, particularly the Prime Minister and the others.  Mr. Speaker, I was the Minister very much associated with the process leading to the promulgation of the proposed new minimum wage and I would like to stand up on this occasion to speak by way of giving information, if it can help guide the House as to whether this Resolution is necessary or not.  And as to this point, Mr. Speaker, I am open.  

What has been given by hon. Dr. Lyomoki and the Minister regarding the history of the minimum wages is correct.  That is, the minimum wages board is normally appointed in accordance with the Act quoted and it is that board's recommendations that are submitted to the Minister in charge of Labour, which Minister has two options on receipt of such recommendations.  The first option is to agree with the board and say it is a fair recommendation, the other one is to disagree with the Board.  Now, before pronouncing himself or herself on either of these positions, Mr.Speaker, it is a requirement of the law that the Minister gazettes the recommendations of the Board for a stipulated minimum period of 60 days or maybe 30 days I do not remember, for public reaction.  Now subject to public reaction to the recommendations - the public may say the recommendations are too high or too low, but subject to that, the Minister then goes to his Colleagues in Cabinet and submits his or her recommendation.   

Now in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, there was a resort to the second alternative by the Minister because on one hand the workers representatives agreed with the board that the recommended minimum wage was fair. The recommended wage originally of 75,000/- shillings, according to the workers was fair, although as they said, it was not satisfactory. But under the circumstances, they were prepared to say that it was fair.

On the other hand, the Federation of Uganda Employers maintained that the proposed minimum wage would lose out on investment, among other things, if we conceded to that minimum recommendation. The reasons that they gave was particularly pertaining to the comparable wage ranges in the neighbouring countries. So they recommended a lower minimum wage. 

Now this is why the Minister had to seek the advise of Cabinet on the subject and Cabinet advised the Minister at that time to refer the matter back to the Minimum Wages Board, given the reasons as given by both sides; by the workers and the employers,  and then the Board reconsidered the issues and lowered their recommendation to 65,000/- shillings which the employers still considered to be too high.  Cabinet was therefore constrained to make a recommendation lower than 65,000/- shillings to His Excellency the President.  

Now, as it has been reported by the Minister, the President wanted further consultations on the proposed minimum wage. I do not have to confirm, but I concur with what the minister said that it is the prerogative of the President, in accordance with the Act, to promulgate the minimum wage. The President wanted to be absolutely sure that the decision he was being asked to take would be in the best interest of the country, particularly for the economic situation.  Now to that end, therefore, Mr. Speaker, he invited Members of NOTU, among others, to discuss with him a number of points which included the proposed minimum wage. I was a party to those discussions several times up to when I left the Ministry of Labour. Another meeting was projected to cover this issue among others.  

Now, I would like, therefore, to inform the House here that, first of all, I am not quite clear of the basis of this Resolution.  Is it an appeal to the President, as the hon. Member who has just sat down has said, to remind him of the international labour obligations? If that is the case, I think  the President, more than anybody else, is aware of the relevant conventions.  I am not saying that the House should not, but I would hate to give the impression that the President is incompetent of recognising international conventions.  Definitely, he is more cognisant of them than anybody else.  

The next issue, Mr. Speaker, is that the recommended minimum wage of 45,000/- shillings per month is hardly paid by any employer right now in Kampala.  In other words, it is lower than what almost everybody who employs even a house-girl or a house-boy pays a month.  45,000/- shillings a month is lower than what is normally paid to Kampala domestic servants as salary per month.  And if anybody wants to challenge this, you just go and ask.  I believe no Member in the House here employs anybody at that rate.  

Now, the president continued, at the time I left the Ministry of Labour, with his consultations principally with organisations like Uganda Manufacturers Association and the others as to what minimal wage to apply because he was really convinced of the strong arguments on both sides.  There was the argument of the economic ability to pay on one side, and on the other side, the argument as to the minimality of the wage.  And considering the effect, particularly of foreign investment, the President maintained his delayed action in the comfort of knowing that the recommended minimum wage was already being paid, in any case, by everybody. So, he was not under pressure to quickly pronounce himself on the subject because the Resolution here does not specifically say the President should pronounce a particular minimum wage and I assume the way it is worded, it is the one I know of 45,000 shillings per month which I say is already paid by everybody.  

MR. PAJOBO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that it is not true that everybody is paying 45,000 shillings.  In the tea sector, people are paid 9,000 shillings.  There are people who are paid 11,000 shillings per month.  So, therefore, for him to say that people are paid  45,000 shillings is not completely true.  I am the General Secretary of the National Union of Plantation and Agricultural Workers. I was a Member of the Minimum Wage Board and I understand very well that when we went around, the employers and other people concerned recommended 65,000 shillings.  Thank you.

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Speaker, the case of plantation workers who the hon. Member has the honour to represent in this House is not covered by the proposed minimum wages.  In any case, what I said in my submission was the minimum wage payable to domestic servants here in Kampala.  I was very clear on that. You can play back the tape.  I did not refer to the plantation workers.  So, I still maintain, Mr. Speaker, that here in Kampala, for domestic servants, there is no body who pays less than 45,000 shillings a month.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think it is because of that that we need to remind the President, through this House, so that he gets a clearer picture.  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member earlier reiterated and said that the President is not under pressure and that he is comfortable because the majority of the people are not paying below 45,000 shillings.  The clarification I wanted to seek from him is, how did he come to get that data and yet some of us know that even within Kampala here, some Indians are paying 30,000 in a month?  How did that hon. Member collect his data that he took to the President for him to be convinced that even though he does not pass it now,  people are paying above 45,000 shillings?

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Speaker, I was very careful in the choice of my words.  I said, as of when I left Labour, which is two years ago, His Excellency the President, recognising the arguments on both sides was not under pressure to pronounce himself on a subject which, after all, he had the comfort of knowing that as of then, most employers of Kampala domestic service, if not all, paid more than 45,000 shillings per month per employee registered with the Ministry of Labour. 

I would like, for the information of the House, to make the following points: That in addition to recommending a minimum wage which I claim and which I remember to be 45,000 shillings to the President, Cabinet also recommended on informal sector, a point raised by hon. Member from Rukungiri about the husbands or wives who allegedly overwork their spouses and do not pay them for domestic chores. There is a standing instruction, to the best of my recollection, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Labour to submit to Cabinet a paper specifically addressing the minimum wage issue in the informal sector that covers husbands, wives and other employees otherwise who are not covered by the present report of the Minimum Wages Board.  

The other significant point, Mr. Speaker, that the House may like to know is that, in a related recommendation, Cabinet directed the Minister of Labour to come up with a proposal for wage payment per hour rather than per month. This will solve the issue of temporary employment, exploitation and all that sort of stuff. So all in all, I do not know what has happened to date.  I would like to claim that the President is not intentionally sitting on the recommendations to him on this issue and that he is definitely, as the Minister has put it, making further consultations in the best national interest. I thank you.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to inform  hon. Members that Government is very concerned about workers; very concerned both in the private sector and also in the public sector.  That is why regarding the public sector, Government resolved that there must be a compression ratio between the highest paid political leader and the lowest paid public servant and it adopted a compression ratio of 1:20 to be achieved in ten years time. In other words, the highest paid political leader is the President who gets, Shs.3.6 million per month. That Act has just been passed -(Interruptions)

MR. CHEBET: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and sorry for interrupting the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to know where the category of public servants like Managing Directors, some of whom get paid more than the President are classified because the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is saying the highest paid person is the President and then you come to the lowest.  How is that brought in the equation to the nearest compression ratio?  Thank you very much.

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you very much.  I would like the Prime Minister also to shed light and give us an opinion on whether failure by Government to establish a minimum wage is caused by the weaknesses of the Trade Unions not being able to push for the rights of the workers as much as Parliamentarians pushed the Prime Minister when he was a Minister of Public Service -  I think you remember how we pushed him so hard - to establish the wage of the President and political leaders. I am happy that hon. Lyamoki and the Trade Union leaders have come to Parliament but the organisations themselves are so weak that they have not been fighting for their rights for so many years and now I hope that this waiting and this motion is going to speed up that minimum wage fixing.

Secondly, whether he is also going to talk about the fact that there is so much unemployment because of the use or misuse of the term "casual labour" and why we do not have, as a Government, an unemployment insurance fund for these people who have cut the bond with their extended family lifestyle and have come to be categorised as workers and unionised workers; and whether the insurance for the aged and the pension scheme - all these matters are being taken into account generally by the Government comprehensively.

Also, the failure by the workers to agitate for a Ministry of Labour when the rest of the world has ministries of Labour, which is part of the United Nations convention. Here in Uganda, we do not have it. Can the Prime Minister shed light on Uganda's  failure to recognise the International Labour Organisation and its requirement for having a full Minister who can take care of the workers' problems?

MR. RWAKOOJO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to know if the Government has any figures for Uganda's unemployment rate because when we are talking about the minimum wage, this is a factor of demand and supply, especially for unskilled labour.  It would, therefore, be futile to try to fix a price when we do not know where the demand curve is and where the supply curve is. Secondly, is there a deliberate policy in some of the things we do to create jobs? There is a time when Government decided to install telephone wires and they were digging trenches from Jinja to Kampala. Marubeni spoiled the roads but in the process created jobs.  Sometimes, some Governments make roads partly to provide transport but also to provide employment.  Is there any deliberate policy - if our employment rate is high which I think is, is there a deliberate policy to create employment in this country?  
PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful for the questions though they may interrupt the process of internalisation but really, this is a very important point.  So, let me dispose of some of them where I am knowledgeable and where I am not knowledgeable, other people can handle the issues.  

On the issue of the rate of unemployment, these are some of the factors which have to be quantified and updated. You need updated figures.  On the policy of creating employment, I think you have heard time and again that first of all, you must create a propitious environment and the right policies.  You must also modernise agriculture and you must create factories.  All these are holistic mechanisms for creating employment. 

In the area of education, we have changed the curriculum from primary down to kindergarten.  We are vocationalising people's minds and hands in that curriculum. We are also putting emphasis on technology. That is why there is even a proposal to merge ITEK and UPK so that the teachers who are vectors of knowledge have imbibed technology when UPK and ITEK are merged.  So, there are many policies going on and we want affordable and sustainable policies. If we promise heaven and it is not here, then the Committee dealing with assurances is going to take us to task. But let me proceed with the issue of the compression ratio. 

When we adopted the compression ratio of 1:20, it means that in ten years time, the lowest paid person will not get less than Shs.180,000/= and you keep this ratio. We are now reducing the gap between the lowest and the highest paid person.  As I speak, the compression ratio between the highest paid political leader and the public servant is more than 70.  It is extremely high but understandable because this country collapsed; we are transiting from anarchy to state-led democracy and we shall move to society-led democracy so that is one mechanism which was adopted with a clear framework and it means that those who are getting reasonable amounts of money stay put and those at the lowest are being upgraded. 

Now, let me deal with Article 40 of the Constitution.  Article 40 of the Constitution is very clear.  It enjoins Parliament to make laws to ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination and I want to inform hon. Karuhanga that the Trade Unions are extremely vibrant and as a former Minister of Public Service, we were having lots of meetings and the reason why you have less strikes is precisely because we have been interfacing with them and they know our holistic policies. 
Now, this Article says Parliament must enact laws to ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination, how can you do this when you do not have even a job evaluation instrument?  As I speak now, the Ministry of Public Service is on the brink of completing a job evaluation instrument.  This instrument enables you to grade the salaries of the people, taking into account their skills and the environmental hazards they face. For example, the hangman faces the stigma of hanging people.  That is the environmental hazard which he faces. Another factor also taken into account are the responsibilities.  
So, before you have a job evaluation instrument, how do you proceed even to assist Parliament to ensure that people get equal payment for equal work?  These are professional matters where you are not supposed to muddle through - you are supposed to move systematically and move towards the cherished goal.  So, all these mechanisms are being put into place and when we are handling the issue of the workers in the private sector, the compression ratio will be taken into account, the job evaluation instrument will also be taken into account. Let me also say that the issue of macro-economic stability is very important because if you merely take people when you cannot afford it, you might disturb the right economic equilibrium we have had. 

Let me finally say that this motion is defective.  Why is it defective?  It is saying that, "Now, therefore, be it resolved that His Excellency the President be required - it is compulsory - to give effect to the recommended proposal for the minimum wage..." and as I understand it, the recommended proposal is Shs.65,000/= per month.  I would like to draw your attention to Article 93 of the Constitution.   Article 93 of the Constitution says, among other things, that if you move a motion or a Bill which imposes a charge on the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund, it is only the Government which can move it.  The reason was deliberate because Government knows what is in the kitty.  If any person moves that kind of Bill, it may not be sustainable.  So, the effect of this motion is to cause the President to pay Shs.65,000/= per month and it is violating Article 65.  Is he in order to move this motion?  It is a point of order now.

DR. LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have stood on this point of clarification but I was waiting to give my submission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The point being raised by the Prime Minister is that this motion is defective because it is imposing a charge on the Consolidated Fund and this is out of tune with the constitution. My understanding of this motion is that they do not know what figure the President is going to decide because eventually he is going to decide either to accept the recommendation or accept such a sum which he thinks can be accommodated within the Consolidated Fund.  So, this will not put a charge unless the President himself decides.  So, I think he is in order.

DR. LYOMOKI:  Mr. Speaker, I was just standing on a point of clarification.  First of all, the motion for a resolution the Right hon. Prime Minister is reading is the former text.  We had discussion  with the hon. Minister in charge of Labour and that text was changed to read that the President be required to expedite the process of consultation.  So, I think maybe you are reading a very old text.  Secondly, if you look at the resolution, it talks of unskilled labour.  Government does not have unskilled labour. They now have support staff who are group employees and they are recognised as such.   So when we are talking about unskilled labour, I think we are really emphasizing the private sector, Mr. Speaker.    Therefore, Mr. Speaker, what I was saying is that, this resolution at the end says "in accordance with the law".  So, I do not think there is any connection with the Consolidated Fund, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Your clarification is that the minimum wage that will be prescribed will not affect the workers in the government; is that what you mean? You mean the President will declare that the minimum wage is 65 for workers and then some employees of government get less than that? Once it is a minimum wage, I thought everybody would claim it.

MR. PAJOBO: Mr. Speaker, in fact the minimum wage paid by government is 45,000 shillings and the minimum wage recommended by the Cabinet to the President is 45,000 shillings.  Therefore, there will be nothing charged on the consolidated account. It will be more expensive because government is already paying 45,000 shillings.  Maybe the recommendation by the Cabinet is 45,000 shillings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, hon. Member, is it your position that you are satisfied with the proposal of 45,000 shillings and therefore the aim of this motion is for the President to say 45,000 shillings? Is that what you want to tell the workers because you have demanded that you want 45,000? Because if you are saying that you are going to be satisfied with 45,000 shillings and that this will not cause any -(Interruption)

MR. PAJOBO:  No, we are not satisfied. We are not saying we are satisfied with 45,000 shillings. We are only answering what he is saying viz-as-vis  the recommendation by the Board which is 65,0000 shillings and then by the Cabinet which is 45,000. We are saying at the moment that if government itself is paying and the  President has been given the freedom to choose - we are not saying that he should pay that, we are saying he has been given freedom. He can think within that period if it is going to affect the Consolidated Fund.  That is what I am saying 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, what you are saying is that because you are not specific, you are not categoric on an amount, so you are not imposing anything, that it will be up to him to decide the amount, that is what saves your motion.  Otherwise, if you were categoric and said 65,000 shillings, then you are directing a charge on the Consolidated Fund and that will be out of tune with the constitution.

MR. BAKU: Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether I am having the right document but what I have here reads as follows:  "Now, therefore, be it resolved by government that His Excellency the President be required to expedite the process of consultation in order to give effect to the recommended proposals for the minimum wage for unskilled labour by the Minimum Wages Advisory Board."  Now, if this is the correct one, it means what we are asking the President to do is to give effect to the recommended amount by the Minimum Wages Advisory Board which is 65,000  shillings and that is what the Prime Minister is saying is going to raise a constitutional issue.     
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay! I thought really item 60 was the gist of the motion. I do not know whether he changed it.  "A motion for a resolution of Parliament requiring His Excellency the President to expedite the process of consultation in order to give effect to the recommended proposals for minimum wage in accordance with the provisions of the Minimum Wage Advisory Board and Wages Councils Act of 1964."  Now, which is which? There is some doubt as to what you wanted - so that we can pronounce ourselves on this.

DR. LYOMOKI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The resolution ties the consultation of the President to the Act and the Act provides that "The President may, on receipt of any wages resolution proposals under the provisions of sub-section (5) of this section accept or vary such proposals and give effect to such proposals as accepted or varied by him by statutory order."  So, the -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, what you are really saying is that the final decision lies with the President?

DR. LYOMOKI:  That is right, Mr. Speaker.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, in light of those clarifications, first of all I was given this resolution by hon. Mateke, so I want to apologise.  Now, I have got the latest one which does not violate article 93 because, as you know, government can not declare a minimum wage when it is not even giving it in the public sector.  It will be giving contradictory signals.  So, it must have a holistic approach.  What it would recommend in the private sector would have to be implemented in the public sector.  So, it would appear to me that the resolution is not violating the Constitution and I want also to make a pledge which I have made to you in our discussions namely that I shall be asking all the stake holders to meet us and we are going to handle this matter because I believe that when recommendations were last made, some of them may have been overtaken by the inflation and other qualitative changes.  

So, I intend to proceed as follows:  As you know, whenever we are dealing with money, we must interface first of all with the Ministry of Finance, we must interface with the private sector. After updating the proposal, we make sure that they are fully internalized and we must have a clear position which is acceptable to the stake holders, after which I preside over meetings.  After presiding over the meeting, we can have some discussions with the President but usually, the best approach is to take these matters to Cabinet because it is better for the entire Cabinet to advise the President.  This is so because sometimes he is overstretched by state functions and if we merely push things upstairs which are not fully internalized, we might lugubrious the state and himself.  So, the motion as it stands, to me, is not injurious to the constitution.  So, I suggest that, in addition to what is here, they should know what I have pledged to them.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mover, please wind up.

DR. LYOMOKI: Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the government for the support that has been given to this resolution and also, the hon. Members of Parliament that have supported the workers in this particular case.  Of course, workers belong to all constituencies and, therefore, I think they will do the needful when time comes.

I want to assure the hon. Members that this final text of the resolution was worked out together with the hon. Minister in charge of labour, and it was almost a joint issue because the workers abandoned the earlier resolution which did not look to be in good line with the government policy.  I  am, therefore, Mr. Speaker, asking the Members of Parliament to support this process because when this resolution is endorsed, it will be taken in the consultations that His Excellency the President is going to undertake to know that even the hon. Members of Parliament support that process and of course, the workers will continue to support the outcome of this process.

We pledge, as workers' leaders, to continue with this support of Parliament and also of the Executive when the time comes for them to consult us but we think or we urge them to expedite that process in order for us to come up with the rightful level for a minimum wage.  I know, Mr. Speaker, that workers would have liked a high level, and I also know, Mr. Speaker, that the employers would like a very low level but, Mr. Speaker, I know that the outcome will try to marry the two interests in order for us to come up with a central position that does not disadvantage any particular sector.  So, Mr. Speaker, I therefore wind up by calling upon hon. Members of Parliament to support and endorse this resolution in order for the workers of this country to be recognised as far as labour input is concerned.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I am going to put a question but for purposes of our records and in view of some observations that had earlier been made, would you like to read the motion so that I put the question?

DR. LYOMOKI:  I am just going to read the last line.  "Now therefore, be it dissolved by Parliament that His Excellency the President be urged to expedite the process of consultation in order to give effect to the recommended proposals for the minimum wage for unskilled labour in accordance with the Minimum Wages Advisory Boards and Wages Council Act, 1964."  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now I want to put the question to that motion.

                    (Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I now adjourn the House till tomorrow 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose and adjourned till Thursday, 15th April 1999 at 2.30 p.m)


 
