Wednesday, 19 April 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Al- Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

LAYING OF PAPERS ON THE TABLE

THE MINISTER OF STATE IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): I beg to lay a number of Papers on the Table:

1.	Audited Accounts of the year ended 30th June, 1992 in respect of Government Central Purchasing Corporation.

2.	Audited Accounts of Financial Statements for the Year ended 31st December, 1993 in respect of Uganda Railways Corporation.

3.	Audited Accounts for the year ended 30th September, 1994 in respect of Uganda Coffee Development Authority.

4.	Audited Accounts of the two years ended 30th June, 1994 in respect of NEC, Works and Engineering Ltd.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT BILL, 1994

MR KASAIJA (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome you back from the long recess and I want to take this opportunity to bring you the greetings of the people of Masindi and Bujenje in particular. (Applause) 

I would like to start by thanking the hon. Minister who has endeavoured to bring this long awaited Bill.  This Bill is so important to this nation and at times I had a lot of quarrels with some Ministers as to why they take so long to take up such important areas like this one. Because government should endeavour to prioritise certain areas which affect the wananchi. When a Bill takes so long like this one to come up and enact laws to control the utilisation of forests, forests are being depleted, then it is too much unfortunate. However, it is never too late. (Laughter) 

So, I support that this Bill should be passed expeditiously so that we get funds to ensure that this Authority is put in place.  Because you know as a poor nation, we cannot stand on our own.  We must get donations and grants so as to implement some of our policies. In fact, that is what is frustrating some of these organisations to operate because we must wait to get assistance from outside.  

Having talked about that, I would like to say that there is need to control the depletion of our forests.  Our forests are being harvested at a high rate and this is being done with full collaboration of the Ministry of the civil servants, the so-called district forest officers and they collaborate with pit-sawyers. So the forests are finished. In my particular district, our wealth is finished; our people have no employment for the future.  We do not have much because the thing is being exhausted, there is no return, and there is nothing they are bringing in to help the people in future.  So this is a serious issue, which the government must attend to seriously.  

And in any case, if these forests should be decentralised so that we have people of our own who can run them in the interest - because people when appointed as district forest officer, who do not hail from those areas, they have no particular concern for the people.  They only work to fill their bellies and then go.  This kind of situation, we do not like.  When you go to Masindi, you will find UZO vehicles.  They are lining up everyday.  That is where they have their headquarters.  The whole of Nakawa is going towards Masindi, all tracks go to Masindi for timber only.  But what has a Munyoro gained from that?  (Laughter) 

Mr Chairman, you better save me from this, she is talking of sectarian and yet a human being should be sectarian.  So with that kind of situation, I appeal to government that this law should be implemented immediately and I would also request the Minister to decentralise these forests so that Banyoro can manage their forests for the sake of continuity and sustainability.  Bunyoro is one of the poorest districts and it has no roads, it has almost nothing.  The whole infrastructure is not there.  But now the little things we have are being depleted and there is nobody to save us.  

So, really there is a need that this law is put in place, decentralisation of the forests is done so that our people can manage their resources they themselves that we know that there is going to be sustainability for the future of our children and our grand children.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MISS NAMUYANGU (Kibuku, Pallisa): Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Bill. I will first congratulate the Minister for coming up with such a comprehensive Bill.  When we stand to talk about forest degradation, there are so many things that we have to bear in mind.  We realise that the majority of our people are using fuel wood, over 90 percent.  

But here I stand to request the Minister to come up with other sources of energy to assist our people for domestic lighting and maybe other domestic uses.  Things like solar could be adopted and it could be used by our people. Electricity could be made available to most of the people because we see that even in towns, the majority of people are using charcoal and definitely, we cannot expect our people not to go in to destroy the forests when they do not have an alternative.  We even realise that even simple materials, these so called non-timber forest products like gum and all these other small products are undermined.  We do not value them and we continue to import them.  I will give an example.  

In Karamoja, we have a species called acacia Arabic.  It is very rich in gum but we cannot even think of exploiting such a resource.  So I would also urge the Minister to consider such smaller items seriously.  Even with these bigger forests, we realise the majority of these forests are lacking what we call back zones.  These are areas that surround these forests that could be beneficial to the people because the local population has to use such areas to get all the products that they need. Products like fuel wood, timber, and even those who want to go on fishing, hunting, picnic sites, they could go to such sites.  But these sites are non-existent.  So what happens, the people go in to exploit the forests.  I will give an example. Of recent, I was touring Bwindi forest but I realised the farms for the people are just almost within the forest.  People are just encroaching on these forests just because back zones do not exist. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that in Budongo Forest, we have some people who have already settled there and they are continuing to uproot the trees and they are building permanent houses in those forests.  Thank you.

MISS NAMUYANGU: I thank my dear Sister for that information and I believe the Minister has taken note of it.  I also want to talk about the wetland.  When you go to the region I represent, that is Eastern, I think you can shed tears.  These so called reserves have become rice reserves and I call upon the Minister to do something about it and the methods of farming used in these wetland, you realise that when farmers come up to grow the rice, they will never leave even a single tree standing in the garden because they believe these trees attract birds.  So, maybe the Minister could come up and encourage upland rice or do something about it. Maybe encourage these farmers to plant trees along the boundaries.  

I would also call upon the Minister at least to encourage the idea of wood load.  Those who do not have land would bring in the idea of agro-forestry because we have countries like Madagascar whereby the main forests are always surrounded by some small dots of agro-forestry and these people are benefiting and we have some very good trees that can really be integrated with the crops.  But when you talk to the farmers, they say trees take long and when you ask them, how about those ones you are harvesting, did you plant them? They say the children will find a solution to their problems  So the Minister and the Members of Parliament and maybe everybody, I think it is high time come up to address such issues.  

We realise that environmental problems do not respect political boundaries.  So, it would be a matter of us joining hands and when I hear some Members saying that maybe since for them they have some forests, these forests should be decentralised, I think for me, I would defer in a way because we realise that of recent environmental officers were elected, but when they were sent to the districts, the local administrators rejected them because they do not understand the values of environment.  

So I would again appeal to the Minister to carry out some sensitisation seminars and mass education to the people in order for them to understand all about environment and even these officers should work in connection with the local administration if they are to curb problems related to environment.  Mr Chairman, I beg to support the Bill.

MR ADAM IMAGA (Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you Mr Chairman. With your permission allow me to read my contribution because I have some health problems  I rise in support of this Bill. First, allow me to express my sympathy to the bereaved families of colleagues who passed away during the recess.  

Secondly, allow me on behalf of the people of Arua and on my own behalf to express our condolences and sympathy to hon. Makumbi on the death of his son and his consequent abduction.  This was too much for one man to bear that.  (Laughter) Also, allow me to thank the newly sworn in NRC Members generally and particularly hon. Karugaba who represents late Tom Rubaale.  Tom Rubaale had a broad vision as far as the tarmac of urban roads was concerned.  He one time was arranging that we, NRC Members who represent urban areas should seek an audience with His Excellency the President to see how the tarmac roads in urban areas can be rehabilitated.  Though Tom has died, that idea is still alive. 

Coming to the Bill,I first want to start by sounding a serious warning to the government on foreign investment, on products which are very destructive to the environment.  About two years ago, I stood here suggesting that five percent of the revenue from the tobacco should go back to the districts where tobacco is grown so as to promote afforestation.  During that time, the Minister for Finance opposed the motion and when it was put on vote, the Noes had it.  Today I must say that let the people who said no go to Arua and see the results.  

Right now you can see Koboko county at a distance of 30 kilometres. You can even stand in Maracha, face one direction, you can count 100 houses. Also, you can stand up and see Arua at a distance of 20 kilometres from Maracha.  This is the result of destruction of trees and UNCR came to our rescue by raising about 2.5 tons of seedlings but up to now nobody talks about these seedlings.  They are overgrowing.  

Therefore, I would like to suggest that with immediate effect the government should release a vehicle to distribute these seedlings to parts of West Nile.  As a result of destruction of trees in Arua, we are experiencing unusual weather in Arua.  Upto now, it has never rained although the rains are there but is not the usual system and the plantation has been taken off.  So, this is a very serious issue and the only way to adjust this is to have government in.  Mr Chairman, another point I would like to raise is the burning of charcoal and the consumption of charcoal in urban areas.  

The rate of consuming charcoal in urban areas is reaching alarming stage.  Sometimes the government talks of rural electrification.  This is not where the problem of charcoal burning can be alleviated.  Charcoal is burnt in rural areas but mainly consumed by urban population.  Therefore, it is wrong to talk of rural electrification as far as charcoal burning is concerned. My suggestion is that the government should immediately improve urban electrification system and also government should reduce the price of kerosene even up to 200/=.  After all, kerosene is bought with our foreign currency.  Even if we borrow it, we shall pay.  But if the price is very high, can a village woman afford that?  

So, my suggestion is that the kerosene price must go down up to even 200/=.  This is a problem which affects mainly Arua.  This is mainly said on page 9.  It has covered so many things and this is about hazard waste.  This is the worrying situation in which Arua Municipality is likely to fall in as a victim of diseases due to poor health situation.  Arua Town uses underground water such as protected water springs, boreholes and wells.  Also Arua has no sanitation system.  It uses pit-latrines, no dumping lagoon.  

During the discussions of NURP Projects, it was agreed that Arua should be supplied with an emptier and also a lagoon centre.  But up to now the emptier has finished to take off, the lagoon has taken off, it appears those who are implementing NURP are doing injustice to West Nile region.  It is another way of halting development.  What do you expect when people ease just near themselves, there is no water system! There are no dumping grounds? Now, are we not expecting disaster?  So the issue of an emptier for the whole region should be seriously thought of. But when we talk of this, some people say it is very expensive.  Really an emptier for one region is very expensive! So that is why I say some of the NURP officers are using NURP to halt development in Arua.  

Allow me briefly to say something about what happened in The New Vision of yesterday, that is revel recruitment in Arua. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please; concentrate on the Bill.

MR IMAGA:  Mr Chairman, this is important and allow me to point out this.  These people are using the colonial legacy of leaving Arua as a source of labour. So in that New Vision, we read that these boys were recruited to make bridge.  So anybody can lure Arua people by giving any reason because up to now, Arua remains a source of labour.  So to fight this, it needs the government to come in.  Mr Chairman, with these few words, I support the Bill. Thank you very much.

MRS OKER (Women Representative, Gulu): Mr Chairman, I rise to support this Bill. This Bill is very important before the House.  I would like to make my own observations on air pollution within our environment in the cities and most of our towns.  This air pollution is coming as a result of our poor disposal of refuse.  you find that the rubbish garbage is so full to capacity and they get so wet, the leak and you see them flowing in all directions. You can even get the smell even if you are 100 meters from that very garbage and this is source of air pollution, which is very dangerous to human beings. 

Secondly, they are also a source of infection to our water because most of the people do not get water from the taps.  So this solid materials drains down into the ground and you find some people tapping the water from some distances and you find people getting cholera in most of the areas in our towns and in the city.  In Kampala here, you walk around the city, you find the garbage bins are full to the brim and you really wonder whether we are really serious with the protection of air pollution.  I would like to draw the attention of both the Minister of Urban areas and the Minister for Environmental Protection that unless we really seriously look into a way of disposal of our refuse by importing proper vehicles that can collect this garbage and dispose of them and we utilise for manure rather than leaving them to be in the town and polluting our air.  

Again on the disposal of waste, in most of the towns, you will find that the sewerage systems are not protected, they are not covered and this is also part of the air pollution in the city and our towns.  I am therefore, requesting both the Ministers concerned that measures be put in place that these town councils and city authorities should see to it that our drainage system is properly protected and covered so that they drain in the channel where they should go and even when they empty into our rivers and lakes, we should also take precautions because it is the same lake again which we are protecting.  So, those are some of the measures. I find that this is very common during the dry season in certain areas; moreso, in my district where I come from.  This is destroying our environment because once you burn the grass, you are also likely to burn more trees which are germinating.  

I am, therefore, requesting that the Minister puts in place a proper control system of stopping bush burning during dry seasons because we have really destroyed a lot of environment through bush burning and also destroyed the soil.  

Repairing our roads; big holes are being dug there and I do not see how we can devise means of filling up these holes after the murrum has been removed.  We must know that this is a danger.  So the Ministry of Works and that Environmental Protection should make arrangements to make sure that these potholes are filled up after the murram has been removed.  I find that women use a lot of firewood in the rural areas.  My colleague has just been saying about the method that women should go into environmental protection and plant trees.  But I see that it should be the duty of every Ugandan that per every tree that you remove, you must plant at least one or two trees. (Applause) 

If you go in the rural areas, you find that most of the homes are bare yet there are trees which we could plant in our homes and we should put in place that every homestead must trees which are never cut down but is used in both ways as firewood as well as for consumption in fruits time.  It should be that every tree a person cuts must be replace by two trees to compensate and this should go right down to the grassroots level, to our RCs, a policy which should be effectively implemented if we are to protect our environment for the future generation.  Otherwise, the rate at which the charcoal burning and cutting of the trees is going without replacing the losses is too much.  

So, I am calling upon the Minister to seriously consider that and not to leave it only to the women.  If you are not going to leave it to the women, I am requesting that big support be given to the women.  You just do not say plant trees and you do not give them entandikwa to start the planting of the trees.  So, maybe, the entandikwa which the Minister in charge of entandikwa is talking of - he should put aside another entandikwa for the women for planting of trees but not just say women should plant trees.  How do you till the land and even those who own the land are the men.  

Mr Chairman can you protect me from hon. Didi who is now telling me that I should move a Motion for entandikwa for women.  I am asking the Minister concerned and I have already appealed to him to consider that if there is any entandikwa for the Ministry of Environment Protection, it should go to the women because women have been geared to plant trees.  Then how will be assisted, they need a lot of logistics for raising of seedlings and then planting of trees.  My appeal is just that request that entandikwa be given to the women.  At the same time, the land should be availed to them and not commandeered by the men. 

We have been in a problem, especially, the Acholi region with the useless war whereby we invited a lot of our soldiers in our district who have really destroyed our environment, especially, even trees that have been planted by the people.  I am also requesting the Minister for Defence does consider the request that has been put by the people to compensate for their trees which were cut, I am not talking about the natural trees, but I am talking about those that were planted by the people.  I know they did a good work but you do not just go randomly and cut down people’s plantation and you do not replace it or compensate it because that will give them the energy and the strength to plant more.  With that I support the Bill. Thank you.

MR JOHN NTIMBA (Mbarara Municipality): Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I think, I would like to start on where my sister colleague ended when she talked about entandikwa in a way of encouraging environmental protection and I want to start by talking about tree planting.  It appears there has been more of a talk of tree planting to the extent that in some places, it seems to have become a sing song and I would at this juncture like to appeal upon the Minister to set up tree planting competition nationwide so that those people who will be known to have planted the largest number of threes in order to protect the environment will be awarded and as a practical measure, in this regard, I am offering as soon as the Minister can set up a nationwide tree planting competition, I am offering one Nyankole heifer to whoever will be the winner of that tree planting competition. (Applause) 

I want to address myself on this important question of environmental awareness.  If we want to make our Ugandans environmental aware, we must address ourselves to encouraging the youth of this country to appreciate the importance of our weather.  About 40 years ago when we were in secondary schools, some of our secondary schools used to serve as weather gathering station.  Some of the important schools were provided by the then East African Meteorological Department with simple gadgets of collecting weather data like reengages and thermometers for measuring wind speed and humility and so forth.  I would like in this regard to encourage the Minister to choose at least one post primary institution in each gombolola and designate it as a weather station, encourage the children to gather this weather data and in so doing, the Minister will be hitting two birds with the same stone.  He will be teaching and encouraging children on how to gather date on weather because most of these schools and I think, my distinguished successor hon. Babu will agree with me that the Ministry of Education and Sports at the moment may not be in a position to afford providing these weather gathering instruments.  But if the Ministry can provide at least one for every post primary institution in each gombolola, at least 700 plus of our education institutions will be in a position to collect this weather data cheaply and at the same time helping the children learn how to collect this weather data.  

Having said that, I would like to ask the Minister since his Ministry is responsible for not only environment protection but also for providing energy.  I would like the Ministry to establish a linkage between a need to protect our environment on the one hand and also the need to provide the population with cheap sources of energy without destroying the environment. And here I am talking about government investing in providing other sources of energy like using cow-dung, like using solar energy, like using coffee husks and perhaps using that type of sigiris which does not consume charcoal at very fast rate.  I am sure the investment put in this will be worthwhile when you consider the fact the amount of forest trees that will have been burnt will be considerably reduced.  

Finally, as a representative of an urban population, I want to say this, the majority of the not so well to do people who live in our urban areas cannot afford this very expensive electricity from U.E.B. We appreciate the fact that the population is being called upon to contribute towards the investments of expanding our power source of supply and at the same time I am implying to say that there is a need for us to help the population to buy this electricity cheaply and protect the weather.  The majority of people who live in our urban areas go in for this charcoal and this charcoal comes from living trees, not from the dead trees of firewood.  And my worry is that as our population in urban areas continues increasing at a rapid rate, so is the consumption of charcoal from the living trees going to be.  I do not know if the Minister has addressed himself on this but it is very, very important and the sooner we do this, the better.  

On this note, I want to remind the Minister that he should set up this national tree planting competition and I would like to associate with that and bring that heifer to donate to the winner of that tree competition.  I wholeheartedly support this notion and I am particularly happy that his has been brought at such early stage of our resumption of our discussion because the debate was unfortunately disrupted when we had to go for recess.  I support the Bill Mr Chairman.

DR MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members.  My contribution is going to be only on one point and coming from town, my biggest worry about the environment will be about the fumes that we have in the urban areas. (Interjection) water hyacinth, yes that we have to explain but I will concentrate on one.  

We seem to like vehicles and we are buying them in big numbers these days.  But I am afraid traveling comfortably, we have got a side effect somewhere and those are the fumes that are coming out of these vehicles. Many of them are really bad.  

I am talking about the pollution of the air.  Some of these vehicles are really bad and then when you follow one vehicle, you can hardly see where you are going especially the diesel vehicles.  It is very, very dangerous indeed.  Apart from the carbon monoxide that is being produced by these vehicles, these are very dangerous indeed especially at night and I think this may be contributing something to the number of accidents we have either in towns or along our highways.  

Now, my question is, do we know the extent of pollution in the towns? Have we done something about that? Or are we just putting these DMC vehicles on the street and say, well, God help us that we see where we are going and then our lungs will be protected somehow.  This is something we have to look into.  We have got to know exactly how much or to what extent the pollution is in our urban areas and I think that we better tackle this problem.  We are getting more and more vehicles in towns and the urban areas are getting more and more congested and we better start thinking about what to do about the pollution of the air in the urban areas.  And if we start monitoring now to see how much or to what extent the pollution is, then from there we can start making plans to see how we can tackle this pollution.  

That is my contribution.  I hope this will be looked into by both the Ministry of Energy and Environment, and Internal Affairs.  I know some countries are very strict on vehicles emitting such fumes in urban areas.  I suggest either we arrest the drivers, not the vehicles and warn them or we do something about our fuel and see that something is reduced in the pollution of the air in the urban areas. Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR RUTARO (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you Mr Chairman.  Before I go to the main body of the Bill, allow me to make one comment on an article that came up in the Monitor this morning and also in New Vision and this is to do with treatment meted out to the mother of Itongwa.  Some 12 or 13 years ago, soldiers of UNLA traveled to Nyabushozi and beat up family members of President Museveni.  At that time he was in the bush fighting for what we call liberation.  Those members were innocent I believe as family members of Itongwa. (Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Is the hon. Member, Mr Chairman, while sympathising with the mother of Itongwa in order to tell lies?  Because all I know is that while President Museveni was in the bush, some of us were in close contact with the parents and as far as I know, there is not a single moment when either Museveni’s father were harmed or beaten.

MR RUTARO:  I wish to thank you, Mr Chairman. The answer to hon. Tiberondwa is within the laughter of the Members.  The answer is very well known.  If the story is true that the lady was mistreated, I would like to urge the Minister for Internal Affairs to try and take corrective measures because it will give us a very, very bad name for no good reason at all. (Interruption)

MR TOM BUTIME:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I just want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that as he puts it, if the story is true and therefore we are discussing rumour from the newspapers and the story is not true and we are carrying out proper investigations on that particular matter and that is the kind of writing that we usually get from newspapers whereas the actual facts on the ground are completely different.  And, therefore, as you put it, if the story is true, I am saying the story is not true and therefore you should not dwell much on that story and you should not even try to compare it with what hon. Tiberondwa is trying to deny because the two facts are completely different.  (Laughter)

MR RUTARO:  I wish to thank the hon. Minister for the information and for the promise he has made and I hope the papers should be brought to book as well for bringing out untruth. Coming to the Bill, I have one or two things to say.  One, is to do with the amount of pressure that is being brought to government to ensure that there is an environmental bill but in place or environmental law. While I know the law is necessary to have in place, but the amount of pressure is such that there are attaching the funding to you putting the law in place.  

Now, the funding, when it comes, it is attached to a project.  A project will have a lifetime.  When the project ends, I am beginning to see like in many other cases where we have projects lots of problems  I have not seen any plans whereby if a project comes to an end, it ends at a time when government has enough resources to take over immediately. This funding is not geared to our ability to collect revenue so that we are able to take up the projects as soon as the external funding is stopped.  

So, I think the Environment Bill is timely for the sake of it.  Not because of the funding and the pressure that we get from outside and if it is to do with funding, I have a fear that in future when the project comes to an end, then environment will look like it has stopped or that there will be no necessity for environment or for the law to be in place. (Interruption)

MR KAJURA:  Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman.  i would like to inform hon. Members that there is no pressure on government to establish or to enact a law on the environment.  The need arises out of the situation in which we are.  Indeed your contributions are showing that this matter is overdue.  We all recognise it is due and there is nobody who is pushing us.

MR RUTARO:  Thank you very much for that information. The second point I was going to touch is to do with various projects that are undertaken by government or private firms  The commonest example is the road construction. When a firm contracts to make a road, they dig up murrum from various places.  While it is good to make the roads, but it is also disastrous to leave the areas where they have picked the murrum bare.  The easiest example is Mbuya.  Mbuya Hill formerly was covered in trees but at the moment, you will find the eastern end and the northern end all bare.  As you travel between here and Luzira, you will find most of the soil end all bare because it has been left bare, and has covered the roads that have been tarmacked.  

I think the government in undertaking these projects, should include a clause where the contractor is bound to make good the areas that he has - where he has collected murrum form or the areas that he has left open.  These projects should be comprehensive, not to pick murrum, do the job you are supposed to do and leave danger looming in a different area.  Section 5 sub-section (3); talks about the authority shall be under the general supervision of the President and I have found difficulty in understanding the general supervision of the President.  The President as chief executive of the whole nation generally would be concerned without you putting it in this law. (Interruption)

DR MAGEZI: Point of information. Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I apologize if hon. Rutaro has got the very first edition of the Bill.  In fact, that has been amended and it is under the general supervision of the Minister.  I apologise if you have not got the correct version.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MR RUTARO: I am sorry; maybe, I have a different one. But this is the latest that has been given to the youngest Member of the NRC. (Interruption)

MR KAJURA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  What happened was that the 4th Bill was subjected to scrutiny by the Sectoral Committee and as a result of the various meetings which were held, the first version was amended and we produced a second one which was circulated to all the hon. Members and if for any reason, any Member has been given the first one, this is really regretted.  But all the Members were provided with a revised and abridged Bill on the Environment.

MR RUTARO:  Thank you for that information and I would like to inform the newest Members in the NRC that the Bill given to them is too old; the one which was given to them yesterday is too old and I would like to withdraw that remark; because of its age.  I hope what I go to next has not been corrected as well and this is the Section 13 which talks about the Policy Committee that it shall on the advice of the District Resistance Council provide guidelines for the establishment of a committee on the environment for each district in this Statute referred to as a District Environment Committee.  I would have preferred personally, where the policy committee passes on policies so that the Resistance Councils adopt - is also amended. (Interruption)

MR KAJURA:  Point of information.  I suggest that we borrow - may be we could borrow from a colleague -(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR RUTARO: You stop there so that I can correct the errors there, maybe, in the old version.

MR OPIO (Samia Bugwe County, Tororo) Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I would like to start by supporting the Bill.  However, I would like to address myself to one point and that is the operation of this Authority.  Although there is a certain levy, the improved Bill is not as complicated as the first one, but even this one, I am trying to find out the necessity of the Policy Committee on the Environment in the organization of the Authority.

We are told that the general supervision of the authority will be by the Minister in the new Bill or the improved Bill; then we are told that there is going to be a Board and somehow we are told that there should be a Policy Committee on environment.  So, the question is, where will this policy committee be? Is it going to be the one the Minister to report to; and is it very necessary to have that Policy Committee on the environment?  When you look at the composition, it is going to have 10 or nine chaired by the Prime Minister, to raise it alone has not been easy - but finding all these 10 Cabinet ministers to come and decide on one issue on the environment. (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is raising a substantial point and the effect of this Bill when you look at it in totality, left right and centre abolishes the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry is taken over by the authority and the authority reports to a committee of Ministers; chaired by the Prime Minister.  So, in effect, the Minister is busy getting himself out of employment. But that is not bad, that is a good thing, the fewer ministers we have, maybe the better.  

But when you look at the effect of it, it is that only a few Ministers for Gender Affairs, these include the Minister for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, the Minister for Local Government, the Minister for Land, Housing and Urban Development, Minister for Health, Education and sports, Finance and one for Agriculture. The rest are not supposed - I think they will then go and through the Prime Minister, report to Cabinet what they have a - Cabinet sub-committee, which is in charge of this Ministry.  What are we trying to achieve? I think the hon. Member pointing a figure in the right place. I think this House should question seriously this anomaly.

MR KAJURA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  The need on the policy committee arises out of magnitude and complexity of what is involved in environment.  There are Ministries whose role is closer to environment.  There are ministries whose role is closer to environment than others and these are the ones which are listed here.  Originally, even the Minister of Information had been included, etc.  Now, the committee and ourselves, felt that this could be reduced to 10 as we have it now.  Now, if you are going to resolve fairly complicated issues and some of these issues are controversial between and among ministries. This can only be done at ministerial level and hence the need of the policy committee chaired by the Prime Minister; they are not issues which can be resolved at official level, they involve decisions at a high level and, therefore, you need to bring the ministers together under the chairmanship of somebody slightly above them, that is the Prime Minister.  

So, it is not a question of keeping out others; in fact, if any minister has a strong point and wants to attend, he could be invited to attend, but these are the ministries that are directly involved in the environment and there was no need to involve every minister in this at this stage, because this is like a sub-committee of the Cabinet.  

MR OPIO: Even if we have to - we have many policy issues which require may be more people who at the Cabinet level I am sure that is why the Cabinet sits every week and these are issues which could be raised at meeting instead of having again in the same week a sub-section of the Cabinet and if you look at what this policy committee is supposed to do on page 20, (a) says to provide policy guidelines, formulate these are -(Interjection) If you have it you can read.  This could be done maybe, at a Cabinet level, if not, maybe, at the Board level and then you find (d), liaise with the Cabinet on the issues, liaise when they about 10 of them, why can they not liaise in the cabinet?  When we look at this, it says, everything possible. There is not really much which is put here for that policy committee to do.  

So, let the Minister look at this and see whether we should have this level here, it is more confusing, doing very little and it is making life difficult for Ministers to meet every time when they should be meeting in the Cabinet. (Interruption)

MR DRANI DRADRIGA:  Point of information. I would like to give information to a Member holding the Floor that in ordinary practice, policies are actually in any Ministry, policies are actually evolved through the bureaucracy of the civil service and therefore, it is not true to say that it is doing a -(Inaudible) if you get the Minister sitting at a policy level. Normally, what happens is policies are propose and then the Cabinet will look at it from a technical and legal point of view and then it is taken back for implementation by the Civil Service.  

Therefore, it is important for the House to look at this issue very critically otherwise, we are going to have a problem where the cabinet as it was pointed out earlier fails to sit, although they are supposed to sit about is it four times a year and it be very difficult for the cabinet to get those policies implemented because they will actually the Permanent Secretary and the senior civil servants to advise them again on technical issues. Thank you.

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that the issue he is raising was seriously discussed by the Sectoral Committee of this House and that is why we had to scale down the involvement of the ministers on sectoral committee.  When we talk about environment. We are talking about the entire life span of the country and the functions of the policy committee in fact, are very distinct and different from the functions of the authority itself nod of the Board, which is proposed.  

We are talking about the problems of implementation of decisions in environment and this is a case where you may find that the Minister of Industry, the Minister for Agriculture, where most of these problems are likely to occur must be brought to be part and parcel of the policy committee and the quorum is five, not that 10 people must meet; they do not have to meet every week as cabinet does, but they are doing a specified job and urge you Members, the Sectoral Committee has taken far more time to go into details of these proposals we are presenting to and there is nothing that had been left unturned.  

If you look at the issues that are going to be addressed, the process is like, that there is a policy committee on top and because of the importance of the policy committee, it is proposed that the Prime Minister should chair it; so that the can summon any Minister responsible, who is not complying. 

Now, below the policy committee there is management a policy, which will do the normal management work of the proposed authority and there below, is the executive director and other members and unless you want to give just inform the authority that the people can enforce, which are very hard decisions on environment, I suggest that you go along with this idea of the Ministers as proposed there, to be members of the policy committee.

MR OPIO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the Members have heard but my submission is still that we have to look at it and see whether he is going to make this authority operational if we maintain this level in the organisation chart.  

When you look at -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the Member on the Floor, with respect with information he got form hon. Magezi that the question of using Cabinet ministers has been tried before.  An example is the Custodian Board. The Custodian Board had a number of high-ranking Cabinet Ministers but they never met.  A report of the Select Committee on Custodian Board reported to this House that one of the problems of Custodian Board was that it was impossible to get Cabinet Minister to meet and discharge their business as far as the Custodian Board was concerned; and I fear that if you maintain the same structure, the same is likely to happen, not because they do not want to meet, but they are very busy people by virtue of their positions.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, first, I want to point out to the whole House that the chairman of the Sectoral Committee who have just given information, gave one misleading information that the Minister for Industry is a member of this policy committee which is not the case; he is not there and yet, industry is the biggest pollutant and he is not in the policy committee.  

Secondly, you can remember what happened to the Aids Commission which was composed of Ministers only; it completely collapsed, there was no chance for it to continue in addition to what the hon. Member has pointed out on Custodian Board.  Where will you find the Prime Minister, the Vice President, the Minister of Finance, the other ministers pointed out, of Health, of Local Government not sitting -(Laughter and interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR KARUHANGA: Not sitting in cabinet but finding time out of their very busy schedule to find another time to go and meet over environment issues; there is only one thing which is going to happen if pass this.  The authority will be permanently frustrated and this has happened in Custodian Board and in the Aids Commission I do not think we should repeat mistakes that we have already seen in practice.  I think this is the time for us to use the guillotine and ask the Sectoral Committee and cut the Policy Commission out.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Opio, please try to wind up.

MR OPIO:  When you look at the functions of the authority, Mr Chairman, that is on page 18 -(Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification with you of what hon. Karuhanga has said and hon. Opio regarding this composition of the policy commission. When you look at this Schedule, detailed composition of the committee, I am beginning to wonder why is the Minister responsible for this environment surrendering his powers to his this committee, what is he going to do? Chairman, is he aware that he is really surrendering his powers?

MR OPIO: Let me finish.  When you look at the function of the authority, one of them is to gather information.  I would like to request the Minister to accept the simple Amendment, of saying to undertake research, because gathering is not likely to give the same results as if it were undertaking research because I know at the local level we shall gather, but at the level of where even the Ministers are going to be, I think we would encourage research other than that one and also 

When it comes to the offices, the term of the office of the Executive Director, the first Bill before it was looked at had given three years and this one is giving five years.  I would like to think that three years is enough for - and then it can be renewed other five years.  When it comes to the offenses there are strict, but my submission is that, it will be very difficult to implement without the people having some elementary way of earning income and especially rural electrification should be very, very put on priority, although the cost of electricity are very high, but this could be temporary.  

Otherwise, you cannot implement some of these measures that have been provided especially, in no. vii of this Bill which people on the village will decide that because someone is cutting firewood, where everybody is cutting any way to cook, say that we shall send this one to prison, who will say that someone who has no school fees and he is cutting some of the trees to take his children to school and we take him to the committee.  Most people are going to say, this cannot be implemented. 

So, unless we improve on the income, unless we improve on the sources of energy unless we improve on the sources of building material, we are not likely to have these measures which are being suggested in Roman no. vii, implemented.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.

MRS MASABA WAFAANA (Women Representative, Mbale) Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill but I have a few observations to make.  I come from Mt. Elgon and my first observation is on Clause 3, which deals with the culture; the culture of the Bamasaba. They visit the Mountain for malewa and so on and so forth.  I have been to the offices dealing with this; the Tourist Park, they are not very well funded, the rules are allowing the Bamasaba to go to the Mountains to gather malewa, are being awaited, I know they have been stocked, smoking malewa in the mountains and these are very heavy things to get out and then smoke them, but they say they have live with mountain without destroying except when the forest started selling land.  So, that is bamboo shoots in English.  

So, there is a problem there, because the culture has made them be associated with that mountain and they are just pleading for access to have their mushrooms; they gather a lot of mushrooms which if the Local Authority licensed, they could get a lot of revenue, they have bees -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information. May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, last Monday, I was at home, and I was told by the people that they cannot get that Malewa from the forest as had been prepared when the National Park was being established.  Not only that, but you find that people who were evicted from the forest, they were promised assistance to be settled somewhere but up to this date, those people - nothing has been done to assist them.  Could therefore, Government look into this as a matter of urgency unless they want those Bamasaba to die.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MRS KULANY:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I just want to answer hon. Wanendeya’s query. What I know is that Government is carrying some information from the leaders of this Mt. Elgon, and we from Kapchorwa have submitted our ideas on how people should be re-settled.  So, I expect Mbale to have been the same.

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MRS MASABA WAFAANA:  Thank you for that information given to me.  If I may proceed, these Bamasaba also go to look for their herbs, you know there are man diseases, they are very few hospitals there, so they go and get these traditional medicines which they use to treat themselves.  So, I think when the Tourist Board takes off, we appeal that they should have - they should allow Bamasaba; because when you live near a lake, you cannot avoid swimming. When you live near a mountain, you cannot avoid sitting under a tree; it is very difficult.  We have taught our women, they have a Tree Planting Movement, may be we shall get the Heifer from hon. Ntimba from Ankole, they have this, they have timber, they have planted many trees, but that close association with the mountain is what the Bamasaba are asking.  

The environment, I think - we have a problem, we border people; the political environment on the border.  We appeal that people should be protected because people have to live under a good political environment if neighbours are rubbing shoulders, you get problems; because if you go to the remote border areas, I get you that most of the bridges along these mountains are down from Masaba from Bulambuli, from the top there, Namisindwa, you go to Bumbo, and most bridges are down. So, these people live in a bad environment in that, they cannot easily come to the part of Uganda because when it rains, there is no way of crossing, and for people in the mountains, they are not very used to the high waters.  So, there is a problem also.  

So, we request you that the infrastructure, now that we have got our Minister seated here, may be, he will assist us to go ahead with it. When it comes to the towns, I have some concern by virtue of being the Principal Assistant Town Clerk in a charge of field administration KCC -(Interruption)

MR WANJUSI WASIEBA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that the Government has taken steps to put in the bridges in Mbale District and the other districts in the Eastern region correct.  So, in the near future, may be before Christmas, she will not have any problem as far as it bridges and feeder roads are concerned.  Thank you.

MRS MASABA WAFAANA:  Thank you very much for that information, Mr Chairman, I was talking about living in the city.  I have a problem; we are getting too many Berlin walls in Kampala City. Every house that is being built is surrounded by walls and sometimes, when you look at the health aspect of it, you do not have fresh air inside some of these houses.  I think we would advise developers to use maybe, hedges and so on; those are very beautiful.  But you find a lot of resources wasted, putting up a wall so many miles, why do we not donate some of these materials to those in areas which cannot afford decent houses? When you come to the flats, it is very appalling and may be garages.  I think it is high time we revised our building regulations; because you find that in the flatlets, there are so many people living in one room, then you wonder, where is the health of these people and yet pollution from factories and so on, keep being pushed out.  

There used to be Forest Reserves and Parks within the City. I am glad there is one up there but whenever there was an industry, there were some trees to take up some of these fumes. But now, you find very many people are suffering either from the eyes or they are suffering from the chest.  It is because there is a lot of pollution.  Travel down to Jinja Road.  There is a factory that produces stones.  Honestly, why can those people who have put up stones there, not compensate these people who live across?  Because there is a lot of pollution. 

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that Cabinet is already or has already approved revisions to the building rules and regulations.  In fact it is just awaiting drafting of a Bill by the Attorney General so that these regulations can come into effect.  But the issue of over-crowdedness in flats has nothing to do really with the building regulations.  Over crowding is a function of scarcity of houses. We only need to put up more houses and Government is also aware of that. I think Members have already heard within their Pigeon holes the National Centre Strategy which spells out the directions Government is going to take with regard to addressing the problem of shortage of houses in this country.  Thank you.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I think it would be useful for this House to know from the hon. Minister who has just left the Floor, talking about the Government Policy or from any other Minister, whether Government is preparing comprehensive Legislation regarding the production of polythene containers polythene bags, and the rest, which do not dissolve and which make the environment very difficult.  In addition to those of us who look after cattle these polythene bags called buvera are very dangerous when an animal swallows.  I do not know whether the Minister would like to inform this House about this and especially some of these buveras are used as covers on top on the building before you put tiles.

MRS WAFAANA MASABA:  Mr Chairman, there is the authority and then the Inspector. We have had many Inspectors in various Government departments.  Education, Public Health and so on and so forth.  But unless they are given tools of efficiency, they are not going to manage their work because when you move from office to office asking what is happening, they either have no transport or they have transport but not fuel.  So, the Inspectorate becomes difficult. May be the hon. Minister will ensure that the authority funds these Inspectors so that they can do a good work.

I am not a scientist or rather a meteorologist but I am interested in the weather.  We are talking of protection of environment by planting more trees, but how about our friends who disturb the Ozone Layer.  Can we not have international legislation that when you are working you are confined to your space, why is it that our weather has changed so much?  This time we have a lot of rain in Mbale, but now the rains - is it only the trees or is it because nuclear weapons are also disturbing the environment? I need the Minister of Education to make me know.  Mr Chairman, I thank you and support the Bill. Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Mr Miyingo Kezimbira): Mr Chairman, I think it is not fair for the hon. Member to say that the water hyacinth is not being addressed.  Government is focusing a lot of effort on water hyacinth and just last week we have a Workshop which was addressing itself to the water hyacinth and the whole Committee has been set up to address the water hyacinth.  It will not fit into blanketing under this Environmental Control Bill. We have it being handled effectively and the results will be shown.  Thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, when I was sitting there, I listened carefully.  If the water hyacinth has been under consideration. So, is it not right to that the Minister should now tell her because the whole lake has gone.

MRS MUGARURA: Mr Chairman, the reason why I am bringing this issue up, is because you know how long it has taken to push Bill through this House.  We managing by crisis and until there is a donor to push the Bill, things do not seem to move comfortably and smoothly, and therefore, maybe we also need pressure to sensitise these who are in ministries which are involved in water management to start working together to address the hyacinth problem.  

Because if you look at this Schedule Article 9, among the Projects to be considered there is manufacturing industries include the rest, and they are all listed there.  When you look at them, they do not have a direct relevancy to some of these issues like the water hyacinth which I am talking about. All right, they are needed; but the urgency.  The amounts of pressure we have to put in the people and the Bodies concerned to effect change, has to start now.

MR WAMUSI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to draw the attention of the speaker on the Floor that the question she is deliberating of the hyacinth is covered in 13(g), which talks of the fauna and flora into the echo system.

MRS MUGARURA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for showing me this Article.  In fact, it is the marginal listed Article that shows you how important it has been considered. I beg to reduce the information -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Mr Miyingo Kezimbira): Mr Chairman, I would like to give the information to the hon. member.  There is a Member who is affected also who attended the Seminar of which have been informed today, I am very satisfied that the Government now has focused the attention to that effect. In fact, there are two Ministries that are very well concerned with this.  They have gone ahead in doing a lot of research.  Maybe the hon. Minister of State for Information could not inform us as to what has happened to the famous harvester for water hyacinth.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION (Mr                            ): Mr Chairman, the water hyacinth harvester.  Money has been gathered for its purchase.  It is not only one.  The Ministry of Agriculture is purchasing one, Ministry of Transport is also purchasing one.  So, actually we have two machines due.  But in addition to this, rather than just limit yourself to the hyacinth harvester, we also have many other methods, which are due to be tried on. You will realise that this is an international problem that has got to be handled consciously.  Chemicals is one of the things that we are considering and we are meeting also of course resistance from the environmentalists.  

We have also other methods that involve biological way of destroying the hyacinth. In fact, if Members had taken the courtesy of attending the workshop, I do not think that the Ministry is doing nothing and Government is just sitting back.

First of all, we have got to agree in the East African Community together, that we use the same method of harvesting the hyacinth. We are trying to get ourselves working together with our neighbouring state so that we put in practice a method that is going to be effective and eradicating the water hyacinth.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS MUGARURA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Member for his information.  I beg the indulgence so that I can push my debate.  I am raising this issue because of the environmental problems that may arise if this water hyacinth is not arrested.

Last week, I had an opportunity of attending the East Rally Show in South Africa and we had a Workshop and among the things we saw was how that country controlled their water hyacinth problem.  They had this problem 18 years ago. When you look at the situation in Uganda, the water hyacinth is entering lakes, especially Victoria from River Kagera.  It is entering the lake from River Kagera and a short fume of about 30 minutes how the water hyacinth was controlled in South Africa because it had covered all the lakes and rivers.  What they did was to introduce the biological control up to the point of the entry where the hyacinth is entering the lakes.  While you are administering the biological control, the point of entry, there was a chemical after a long research of so many years, they discovered a chemical which had to be spread from the other extreme end. So, with chemical you start on one end and you spread and with biological on the other.  Then you can arrest the situation.  I hope when this problem has been addressed, that it should be addressed properly.  Because this Bill on Environment has taken us many years of agitation to have it here.

I would like to raise another observation on Article 12 of the same schedule on the Projects.

This talks about waste disposal including ‘fights for sold waste disposal, sewerage disposal works, and the rest.’ I get embarrassed as a parliamentarian and Leader moreover from Bushenyi to see by level of garbage disposal along our major towns and high ways.  It is a shame to this nation as a whole. I hope since the authority in Schedule - one of the responsibilities when it has been formed is to manage this balance between environment and good health.

There is need for this authority to educate Ugandans on these disposal elements.  We have the plastic containers and buveras; they can be separated from the food, the peelings of matooke.  We could transform these peelings into manure and use it to fertilize our gardens and so on and so forth.  It can be used to feed cattle. But we need proper -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  May I inform this House that the point that the hon. Member is raising is very serious in that at one time, some people tried to work on this garbage in Jinja.  But when they went round to see that to do with the garbage, the first thing that welcomed them was the carcass of the dog and then the dead body of an infant and at the end of the day they just ran away.  They could not do anything about the garbage. 

MRS MUGARURA:  Mr Chairman, the Bill talked about food processing plant.  Why does the Ministry on Environment not look into the process in plants which will recycle some of these items that form the garbage because, the method we are using at the moment where lorries come and collect this garbage, by the time these lorries reach the damping place they have caused more havoc than expected.  They spread the garbage on the way. Mr Chairman, with those few remarks I beg to support the Bill.

ENG. ORYANG (Gulu Municipality): Mr Chairman, I thank you. I would like to convey few points to the hon. Minister, concerned with environment.  Environment covers almost anything.  Now in this respect these are points I would like to raise.

In some areas, especially in rural areas, you find that there are so many mad people. These ones have been left to move about.  This one spoils the environment.  It would be corrected.  Secondly, we have a number of diseases that are contagious.  In the past, some of these diseases were not contagious, but because of ward, negligence and poverty they have come out of their isolation.  So, I would like to point out to the Minister that please, in future when you sit try to think about this isolation of contagious diseases.

Thirdly, it has already been overlooked for those of us who have worked in Karamoja, have known that overstocking of the land can destroy land.  So, I think I am correct to say that, this Bill has come in very slowly and it is very bad.  I wish it came much earlier so that we could have these people. 

Fourthly, environment actually also includes noise.  In town, vehicles making a lot of noise and so on.  I think the composition of the Board should also consider this.

Lastly, concentration of people. I do come from Luzira. People are concentrated in certain areas, so you find this portion system is now very meagre.  Otherwise, I support the Bill.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting.

(The Council rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 20 April 1995, at 2.30 p.m.)

