Thursday, 14 April 2011 

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting but today we are faced with a problem here in Parliament. Our water system has broken down and the water tank that supplies us with water is under repair. This means we may not be here for a long time because of this lack of water. 

Also the AC system since yesterday has not improved and that is why you see the doors are open to gain fresh air from the outside. So, let us transact business for a short while then we shall have to adjourn. Hopefully, by next week water will have been restored to the premises. Thank you.

2.43
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of national importance. On Tuesday, Uganda Police returned their force that had been deployed in Darfur and they arrived at Entebbe at around 5.00 p.m. They were about 108 and immediately they arrived all those who returned were interrogated, which to me was strange. There is now a lot of talk that they are going to be taken to a training school but all this is to punish them for whatever reasons we do not understand and that they will also be deployed in very harsh environments.  

On their return, I tried to investigate and find out what was really happening because the return was not normal. Some people informed us - and this is the reason we want the Minister of Internal Affairs to be fair to this country and let us know what is happening - that the reason for this withdrawal of the Ugandan Police from Darfur has an ill motive and it concerns the relationship between Uganda and Khartoum.

Secondly, the reason for the harsh treatment of these people who have returned, I have been told, is linked to their pay and that last week something appeared in the newspapers that policemen who are deployed outside the country are being taxed unfairly by the police authority and that in order to punish them, perhaps these people in Darfur leaked this matter to the newspapers and that the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs, extended their stay in Darfur without the consent of the police authority, that is, the Inspector-General of Police and the other officers.

So, I wish to raise this concern because returning 108 police officers in such an awkward manner and being surrounded and interrogated is not fair for this country especially when they are not sure of their own destiny. They were supposed to all return here when their contracts end in June but all this has been brought to an abrupt end and their future is also very uncertain. They are family people and they are worried. They are not sure what their fate will be. They have not done anything bad; they never chose to be deployed. It was the Government of Uganda that deployed them. 

So, I seek clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs since he is here to reassure this country and also to allay the fears that perhaps there could be some tension between Uganda and Khartoum. I thank you.

2.47
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker, I thank the Member for bringing up the matter. As he said, they arrived yesterday; he seems to have had prior information on the whole case and I was not informed about the case. However, I know that it is the police regulations that work and nobody in the Police Force will be victimised or can be victimised outside his terms of employment. I undertake that I will take it up and be able to furnish either the Member, or if he so wishes to use this House to be able to inform the others concerned.

THE SPEAKER: So, next week we get a statement on the circumstances of the return of the contingent from Darfur, subsequent treatment on their arrival and the plans for them. Thank you.

2.48
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, as you tell the Minister of Internal Affairs to give a statement next week, I am concerned about the way Police are handling this issue. The places they are tear-gassing - let them refrain from tear-gassing some places. We cannot wait until next week when they tear-gas a health centre- 

THE SPEAKER: The minister is making his statement today. This was in response to hon. Okumu’s concern about the Police contingent that was operating in Darfur, which returned on Tuesday and there was some concern. That is the statement he is going to make next week but on what has been happening in Uganda, he is making a statement today.

STATEMENT ON THE DEMONSTRATION THAT LED TO THE ARREST OF DR KIIZA BESIGYE AND OTHERS ON MONDAY, 11 APRIL 2011

2.49
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker, this is a statement to Parliament on demonstrations that led to the arrest of Dr Kiiza Besigye and others on Monday, 11April 2011.

It is common knowledge that some political leaders in Uganda have been planning destructive activities that would give an impression to both the citizenry and the outside world that Uganda is ungovernable. 

Prior to the general elections, statements were made and actions towards this direction were carried out.For example, the systematic campaign against the Electoral Commission, statements to the effect that Dr Besigye would not go to courts of law even if he were dissatisfied with the elections, the unofficial declaration of results of elections by Dr Besigye; and others. This trend of affairs continued during the campaigns and the general elections. 

Last Monday, attempted demonstrations again by the same elements were part and parcel of this plan. The Walk-to-Work demonstration had nothing to do with the current oil and commodity prices. The intention was to disrupt movements along highways so that businesses in town would come to a standstill. This would eventually lead the country to hate Government, that is to say, the demonstrations were part of a hate-government campaign. It is for this reason, therefore, that Police were instructed to disallow those activities. 

Members will recall that sometime back, under the auspices of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the guidelines on demonstrations and processions were worked out and agreed upon with all the stakeholders. These included NGOS, political parties, the donor community represented by their embassies, my ministry and the Police. These guidelines required organisers of the demonstrations and processions to notify the Police of their intentions and to plan together with the Police the management of the events. 

I would like to inform this House and the country that the organisers of the Walk-to-Work demonstrations of last Monday did not follow these guidelines. The Police were not notified, the organisers did not identify themselves, the routes were not agreed to and others. Instead, the organisers went ahead and planted some people at particular locations along the routes they intended to use. Those so planted would join the processions which would grow bigger as they approached the city. The processions would then converge at one location and not their places of work. 

Incidents on various routes into the city confirm these facts. The ease with which crowds gathered and the fact that some of those who attempted to take part in the demonstration were not residents in the areas they were found in shows that they had been ferried there. For example, hon. Mathias Nsubuga, a resident of Rubaga Pope Paul Zone, William Kamulegeya, a resident of Lugowa Zone, Robert Kwesiga, a resident of Mengo Central Zone were all arrested in Ntinda taking part in the so-called Walk-to Work demonstration. 

I could also remind Members that among those arrested was Mr Nobert Mao, who is the Chairman of Gulu District. I do not know whether he was walking from Ntinda to go back to his office in Gulu.

Investigations have also shown that the so-called walkers carried stones, sticks and boulders which they put across the road. Cases in point are road blocks that were erected at Kasangati to Kampala and Kasangati to Kalagi roads. Furthermore, some of the so-called walkers, when engaged by police, decided to run into schools and a health centre to use children and patients as human shields. With all this in view, and with the obligation of Government to maintain law and order, I am surprised at the reaction of some of the international organisations. Instead of supporting and congratulating Uganda Police for their actions, they instead went ahead to blame and condemn Police. 

Mr Speaker, I want to lay on the Table – as if it was by coincidence, on Monday, 11 April just simultaneously, a similar incidence whereby the Mayor of Washington, the capital of the world, also engaged himself in an illegal demonstration. He was arrested and here is the picture and news. So, there is nothing which is abnormal - and by the way, he is the Lord Mayor of Washington. Uganda Police Force’s actions are similar to those which the Police in Washington took. Almost at the same time, the Police in Washington used similar methods to control a demonstration in that city. During this demonstration, the Mayor and others were arrested. 
Government is aware that some political leaders here want to sustain a campaign to mar the swearing-in ceremony of the President and thus hijack the people’s verdict. We have just finished an election and the people pronounced themselves on who should manage this society. [HON. ODONGA OTTO: “Even in Bugweri County?”] Yes, and that is the very reason somebody else came from Bugweri. It gives legitimacy to the whole process. Ugandans are not willing to allow unconstitutional means to change Government. 

It is true the Constitution provides for the protection of individual liberties and general limitations on fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. Article 43 states: “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.” It is also the duty of all citizens to cooperate with the lawful agencies in the maintenance of law and order as contained in Article 17. Police on the other hand, have a duty to protect life and property, preserve law and order, and prevent and detect crime as enshrined in Article 212. The organisers and participants of the Monday incidents were clearly in breach of these constitutional obligations. The Monday 11 April 2011 incident is being investigated. All those who took part and are not yet before court are being sought and will not escape the long arm of the law. 

I want to take this opportunity to assure the people of Uganda that Government will not accept this conduct from whatever quarter. I am, therefore, calling upon law-abiding citizens today, tomorrow and in the future to go to their places of work as usual. Government will be there to protect them. I have also been assured by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that she will soon inform the country why the economic situation is as it is and the measures she is already taking and will continue to take in order to ameliorate the situation. Thank you.

2.59
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, with all due respect to the Minister of Internal Affairs, who I first learnt about in my civics lesson while still in primary school - I am giving this reference because he is a very mature and elderly person and he should be responsible! You cannot be irresponsible to the extent of bringing such a statement to Parliament and covering police acts. You cannot be irresponsible in provoking this country to war! The statement here is irresponsible because this country belongs to all of us. How you treat us matters a lot – you cannot treat us as though we were non-citizens in this country. You cannot handle my leader – even if you are arresting him – and bundle him behind a pick-up truck and you expect me to be happy. You are provoking war and I hope, at your age, you will be able to hold and sustain that as an individual because you will be responsible. 

I would like to assure you that you are provoking war! What took place on Monday was not a procession. What is a procession, if you understand English? How many people walk to their places of work every morning? If Dr Besigye leaves his residence walking, is that a crime? If I leave my residence walking without touching anybody, is that a crime? This is demonstration of lack of confidence in the Government.

I watched how hon. Mao was arrested from Ntinda as I went to see my doctor. The manner in which he was arrested was awkward and stupid. A civilized police cannot do that. I watched police officers failing to explain to the people who were being arrested why – they were just telling them to go back home. Go back home to do what? Some officers offered transport to those who were walking. If Police had transport to offer, why not offer it to the rest of Ugandans too?

I would like to say that every citizen has a right to complain when things are bad. It is shocking that the Minister, in his conclusion, says that the Minister of Finance is going to inform the nation. What have you been waiting for? I am saying this because that is the gist of the matter. There is a crisis, there is a problem and people are suffering. The majority of Ugandans cannot afford the basic needs today. Can you do that, Mr Minister? Maybe you can now, because you are being chauffeured. But I would like to bet that when you get dropped like it happened to you the other time, you will not manage. I saw you walking.

So –(Ms Nankabirwa rose_)- no, I am not taking your information. As Minister of Finance, why didn’t you inform us early enough? You are there to just waste taxpayers’ money.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us be sober and courteous to each other.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I am very sober. But I am rising on a point of order in regard to what hon. Okumu said that the Minister of Finance has failed to address the nation and that that minister is there to just waste taxpayers’ money. I would like to inform the House that the Minister of Finance issued a press release last week explaining this situation. What is remaining is for the minister to come to the august House to issue a statement in details. Otherwise, the nation was addressed. 

In that regard, therefore, is hon. Okumu in order to impute improper motives by saying that the Minister of Finance is not doing anything?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu, earlier the Minister stood to give information, which you resisted. Yes, you are entitled to that but the information she wanted to give is that actually a statement has been made by the Minister of Finance; I think you can now adjust your approach on that issue.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I notice that the minister has not read her colleague’s statement that has just been presented. I am saying this because if you read paragraph 13 – what does it say? This means there is un-coordination on the Front Bench. The Minister of Internal Affairs has just stated that he has been assured by the Minister of Finance that she will soon inform the country – soon inform the country? My contribution is based on the facts in this statement. So, when you talk about a statement – maybe you issued it in TheRed Pepper; I never read it!

THE SPEAKER: Well, the thing is that as a Minister of Finance, she made a statement, but that she has to improve it by coming here. You are dealing with a statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs, but the Minister of Finance says a press release was issued. 

MR OKUMU: Then she should inform the Minister of Internal Affairs. This statement is presented by the Minister of Internal Affairs. And more so, she should inform the Third Deputy Prime Minster who is her boss.

THE SPEAKER: Please, continue with your submission.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I just do not want to dwell much on this. I watched what happened on Monday while in my sitting room at home. When I tuned into NTV Uganda, I watched footage of children scattered and running out of their classrooms because of tear gas and here is the Minister alleging something else!

Today, hon. Kakooza knows where he has been – he camouflaged as a Red Cross staff in order to access some of those places. He knows that he has been ferrying children to Mulago Hospital – hon. Kakooza, the Minister of State for Primary Health Care is there! 

I would like to state that what Police are doing is beyond what is acceptable. It is the Police who provoke all this. I know we have politicians who are misleading these policemen. No wonder when I look at the list of people being recruited, it is evident that the exercise is not nationally balanced. That means you only recruited certain people to listen to certain orders and to take certain directions.

Before I sit, I would like to say that what this country needs is an apology, given what has happened. I have just returned from hospital; I have seen what has happened this morning, and I have seen the number of people that have been affected and are now admitted in Mulago Hospital. I have also seen how my party president was shot at with a live bullet – he is at Kampala Hospital! How can a police officer shoot at somebody who is at close range and not running? What was the intention? That is why I usually say that sometimes power corrupts because when people are in power, they get mad. They also think that they are absolute and can do anything, but I would like to tell you that you are provoking a situation that will drag this country into what will involve all of us in a very dangerous state of affairs. It is very shameful! The Minister of Internal Affairs and the Inspector-General of Police should resign. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister at his age can even afford to laugh when his policemen have been throwing teargas at young children. You just laugh when your policemen are busy shooting at innocent and unarmed people and you are proudly seated in front there? I pray that God blesses this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.09
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, there are several MPs who have been arrested yet they should have been here with us now.

THE SPEAKER: How many?

MR ODONGA OTTO: They are several and I can name them. They are: hon. Issa Kikungwe, who was arrested as he walked to work; hon. Amuriat Oboi; hon. Erias Lukwago; hon. Beatrice Anywar, who was mishandled. I think they managed to undress her in public, Mr Mayanja Kibirige and hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

All those MPs have been detained at different police stations – Jinja Road, Katwe, Kajjansi and Entebbe police stations. In fact, they ran away with Lukwago to Entebbe because they feared an outbreak of a riot in the city. Other MPs were also arrested yesterday, for example, hon. Abdu Katuntu, Mr Wafula Ogutu and an MP to come, just because they were attempting to walk to work, the way I did. 

Today is the last time I am participating in any walk to work. I am talking with a heavy heart. I was in Kasangati yesterday and today, when Besigye was shot - I drove together with the Police to Mulago Hospital. As we left Kasangati to get to Mulago, we passed nine roadblocks. If you do not do the V-sign, or if you do not persuade the crowd, you cannot pass. They were burning tyres everywhere. We reached Mulago but Dr Besigye protested because he does not trust Mulago Hospital. That is when a minister appeared in a Red Cross vest to see which doctor they can get to kill Besigye once and for all, because there is no explanation as to why a whole minister can put on a Red Cross vest. I even met the Minister of Health at the canteen with the same vest. He was at Mulago at the time Besigye was bleeding –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Odonga Otto. I would like to give you this information and to also request politicians to use public institutions as a life shield. I was called from my office at around 10.00 a.m. and told that somebody was running into a health centre IV and that the health centre IV was tear-gassed. I camouflaged myself in a Red Cross vest to find out the situation on the ground because private vehicles were not allowed through. It was only ambulances that they were letting through. The nearby school was also affected. 

After getting that information, I alerted an ambulance. The roadblocks were there but they could only allow ambulances through. We went to the health centre IV and to the nearby school and we picked the patients –(Interjections)- civilians were manning these roadblocks and using stones. They would only allow ambulances and no other vehicle. So, camouflaging as a Red Cross person was intentional. (Laughter) I had to find out what was happening on site. I rescued seven pupils and brought them to Mulago. They will soon be discharged. I have their names with me but I will give a detailed account when I – 

THE SPEAKER: So, you were on a rescue mission?

MR KAKOOZA: I was on a rescue mission, and not on a mission to kill Besigye. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, immediately I reached Mulago and saw Kakooza, who is heading the other project, putting on a Red Cross uniform and masquerading among the medical doctors, I advised Besigye that this would be his last journey. 

THE SPEAKER: But I thought he has explained the circumstances – 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Whatever the circumstances but when I saw him there, in that uniform, I concluded that this hospital was very dangerous! So we led Besigye away to another hospital in Kololo where he is undergoing an operation. I am not a doctor but given what I saw, the bullet fractured a portion of his hand. 

Interestingly, the bullet hit him while he was putting his hand up to protect his heart because he was seeing the person targeting him on the other side. (Laughter) You people continue laughing. 

I am glad the person who has made this statement is a very old man. In fact, we even need an age limit for people to be in Parliament because this statement is just not a statement; it is a statement from someone who should have been in a graveyard. 

People are bitter in this country and the moment Government cannot allow peaceful civilians, the way I am allowed – I have walked twice to Parliament successfully, and even this morning alone not looking left or right, and then I went to the committee of COSASE. But when Besigye tries to walk – why don’t you cordon off the whole road so that he walks to Najjanankumbi? I do not think he would even walk ten times. Instead, you arrest him; you create a scenario! You saw how Police were embarrassed. For four hours, they could not get Besigye out of a trench until they moved into the trench and shot him and poured water and tear-gassed him. 

This country will go to war and if any opportunity ever avails itself, I will avail myself for that opportunity because we are talking to those who do not listen. The other day a policeman killed three people in Ntinda. Yesterday a policeman shot a 16 year-old pupil in Kabale but no one is commenting. Everyday policemen are killing Ugandans. A pupil of 16 years in western Uganda, not even in Acholi, to be caught by a stray bullet? Where is that bullet coming from, from Heaven? You may say I am emotional, was that an Acholi who was shot dead? And you are here and you do not even talk about it! Today they are burying a girl of 16 years – (Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you very much, hon. Otto. It is true a student was shot in Rubanda East constituency, which belongs to hon. Ahabwe. [HON. MEMBERS: “You took it over”.] My colleagues say I took it over; thank you for giving me that constituency and for that matter, can I request the Minister of Internal Affairs, since hon. Ahabwe has given me his constituency, to bring a statement explaining how Police could use live bullets and attack a school and kill an innocent student, a girl for that matter, who was not even participating in this strike? This is very disheartening. Why do Police use live bullets on students when they are striking? These students are not armed. We demand an explanation from the Minister of Internal Affairs.      

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry I am talking with a heavy heart but in just one week, we have lost six people to the Uganda Police. 

On Monday, when court granted Besigye bail, I engaged the Police. I negotiated with them to let me carry Besigye in my open roof car, to wave to people as he was going home. Because there were thousands of people in the court premises and if Besigye was to go on foot through town, there would be another scenario.

As I was negotiating with the DPC of that area, I was shot on the right of my neck, at close range, with a rubber bullet by a police officer, intentionally. If it had hit me on the head – (Interruption)

MR KIVEJINJA: I just want to inform the House that the incident hon. Otto is reporting was well documented. He was hit by a stone from his supporters. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, we have now very many spokespersons of the victims. If it was not because of parliamentary etiquette, I would undress and make you come and inspect my right side of the neck! There is no way you can hit me with a stone, I fall on the ground and the time I get up, I do not have a single bruise on my skin, not even a single cut or a drop of blood! The swelling was two kilogrammes. It is only the Red Cross that helped me. I was unconscious and I just woke up in Mulago Hospital and then you come up and say it was a stone? You have not even said you are sorry, the same way you did not say you were sorry when you were accused by this Parliament of stealing 2,000 litres of fuel when you were the Minister of Transport. (Laughter) You see, these are the categories of people we have. You stole fuel and you know it. You were censured by this Parliament. (Interruption)

MR KIVEJINJA: Is the hon. Otto in order not to respond to my statement but he is bringing hearsays and allegations? There is no proof that I actually did it. Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, since we have clerks here, they could go to the library and bring us a comprehensive report of Parliament, which shows that he resigned from Parliament to avoid being censured for siphoning 2,000 litres of fuel when he was the Minister of Transport.

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate? If you can, next time you can bring it with you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Maybe he can tell us the details of how he stole the fuel.

THE SPEAKER: Let us be focused.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Lastly, Mr Speaker, on Tuesday I tabled before Parliament a newspaper, which showed two people beating themselves in State House on the front page. The story ran that they were found stealing car lights. Now, if you see the picture, they are bleeding from the head. One has a deep cut on the forehead and another one is bleeding from the nose. These cuts should have come out of a bayonet and they said they were arrested in State House stealing lights.They were forced to beat each other up in turns until even the national newspaper could get time to call their photographers to photograph these people being beaten in State House where the President lives! Do we have a country? Corporal punishment was abolished a long time ago!

There is even the presumption of being innocent until proven guilty. How can Ugandans be allowed to beat themselves in State House and we even have time for the national newspaper to come and photograph them. I asked for an explanation and then you tell people not to practice mob justice when the factory is in State House? In fact, let me even ask: how could those people get to State House to steal the car lights? Is the President safe? Won’t he be stolen? State House to steal car lights? There are no check points? You do not have a programme when you are going to visit anyone? Where is this country going? Are there thieves in State House?

Honestly speaking, I rest my case. I am not going to participate in any walk or civil activity but if any group offers itself to fight this Government, I will participate. Thank you so much.

3.24
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to say something about the statement of the Prime Minister. We need to ask ourselves, why are people demonstrating and what can we do to stop this?

There are several factors why people are going to the streets but one, which I know whether you are on the Opposition or Government side is that the prices of things are increasing. There is inflation in the country and I think that is a fundamental issue that we must address. 

The approach of the Opposition has been, let us walk-to-work. I do not know whether that can solve the problem of the increasing prices. I do not know whether the approach the Police are using to stop these demonstrations is the best. It is debateable but I am inclined to believe that the fundamentals of macro-economic policy in this country are beginning to temporarily get threatened. The prices of things are increasing. For example, last month matooke was Shs 10,000 and today it is Shs 15,000. A kilo of beans was Shs 3,000 and now it is Shs 6,000.

A litre of milk - I do not know what you are doing with your families but with my family, I have said in a litre of milk, you must put a litre of water so that we can reduce - it could cause malnutrition but the point I am making is that prices are increasing! Why are they increasing? Actually the statement that we should have debated today is a statement of the Minister of Finance (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you very much, my colleague for giving way - I think he has stated it clearly that the prices are not affecting Uganda only but the whole world. That is why even this man the Mayor in Washington D.C - Mr Speaker, last week I was in Washington when President Obama was addressing the whole world about the fuel prices. So if it is affecting the whole world and other countries are solving it calmly, why should we take the approach that the Opposition is taking? Will that solve the problem?

Since the Minister of Finance said he will give a statement here, I would like to state that the approach we are using cannot solve the problem. To go on the streets, health centres or public institutions- if students in schools are suffering, which suffering is caused by some people, we should not take that approach. We should take another approach. Thank you.

MS ALASO: No, he can’t just behave with impunity here. Order, Mr Speaker! I have been part of this circus or whatever you call it; whenever we start to walk-to-work and the Police intervene.

Hon. Kakooza who acted as a Red Cross official found me in Kasangati today and he knows that that school is over 100 metres away from the road where we were and he knows if the police did not throw tear gas canisters at that school, he would have had no work to boast about today.Is he, therefore, in order to come and blame victims here saying that it is us who are causing people to be tear-gassed when actually he knows who holds the tear gas in this country? Is he in order to say so even without shame?

THE SPEAKER: I think as he said, for him the facts he has are that these people who demonstrated went to the institution. I think what you can do is give him facts or information that the actual situation is that they never ran to these institutions. Give him the information.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the information is: we did not leave the road and we did not run to any school. It was the reckless Police who tear-gassed the health centre and caused two women to get miscarriages. I am telling you what happened therebecause I was there. They tear-gassed three children who were ferried from the school. Therefore, it is wrong for the Minister to come here and lie to this House when he has no facts. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he was misinformed but you give him the correct information. Anyway, let us debate. For the prices, I have got a copy of the statement of the Minister of Energy, he will be explaining the inflation we are experiencing. But let us address the issues covered in the statement of the Minister of Internal Affairs because it is what we are debating. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement is interlinked with the factors that are causing the problem and maybe, I will not be restricted to mentioning something beyond the statement. 

Therefore, whether you are in the Opposition or Government, you are a national leader and we must address the problems facing the country now. We must involve ourselves in a constructive debate on how we can solve the headline inflation that has increased from 4.2 to 11.8 percent just in two months.

We need to ask Government: where did the silos go to have the buffer stock and the stabilisation fund to control the headline inflation? What happened to Masese? There used to be silos here in Nalukolongo. What happened to them? Can we revive these? 

The other point that is contributing to this is imported inflation, which comes with fuel prices. We have a problem in other countries like Egypt and Qatar, which affects the inflation that we are importing. Will the walking on the street really, Members of the Opposition, solve this problem? I think the best way is to ask our minister: what has happened to the reserves of fuel in Jinja that you came to this House and promised were being filled? What happened? Can we use them to fix the prices? 

We can argue because I am also a student of economics and so I know some bit of economics. When the prices are increasing, Government must do something about it; there is no question about that. And the best way to do it is to put in more fuel and reduce the prices or fix the price of fuel so that the prices are controlled temporarily. You cannot sit and say, “We are not going to do anything about it.” I think that will not work.  

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Something you may not know is that hon. David Bahati holds a Master’s Degree in Economics and International Studies and also in Accounts. So, when he is talking, Members need to respect his views. (Laughter) I would like to just inform my brother that I have just done rough calculations on one of the factors. You are aware that as we were heading towards elections, there was printing of new currency notes. And without withdrawing the old notes from circulation within a set time frame, you know what that means basing on your experience in economics and business studies. 

Secondly, you know that one candidate sent on average Shs 200,000 to each village during the last elections. In Uganda we have 20,000 villages -(Interjections)– yes, you are talking of about Shs 6.0 trillion in circulation without production. Remember that our budget is Shs 7 trillion without other logistics. So, it is no wonder that we have the headline inflation doubling from 4.2 to 11.8 percent. 

Besides that, we have overdrawn our reserves. Last time when we were passing the supplementary budget here - I am a Member of the Budget Committee – we were told that there was a draw down from Bank of Uganda. What does draw down mean? It means pulling the little from the reserves. So, we dried our reserves. This means that we could not mop up inflation as a result of external factors. 

To make matters worse, instead of Government sorting out the problem it says, “Because people might demonstrate on the streets,” it buys jet fighters at Shs 1.7 trillion, which is a quarter of the budget. Thank you. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, for that information, hon. Ekanya, but also to let you know that I am aware that Government is doing something to mop up the excess liquidity within the economy. The Bank of Uganda has really informed us that they are doing that. So, there must be something done on this transfer of prices brought about by the increase of fuel prices. 

So, I suggest that let us all Members of the Opposition and those of Government engage in this constructive debate that can help us find solutions to the current problem, which I think is temporary, that we are facing in this country. Walk-to-Work, while risking the lives of Ugandans, is not necessarily the best approach that we can take as leaders of this nation. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.37
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by informing the Members on this side where I am seated that we should handle this issue bearing in mind that in modern democracies, today you are in Government and tomorrow you are in the Opposition. And it has happened even in this country.  

I would most especially like to remind the Members on the Front Bench that some of you were part of the governments before and today you are in this Government. There must have been reasons as to why those governments failed. Out of the many, can you remember that these could have been some of the problems that pulled down those governments? 

Colleagues, if you were the one in the Opposition and you demonstrated, would you have loved to be handled in the way those people were handled? “Do unto others what you would like to be done unto you.” Would you feel comfortable with such? I doubt whether anybody who believes in God can handle a fellow human being in that manner. 

What is our motto as a country? It is, “For God and My Country” but in the spirit of God, did Police handle well the people who were expressing themselves on behalf of all those affected?

We are in Parliament representing the majority of the people who are affected most. But what are we doing as Government to make sure that this problem is solved? People talk of fuel prices in Rwanda being much lower than the prices in Uganda yet when you are calculating the distance -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, hon. Lumumba, for giving me the opportunity. It is not true that the price of fuel in Rwanda is lower than in Uganda. My people are on the ground and they have been checking all this data. In Kenya, for example, the price of petrol is Shs 2,970 and diesel is Shs 2,741. So, the prices are lower than in Uganda but in Rwanda, they have a uniform price for both diesel and petrol and in fact in their Rwandan Francs, it is 1,015. If you apply the exchange rate of Shs 3.9 per Rwandan Franc, then it is about Shs, 4,000 per litre. That is the fact on the ground.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for the information but what he should also keep in mind is the issue of the distance from where the fuel is got up to the country that you are talking about -(Applause)- so, if you calculate in terms of distance, it should be much lower in Uganda. I think with what we have gone through in the elections, the Front Bench should change and smarten up. What is happening today is that the Minister of Internal Affairs is receiving all the pressure from every side but the problem is from the Ministry of Energy. What have you done, as the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, to regulate energy?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, the acoustics of this Chamber are such that voices beyond a certain point become a problem. Is the honourable member in order to crack our eardrums? 

THE SPEAKER: I think the problem is a question of our gadgets and maybe she has done it unintentionally. You can adjust so that - 

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to be listened to. We have had cases in this Parliament where people have been portrayed in the media dosing. So, I want everybody to listen to me and this is a very big issue that I am contributing to. In this Parliament, we are not of the same age. Some have too much energy and others so little –(Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: What is the innuendo?  

MRS LUMUMBA: What I mean is that we came here after lunch and some of us came in with enough energy. So, if some have less energy, they should find you in your office for a solution. 

THE SPEAKER: It is the stamina. (Laughter) 

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think we have had enough of breaking the ice. We have a challenge as Government. When the price of fuel is high, it affects almost everything and the majority of the people we represent are poor. But what have we done as Government? The teargas is not enough. Tear-gassing people 100 times will not throw away the problem. 

The NRM party just won the elections voted in by the majority of Ugandans; do we love those people who voted for us? What are we doing to show them that we are concerned about the issues that affect them every day? It is not just a matter of coming here to make a statement and make it look like these people are running after the NRM party – the party in power and the party that will be in power tomorrow. That is not enough because when they voted for us in the villages, the concerns were that the prices of agricultural commodities in the villages are still very low and yet those in the urban areas say that the prices are too high. The issue is fuel! The minister in charge of fuel has not said anything about the fuel prices and then we get the spokesperson of Government, the Minister of Information and National Guidance, to hold a press conference and offer no solution or hope to the Ugandans on the issue that is at table - (Interruption) 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I thought we are discussing the statement issued by the Minister of Internal Affairs on the events of last Monday. I am also aware that the Minister of Energy is supposed to present a statement to discuss the question of fuel prices. The Minister of Finance is also going to submit a statement to us, to discuss the economic situation in the country. I do not understand why people are now delving more into issues of prices rather than discussing what took place on Monday. Can I be guided?

THE SPEAKER: There are two issues here. The first issue is the conduct of the Police that we experienced on Monday and the aftermath of what happened. The other issue is what the alleged cause of the demonstration on Monday was, where I think both sides need to sit together to find the herb to cure the ailment. But the main purpose of the statement was the behaviour both of the Police and the demonstrators. The statement does not provide a medicine to the problem of high prices; it only talks about the security arrangements that we had on Monday and why they were there. 

But like hon. Bahati said, I think it is important that later we should sit as citizens of this country – the Government side and the Opposition - and talk about curing the cause of the demonstration on Monday. But I now think that people are talking about the cure of the inflation, rather than talking about the conduct of what happened on Monday. I think that is the problem but the main item now is the statement of the minister on the conduct of people walking to work and how the Police handled the matter. 

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, paragraph two of the Minister’s statement said: “The attempted demonstrations of last Monday, again by the same elements, were part and parcel of this plan. The Walk-to-Work demonstration had nothing to do with the current oil and commodity prices …” So this issue of prices is even in the Minister’s statement. He is de-linking the two and I am so happy that – 

THE SPEAKER: Even if it were, why it was done is the gist of the statement. But you are entitled to giving the medicine. 

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, there are so many Ugandans especially here in Kampala who walk to work. On the roadside by 6.00 O’clock every morning, so many people are seen walking to work. So, the issue of walking to work is not new but the way the Police have handled it is even inflating the personalities of the people involved. There are colleagues who walked up to Parliament today but they have not been arrested and if you watched TV, there was not even any problem on the routes they used but when the Police go in to arrest these people, they make it more pronounced. Actually, the Police have given it more prominence than it would have got. 

Police have got a tendency to inflating people’s personalities. We have a Member here who was always chased by Police before she came here and we thought that she was a supernatural human being. When she came here, I see nothing special. Police actions are inflating people’s personalities and their actions. This should stop. 

For qualified Police to go and teargas in a school is unprofessional. If the demonstrators took off and entered a school, the best option would be to cordon off the premises and handpick them because they are big men and women who can easily be identified from the small children. I think there is a big problem in these ministries, the ministers are male and those heading Police are males too. We need to have a female there who will have a motherly heart. The person releasing teargas should be a woman because there is no way you can teargas in a health centre as a mother. I was so touched when I saw a woman running away with a two-day old baby –(Interruption) 

MR BANYENZAKI: The information that I want to give to my colleague is that one of the ladies who is in police (Judith Nabakoba) went to that school and apologised to children but instead of the Minister apologising to the nation, he is merely castigating those who took shelter in the school. Why don’t you own up and apologise as Nabakoba did before those children?

MRS LUMUMBA: The example he has given is good. She went to apologise because she felt hurt as a mother. These male ministers are coming here to tell us that everything is okay when a woman took off with a two-day old baby. She had not yet recovered but she had to run for dear life! Another lady was taking off with a baby of three months and the Minister has not come out to apologise to these people. Do not make it political; just address the problem with a human heart. I feel so bad for the policemen and women –(Interruption)

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the honourable member as a woman and a parent that they threw a teargas canister at a woman in Lweza and she died. This woman was just operating her kiosk but the people throwing the canister were men. Maybe there is a movement being led by men to exterminate innocent women.

MRS LUMUMBA: I sympathise with the policemen and women who have been deployed to arrest and cause all this havoc yet they have low salaries. They are the people who are affected most by the prices but they are deployed to stop demonstrators. As human beings, they are not happy but they have to do it because it is on order.

I want to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to negotiate with Finance and get better pay for these people. People walk to work because we do not have a minimum wage as a country. The policemen and women walk but now you are telling them to stop those who are walking - where is the wisdom in that?

3.56
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): I thank the minister for the statement. I want to dwell much on the causes of this Walk-to-Work. Around October or November, the Minister of Disaster gave us warning regarding the drought. The second season for last year was a disaster and now the prices of fuel have increased internationally. When you combine the low production and the imported inflation, you realise that there is need for this Government to do something. I think it is time for Government to pay attention to the economic situation in the country.

The Minister of Internal Affairs has assured us that the Minister of Finance will be addressing this Parliament. I believe Government should think of subsidising the price of fuel. When the price for fuel is reduced, it will go a long way in reducing the prices. Most of our goods come by truck and if the Minister brings a supplementary to tackle this problem, we will support it.

I agree with the Minister that preventing the demonstrators from reaching the city is good. I think the crowd would be out of hand at that time; but I want to condemn the manner in which our Police are handling the situation.

In March this year, there was an attempt to recount the ballot papers for Buikwe South; I witnessed a police officer intentionally tear-gassing a nearby primary school. It came to my memory and I realised that maybe among the policemen, there are those who want to portray a bad image of this Government. 

The excuse that people first run to those schools and dispensaries is not correct because I witnessed it in Buikwe. I would love it if the Ministry of Internal Affairs retrained their policemen especially those ones handling the teargas otherwise even if we continue tear-gassing the demonstrators, it cannot solve the problem. 

I think this country would have loved that on a weekly basis, we do get updates on how our economy is progressing. I remember last year during the Budget, we were told that we have reservoirs, which can take us for six months when we are in a closed economy, but it is hardly one month and everybody is crying. What is the problem with Finance? We need to be advised. 

As we give priority to certain sectors and this Parliament approves supplementary after supplementary, we would love that in this situation which touches our people, the Government addresses it as a matter of urgency. There may be some side effect but as we talk, the Executive should think of subsidising the fuel. 

If at all we had buses – because the cause of these problems actually cannot be one. If we are using buses, one bus can bring 80 people into Kampala. How many can a taxi bring? Then the question is – you know the thing should be broad because the problem is going to continue. I would love that the Government addresses the economic situation in this country as a matter of urgency. 

I really sympathise with our leaders of the Opposition, I sympathise with the Ugandans who have been affected because you cannot differentiate between somebody who is walking to work with an intention to demonstrate and somebody who is walking normally. I stay in Seeta and everyday, half the population in Kireka–Banda that works in Kampala walks not for leisure. By the way, it is an insult for the leaders; those who can afford to buy fuel, to make the people suffer. 

If you are expressing solidarity, then the Minister should be aware because if people normally walk to work from Banda to Kampala, I do not see any crime but since the Minister was aware that if they reached Kampala, they could cause chaos, I would love that you talk to your accountant such that when we sit on Tuesday next week before Easter, then we pass the supplementary and we supply the fuel and that will go a long way in the history of this country to show love to our people and voters rather than importing teargas. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, since many of you are interested in making contributions, I think we should curtail the kind of speeches we are making so that somebody does not speak for more than five minutes because I see many of you are interested.So, let us now take the Minister, then hon. Rwamirama and then I come back to this side.

4.05
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much for this opportunity. I also want to ask you to at least give me a moment to respond verbally before a written statement comes on the factors driving the inflation –

THE SPEAKER: Then you should come at the end.

PROF. KAMUNTU: At the end? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, after having listened to a number of points directed to your ministry.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I thank you very much. I will oblige.

4.06
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): I want to thank the Minister for the statement and also thank the Police for their effort in trying to keep law and order in Uganda because it is a very difficult venture. 

It is the responsibility of the Government to maintain law and order. It is also the responsibility of the Government to protect all its citizens. I want to quote one of the world’s wisest men recorded, Sir Winston Churchill: “In the supreme authority lies the blame of credit for the results.” If people’s property was vandalised because the Government failed to give security, the Government will take responsibility. If business in town was disrupted, the Government will take responsibility.

In this House, we have enjoyed security even in most difficult conditions when they were bombing the country right and left and this was the work of the Police. We have just concluded elections where the NRM was overwhelmingly voted in and, therefore, the people who voted had reasons to vote NRM and one of my considered strengths is that NRM had the capacity to maintain security and to protect the citizens. 

We want to look at the situation, which the Minister is trying to address today - what was suspected and what transpired. If you look at the third paragraph of the Minister’s statement, the last sentence says, “The Police were not notified, the organisers did not identify themselves, the routes were not agreed upon”, etcetera. 

It was suspected or actually the Police had knowledge that the procession would then converge at one location and not their places of work. I agree, we have problems in this country arising out of prices of fuel but Uganda is not the worst. I have heard the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development trying to explain the taxes and the difference between Rwanda, Kenya and Uganda. I also want to add on that in those countries, people are paying road licenses and here in Uganda we do not. It was agreed that we factor the cost in the fuel and that is why partly the fuel is high. So it is a known fact.

Walk-to-Work: I want you to put yourselves even without prior knowledge of police - we walk to work and even today I see people walking but do you notify people? Do you have to move in hundreds of thousands? If you look at this report, you have roadblocks -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I request for your protection. I just kept quiet and listened to my colleagues when they were talking and I am quite sure police are not here but they are being represented by all of us.

I have seen scenarios that actually need explanation. One day an honourable member, the Lord Mayor elect now, was asked by Police to go and make a statement and he resisted. They saluted him, he resisted and he decided to lie down. The policemen looked at each other - I was watching on TV and they lifted him onto the pick-up and took him. I saw it today and I saw it yesterday - I am a state minister and I have a police escort. When they stop me and tell me, “This route is closed”, I abide but when these people tell them, “Do not go this side”, they just push the policemen. If you look at the videos, the police are pushed. What are we doing? Are we really giving examples as leaders?

Enjoyment of one’s rights should not be an infringement on other peoples’ rights. I am very sorry and grieved for that matter for people who have suffered because of this scuffle and I want to attribute it to us leaders, because we have not shown a very good example. It is very sad that leaders of that calibre get entangled in a similar situation. We have dialogue; people come here and talk and people walk out. Why don’t they bring a paper here and we debate it intellectually and solve it rather than causing problems and unrest in this country?

The issue of donors condemning the actions of police is simply regrettable. The Minister has just laid on the Table a newspaper cutting from The Associated Press in Washington and I just want to quote: “The DC Mayor, Vincent Gray and council members, dressed in business attire, sat down in the street outside the Senate Office building. US Capital Police arrested them, cuffing their hands behind them with plastic loops and loaded them into the police wagon to the police cells -(Interjections)- I am quoting: “… they were arrested for blocking the street with unlawful assembly, a misdemeanour that can be resolved by paying a US $50 fine.” 

According to US Federal state, it is a felony to hold any demonstration without police authority. [MR ODONGA OTTO: “When you went to the bush, did you get permission?”]we did and when we came out of the bush, we behaved as people out of the bush.

I want to say that we are leaders; we must provide an enabling environment for security agencies to protect our lives and our property. We should not be the ones condemning them when we resist their advice and more especially when we do not act within the law.

Hon. Odonga Otto, I am not waffling. I am talking from experience and I am actually quoting the report from the police findings and what I see going on. They say, “Wise men learn from experience of others and fools learn from experiences of their own.”

If you look at this report on number 5, “Incidents on various routes into the city confirm these facts. The ease with which crowds gathered and the fact that some of those who attempted to take part in the demonstration were not residents in the areas they were found; they had been ferried there. For example, hon. Nsubuga Mathius, a resident of Rubaga Pope Paul Zone, Kamulegeya William, a resident of Lugowa Zone, Kwesiga Robert, a resident of Mengo Central Zone, were all arrested in Ntinda taking part in the so-called Walk-to-Work demonstration.”

I am praying and requesting colleagues that we handle this matter with soberness, we give credit where it is deserved and where people have made mistakes, we correct them. As leaders, we must find better methods of resolving differences. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, but honourable minister, we are regrettably talking about what happened on Monday but how do we prevent this occurring again? In your statement, you mentioned the agreement you made with stakeholders and NGOs under the auspices of human rights. Is anybody here aware of the guidelines that we have to follow when we make arrangements as were made on Monday? Have you sensitised people about these guidelines or they are kept a secret in your office and the offices of NGOs? Don’t you think you have the responsibility of making people aware of the steps that have to be taken when organising such programmes or demonstrations as they did? Because people may say, “We did not know.” Have you seriously thought about this? I think you should sensitise people; they have their rights but you say, “Because of the meeting we had with parties and this and this, these are the steps which you have to take”, instead of blaming people who maybe are not aware.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, in our ministry, we believe in sharing responsibility - this job was done before hon. Kirunda Kivejinja joined us at the ministry and so I think I should be the right person to answer. These guidelines were put in a form of a statutory instrument which hon. Rugunda signed when he was in charge and copies were distributed to those who were supposed to get them. I agree with you; maybe we should have done a little bit more especially by giving all the political leaders these rules.

We have drafted a law in which these rules are now coming and this law at the moment is with the First Parliamentary Counsel for drafting and subsequently it will be brought to this House. Maybe I will use this opportunity; as soon as this matter gets to this Parliament, colleagues, please help us to debate and pass this Bill as quickly as possible so that everybody can know the rules of the game. We will not have to be hitting each other everyday. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but when you pass the law, you are going to say, “Ignorance of the law is no defence”; is that the kind of statement you want to make? I think what has to be done is for you as a ministry or Government to tell people in the villages – those deep in the villages and the lakeshores - the guidelines that they have to follow to organise this. I do not know whether it would cost you too much, but I think it will be for the good of the country. This is because the citizens will be aware of the steps that have been taken rather than keeping them in statute books.

MR KIVEJINJA: Mr Speaker, I accept that that issue had not been repeated, but the agreements by all political parties about how we should conduct ourselves were developed immediately after the Mabira demonstration. We came to an agreement then, and after that all subsequent demonstrations by all groups have been following them. The leaders of the parties were part and parcel of that agreement. 

So, how can a person who is aspiring to be a leader of Government say that he did not know about it? He should be very knowledgeable because it is not the ignorant people falling in the trap but it is the most knowledgeable of our society who are ignoring the rules. 

4.23
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is not every day that I read this book for you in the House, but I will read my Bible today for this Parliament so that if I do not say anything else after it, at least I would have read from the Bible.

The Bible says in Hosea 4:1, “Hear the Word of the Lord”. It goes on to say, “There is no faithfulness, no love, no acknowledgement of God in the land; there is only cursing, lying and murder, killing and adultery; they break all bounds and bloodshed follows bloodshed. Because of this, the land mourns and all who live in it waste away.” There is nothing that I will be saying that is new. Everything that has been said on this Floor has been said before; whether it is about fuel, freedom of expression, infringement on people’s rights to freely assemble and demonstrate in this country, it has been said before. 

At the end of the day, the Bible gives us caution, but let me also give my caution. This statement that the Minister has read is already overtaken. So, may I ask the Minister to give us a statement about today’s events? If he does not give it to us, on Sunday it will also be overtaken and on Monday we will still be walking to work until you sort out the problem that is causing this. 

Stop dealing with symptoms; that is the caution I want to give to our Government. Dealing with symptoms never solves any problems. Today you graduated to the use of live bullets. People are still crying about teargas, but there are people who have been shot using live bullets today. So I do not know what we should be talking about now. 

I want to inform the Minister that whether we want it or not, policing Uganda en-mass will be a difficult task. Today we were in Kasangati, Jinja Road, Kampala and the people who are suffering with fuel prices are also on the road. The ones in Masaka also took to the roads this afternoon, including Mbale and Jinja. Let me tell you, if you do not deal with the real problems and try to deal with symptoms – I saw the police helpless for once; they exhausted all their tear gas and it reached a moment when they were ordering for more but there was nothing forthcoming - policing this whole country, hungry people, will be very difficult. The sooner the Movement Government re-thinks a new strategy for dealing with social problems, the better. 

Mr Speaker, I want to put it on record, particularly for the Minister of Internal Affairs that he is not telling us anything new. We will continue to camp against the composition of the Electoral Commission. We will not go to the courts of law to challenge any presidential election. That was said long ago and it will not be revisited. 

I want to help the Minister know a few things in the field because I am from there, where the action happened. Your policemen are using expired tear gas on Ugandans, including those children you tear-gassed in the school. We personally picked the labels on the tear gas canisters and if you insist I will bring them to this House; they are of 2008/2009. That is the tear gas you are emitting out on those children and yet we give you money. If you wanted good tear gas, you would have done it but you cannot poison our children. 

Two, the water you use is sewage. Sewage is what you spray on those people. It is not even water; it is sewage! I think you go to the Nakivubo Channel to fill your vehicles. I am telling you the truth. I am from there. 

I would like to tell the Minister that selective comparison of the Ugandan situation with the American situation does not help. Today, you proudly extract an Internet copy saying that the Mayor of Washington DC was arrested. Why is it that when we came to the same House and talked about presidential term limits, you could not allow the comparison? Selective comparison does not apply and need not arise. If you chose to set your own stands, then stick to them. Why did you remove the presidential term limits if the American example is your role model?

Mr Speaker, the Minister is not even in charge of the operations that go on in the field where the tear gas is being emitted and people are being fired with live bullets. He is not in charge. Again, from today’s experience, I can show you that he is not in charge. 

I was privileged to be there, I was tear-gassed and I fell in the mud. I found a woman who had been tear-gassed with three children, all of them about three years. I ran back to the DPC of Kiira Road and I told him to please issue a command and tell them not to tear-gas the houses. He said he was not the only one, there were so many people commanding the same operation. 

To prove that, when the Regional CID of Kampala, Mr Kato, came to where we were, a plain clothed man mistook Mr Kato for a demonstrator. He picked his tear gas and sprayed Kato properly –(Laughter)– yes, I am telling you I am from the field –(Interjections)- Yes, because those people open it on us, on the ears, on anything. They came and found Kato talking to us and thought he was one of us. They tear-gassed Kato and he was whisked away from Kasangati as a casualty –(Interjections)- yes, they tear-gassed the DPC of Kiira Road. I asked him, “DPC, you mean this thing makes you also cry?” He said, “Yes, this is tear gas.” I said, “Yes, I understand.” (Laughter) So, the honourable minister had better get to know what is happening there. 

Let me comment on the statement of the honourable minister. First of all, he says the Walk-to-Work Campaign is an attempted demonstration. Let me put it on the record of this House and from my perspective that the Walk-to-Work Campaign is a solidarity campaign where we who represent the people choose to walk with the people, to bear their pain for one day and just see. Coming from Kireka where I stay to Kampala on a daily basis costs Shs 4,000 - Shs 2,000 coming and Shs 2,000 going back. Most of our girls and our people working in the town here earn about Shs 80,000 (per month). So, you work to transport yourself only. It is a solidarity match. 

I would like to tell you that you are firing at the wrong people. These people are giving you a signal of the greater problems our community is facing. That is why I would like to tell you that you construe in your statement that this is a hate campaign against the Government. 

Let me tell you what will make Ugandans hate this Government, in case you do not know. Ugandans will hate this Government when they fail to get food on their tables; they will hate it properly. They will hate it because of the corruption and the failure to fight corruption. They will hate it because of repression, repression, repression and the absence of an opportunity for expression –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I told you in the beginning, we shall not sit here for a long time because of the breakdown of the water system. That is why I am asking those who are making contributions to be brief because I am about to adjourn. The water system broke down and I mentioned this at the beginning. We will not sit here for long. You can wind up here.

MS ALASO: I said those are things that will cause you real problems like the failure to hold free and fair elections. The military might that you display on the streets is at the same level that we have seen elsewhere in Africa - better dictators of 42 years like Libya, Ivory Coast, Egypt wherever. We have seen this but the real things that will change the relationship are the things that you are not treating. I want to caution you as a government that it will not be easy if you do not address this problem. 

You sounded terrified in your statement. The Minister said, “This was a hate-government campaign.” I want the Minister to address the issues that cause you to fear. What is it that you fear? There must be something you know that is causing you to fear. Deal with it because there is a saying that goes, “The guilty are afraid.” If you are not guilty of anything, why should you be afraid? 

I watched on TV how hon. Katuntu was walking to work the other day. He was walking alone and he lives in Naguru. Wafula lives in Ntinda. They had walked all the way past Kireka, past Nakawa, past Jinja Road up to in front of your offices there. No shop was broken into on the trail. Even this morning hon. Amuriat came all the way from Kisaasi and no shop was broken. Nandala came all the way from Kyambogo until they reached Jinja Road then you suspected that they had mobilised people! There is evidence to show you that not a broom was stolen as they passed by. Why do you want to impose a possibility of theft on people walking ordinarily to work because you have no evidence? 

I want you not to publish things that are not true. I am trying to be very good this afternoon. You should have mentioned which demonstrator or which walker ran into that school which you tear-gassed. It is okay that Judith Nabakooba apologised to the children but they were tear-gassed again today. Three of them have been hospitalised. So, what does this apology do or even the one of Judith Nabakooba? What does it do? You tear-gas them, apologise and you tear-gas them again. Today, you tear-gassed the hospital. This statement of yours, especially number 7, is wrong and devoid of sympathy when you say that demonstrators walked.

Finally, it is okay to deal with Dr Besigye as an individual and shoot him, perhaps even shoot him to die, but that will not solve the problems of this country. They can only flare up. Again, I say the sooner you know how to deal with the problem, the better. Bullets killing people will not help because while you are holding Dr Besigye there, in Mbarara, people are walking on the road, in Soroti people are arrested. You can kill that one person called Dr Besigye but you will not shoot the problem; you will not shoot the crisis. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t that enough?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: I think what you should do is to hear something from the Ministry of Finance and then it will be enough. There is a situation, which I have told you about. I am aware of what is happening in the building. There is a situation, which I explained. It relates to the water system; it is not working. [MR TINKASIMIIRE: “We shall not go there, Mr Speaker.”] It does not matter. Let us conclude this matter. 

4.38
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think what we are faced with is exactly nothing but political football in which this presentation is a political machine to defend.

I want to stand here and thank God for today’s Walk-to-Work Campaign in which Dr Besigye was spared in an attempted assassination by army men who were in police uniform. This is a very serious matter; it is not a simple matter-(Interjections)- Walk-to-Work, as you read this statement, like those who are driving to work at the end of the day and you come to a traffic jam –(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I happen to be, with the hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, in charge of Police in this country. I know the number of Police officers I have. We know who they are, especially the senior ones. We are not aware that we have got army officers other than two - the Inspector-General of Police and his aide. Is the hon. Member, a great friend of mine, [MS ALASO: “Those are army men in police uniform.”] Is my honourable friend, hon. Gutomoi, in order to impute, and even mention that we have got army men dressed in police uniform? Could I ask him to come to Parliament and substantiate that matter and bring the names of army officers who are masquerading as police officers? Can I ask, is he really in order?

THE SPEAKER: Maj. Gen. Kayihura is not an army man. He is an army officer. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The history of this country is very clear. What we are discussing here is, as I said, political football between the “no change” and “the action for change” and this has created big fear in the “no change” group. Therefore, we would like to remind this House of the history of this country that no change of presidents has ever been done through the ballot boxes. It is only through the gun. You think about it. 

When we were walking this morning- I was one of those who participated and got enough of this tear gas until I ran to Mulago where even patients were complaining. I said that the honourable minister ought to go to Mulago now to apologise to the administration of Mulago because they aimed at Mulago Hospital and there was no option. Every patient was affected.

How are we going to end this saga? How are we going to end this Walk-to-Work? I think without wasting time, it is now time for the “no change” to go to the State House and the “action for change” to go to Pope Paul Memorial Hotel and then we come out with a solution to give this country peace or the way forward to what is happening. 

As far as we are concerned, what we were demonstrating about last Monday, if there was Government in place they should have acted. Rising of prices started before the elections. Even during the campaigns, it was there and the Ministers were aware. Now it has reached that alarming stage that nobody can tolerate. 

When we are talking about this Mayor, I think you can imagine one mayor doing it on behalf of all the mayors in the States. Now, what is not surprising about it? He did it. He went and sat down and the way he was handled was marvellous; the whole world understood that there was a government and there was police. Only two policemen were doing it. Here, this morning and on Monday, you cannot imagine-

THE SPEAKER: No. I think the main idea of giving you that example is to show that he was arrested for demonstrating - a freedom that he has. That is why he brought it in.

MR ANGIRO: Yes, thank you, Mr Speaker. It is in order that he was arrested for demonstrating but in a manner, which shows that there is discipline in their lives -(Member timed out_)

4.44
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday we were talking about the macro-economic forecasting models that the ministers were unable to bring to us and three years down the road, we are in a mess.  Let me tell this country one thing. Ever since Gen. Kayihura took charge of the police force, we have seen nothing but anarchy in the force. What do you see? Brutality at its peak! What does that tell you? We actually miss the former IGP. Why? The Police had sanity and now they do not. Why? 

Mr Speaker, to draw your attention, if you look at the recent recruitment - I can give you figures off head – in Abim they recruited two; Arua, five; where the First Lady comes from, Kiruhura District, 23; Mbarara, 19 and where he comes from actually, Isingiro, 23. So when these guys are acting immorally, they will be insulated. Why? The people who will be protecting them are seated right before you. 

Walk-to-Work is a serious statement to Government that this Government has abandoned and neglected this country. That is the very reason we are showing solidarity with our counterparts down there. We want to tell them - actually it is not those who are already walking; it is the motorists - that please save energy, save resources, afford essentials. This is what we are saying. Unfortunately, I do not know whether it is an age factor, like my colleague, hon. Otto, is saying, that our friends do not understand this. 

I was in Kasangati and I saw what happened to Dr Besigye. I was down in the hospital. I became a nurse myself when they were washing his hand – blood - and my honourable minister has the courage to come and tell us that these are people who are trying to hijack the swearing in of the President, an illegitimate president who procured leadership! Why are we suffering now? We wired this country with amounts of money that were not absorbed in investments. We wired this country with money that went into consumerism. Now here we are suffering and there is no response from Government. 

I want to advise Government; in such crises, Government must rise up to protect the citizenry. One thing you can do is basically to look at your production system. This country’s agriculture is growing at negative three percent while the population is growing at positive 3.6 percent. What are your people doing? Absolutely nothing! They cannot forecast anything. Quantitative export bans - restrictions on quantities of food exported out of this country- can help us save food for this nation and lower costs of feeding the nation. Unfortunately, no minister goes to bed thinking about this. 

I am happy hon. Daudi Migereko is here; the fuel reserves are in Jinja and there are those that were established by Amin in Nakasongola. What happened after the takeover to the fuel that was in those reserves? Do you know how you stole the fuel? Can you please account to the nation now? To this day you are even unable to refill those reserves- (Member timed out_)

4.48
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister has brought a statement about Monday’s incident. When is he bringing a statement for today’s incident? That is one.

Two, we have a saying that a fruit that fails to fall when it is ripe will definitely fall when it is rotten -(Interjections)- a fruit that fails to fall when it is ripe will definitely fall when it is rotten. We saw what happened in the African countries in the North. We are not immune to it. Do not give us ammunition to challenge you. You are the ones who have brought this situation. 

If you were proactive, the statement from the Ministry of Finance to explain the economic crisis would have come a long time ago and not wait for the Walk-to-Work, a campaign in solidarity with those people who have been suffering, and then you say you are bringing a statement. It should be a shame. We are not just laughing at those who have been walking because they are the voiceless. We are their voice. They cannot talk but today the message has been heard loud and clear, courtesy of Dr Kizza Besigye. Now we are talking. I know tomorrow or in two or three days we are going to see action. Should we wait to see that? We should not. 

They have talked about economic issues here but I hope the Minister of Finance is taking action. My sister here talked about agriculture; yesterday I was telling hon. Rwamirama how this government is killing NAADS and he should be taking action. You can see how a single company, Victoria Seeds, that was procured to supply seeds to farmers supplied rotten seeds, which failed to germinate. In Teso and Bugisu – hon. Wakikona’s constituency – they supplied seeds, which have failed to germinate. You should take action!

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I want to remind my colleague that the decision to privatise the seed company was made here in Parliament. He was my committee member so he should be aware.

MR OKUPA: When we recommend privatisation here, I do not think we list the companies to privatise. Even if we privatised, should there be a problem? Can’t we act? Was there an oversight? Please act on that company; otherwise the NAADS programme will fail. 

We have seen how Police has acted in handling the issue of Ntare School and Kiira College Butiki – where hon. Kivejinja comes from in Busoga. We have seen how those children were handled. I can see him busy conversing with hon. Migereko; I hope they will listen to this. We must act in a civilised way. We saw the way you handled schools; do they also have nugu against Government? Please do not give us ammunition. Do not wait for us to rise up. Address issues as and when they come. Thank you.

4.53
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Mr Speaker, I do not have much to say but suffice to say that what I have seen on the television screens does not reflect nicely on this august House. When we see our colleagues being roughed up and bundled into police pick-up trucks, it is not a pleasant sight. I saw the same footage, which the Minister of State for Agriculture saw, but I got a different picture. In most cases, I saw walkers walking alone or in twos and threes. The footage of Besigye showed him walking with two people. Not until the Police intervened did the crowd gather. Therefore, I am requesting my colleagues on the other side to look at this matter with the seriousness it deserves.

The underlying factors go way beyond the price of fuel. If you look at what has been going on in this country, we have gone through a phase of child sacrifice. The stories you hear around are that sacrifice is about people trying to get wealth or power. Shortly following that, we got uncontrolled mob justice springing up in all corners. It should be a clear indication that there is a lot of pent-up anger in the society. It is, therefore, important that as a nation we find out what the exact cause is before it explodes and envelops all of us.

If you say that the walkers had stones and sticks, where do the mob justice executors get them from? Are they moving around with stones and sticks waiting for somebody to commit a crime and they pounce and kill them? That does not hold water. 

I am urging the Minister of Internal Affairs to handle Ugandans with care. I have just alluded to some of these underlying factors, which are not a creation of the fuel crisis. The North African fuel crisis came almost at the end of our elections. We do not have reserves. Last time we had problems in Kenya, within two days there was a fuel crisis. That in itself cannot be an excuse but the underlying factors are a problem. 

Even within this very House, there are Members who are coming out of elections but have no fuel in their vehicles. If we are honest with ourselves, there is a big problem. If this House were to re-calculate the mileage on the present prices, there would be an absolute uproar in this country. (Member timed out_)

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief and should be able to show the House that the factors driving commodity prices and inflation cannot be contained by walking to work. I should also be able to show that indeed Government has taken and is taking measures to address these issues. I will be giving a full written statement later but this time I will simply give a quick verbal summary. 

In doing so, Mr Speaker, I want you to allow me thank the third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Internal Affairs for his statement. It was a dynamic, comprehensive and youthful statement. I want to emphasise that because there is a mistaken view about ageing. There are three types of ageing, namely chronological ageing – the time you spend after leaving your mother’s womb; biological ageing – the lifestyle you choose; and there is psychological ageing – when you are saddened. The Third Deputy Prime Minister thinks young because one is as young as one thinks. His statement was indeed full of youthful advice – advice to those who are going through the same path he has gone through - and it should be appreciated. 

We are going through a period of transition, Mr Speaker. We have transitioned from the movement political system to a multi-party political system and I think we need a deep understanding in deepening democracy. Democracy in this country is going through transition and requires a change of attitude. It requires mutual respect, tolerance and empathy. Members on the opposite side should have empathy. If they were on this side, how would they have treated the situation? Suppose hon. Odonga Otto was the Minister of Internal Affairs, can you imagine!(Laughter) All we are pleading with hon. Odonga is that a certain degree of empathy and mutual respect is necessary when we are debating these issues. 

Let me ask a fundamental question: why all this? In doing so, I take hon. Bako’s scientific approach of distinguishing between cause and effect. What is the fundamental cause of all these? Police action is simply a consequence; it is not a cause. Therefore, focusing on the consequence of an action you have caused is to misdirect the solution you are looking for. Surely, if all these things were not there, how would anyone have released tear gas? How would anybody –(Interjections)– yes, I accept that clarification.

MR TINKASIMIRE: I am glad that the hon. Minister is interested in addressing the real causes of the problem but not dealing with its consequences and effects. In that line, let me ask this: is he, with the other members of the front bench, actually looking at the causes of the walking? Why are people walking on the streets?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, if the honourable members wanted evidence – and this is why we need to learn. In this transition period of democracy, the remarks from my colleague at the Back Bench is an example –(Interjections)– yes, I am answering. In a democracy, when a member of the front bench is responding to something, to expect a backstabbing from a backbencher who would be defending them is contrary to democracy, and I would want hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire to take this point in good faith. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire is sending unguided missiles to his Front Bench that he should be defending. 

Mr Speaker, I am making a fundamental point for us to learn how democratic institutions in a multi-party political system work. We have heard statements from our colleagues to the effect – can you imagine, somebody declaring that they are willing to die? If somebody is willing to die, my goodness, do you help him to die or do you prevent them from dying with others? Some people do not want to die alone; they would want to drag others to die with them. This is a very difficult situation in our country.

By the way, I am really serious on this point because in a country with this level of development, members in the Opposition and indeed our colleagues here –(Interjections)– okay, let me ask a question: how does walking to work reduce commodity prices and inflation? You tell me – (Interjections)– no, I will answer it because it is a rhetorical question.

Indeed people have been walking to work, but how comes commodity prices and inflation went up? It means the walking has not addressed this situation. Let me share the empirical factors that have been driving commodity prices and inflation up with the members. Some of these factors are domestic, some are regional and others are global. So, if the causes of commodity prices and inflation are global or regional, are you going to walk globally or regionally? How are you going to address this?

One factor that is driving the commodity prices in the country up is poor rainfall and drought. This situation was predicted by my colleague the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, a long time ago. You know that once there is drought, a supply factor will arise because the production of food is affected due to lack of supply. Now that the rains have started –(Interjections)– this is the answer – this situation is going to be self-correcting. It was predicted. So, tell me whether walking would bring rain –(Interjections)- No, we must face it! The fundamental reason for this walking –(Interjections)– what? Mr Speaker, the third reason why there has been price increases –

THE SPEAKER: No, I think we are gaining nothing because of the talking. The Minister stood to make a statement but you are not allowing him to do so. Maybe, Mr Minister, you come back next week because we are not listening to you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: It is because the Members are not allowing me to give them –(Interjections)- and that proves my point.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but you are not being heard.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Don’t you see, Mr Speaker, that the Members do not want to be given the reasons why prices are rising because it is not the reason why they are walking –(Interjections)– No, I am answering them.

THE SPEAKER: With that we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 18 April 2011 at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.06p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 April 2011 at 2.00p.m.)

