Tuesday, 15 April 2003

Parliament met at 2:34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you remember, yesterday we agreed to set up a select committee to consider the matter that was before us. In the process of setting up this committee- and maybe tomorrow I may announce the names- we agreed that the House should set out the terms of reference.  I am now appealing to you, honourable members, to consider the kind of terms of reference we should give to this committee when it is set up.

I think for purposes of an orderly way of handling them, if you have anything in writing, you can forward it so that we can tabulate and set them in a written form; so that tomorrow we go through them and see which ones we can accept.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  With your permission, I am standing on a point of public concern, and I need some clarification briefly.  Following the passing of the Political Organisations Act last year, Article 269 of our Constitution became redundant.  With reference to Article 72(1) of our Constitution, the right to form a political party is a constitutional right.  So, political parties are not NGOs – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, is this really a matter of urgency?  Is it a statement?  Is it a question? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: It is very brief. I am about to – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But then, who is going to answer it?  First of all, this is a legal matter; the Attorney General is not here and the minister of Constitutional Affairs is not here, now who is going to deal with it?

MR LUKYAMUZI: The Minister of Finance. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: We rather keep it.  You frame it so that we can do it formally.  There is definitely no minister who is going to shoulder it.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I will raise it as soon as one important personality comes in.

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I wanted to inform this whole House that I have been having a long unsolved crisis over a funeral home in my area, which has now been solved by the Minister of Health, Brig. Jim Muhwezi.  After excessive consultation with stakeholders in my area and the Minister of Health, we have resolved that the funeral home be relocated to another place.  

The people of Kyadondo East Constituency have sent me to tell this House that they are very happy with the way the Minister of Health has handled this issue, because the crisis was so much and it was leading to bloodshed in the area.  Thank you very much.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance on a matter of great public interest.  We have read in the papers today that the representative of the United Nations Commission for Refugees was expelled from Uganda over a matter concerning the relocation of refugees from Kiryandongo to West Nile.  I remember, in this House the Member of Parliament for Lubaga South raised a question of Sudanese refugees taking up residence in his area.  It will also be recalled that to relocate the refugees to Kiryandongo, they had come under attack in Acholi Pii.  I am aware that Uganda is signatory to the Geneva Conference and actually is bound – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You should ask the minister to tell us under what circumstances was the High Commissioner expelled so that we get the answer!  Otherwise, if you are answering yourself, then somebody will not have an answer to give you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The question I am asking is that, why has it become necessary to relocate refugees from Kiryandongo to West Nile in contravention of the principle of non – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, don’t you think you should ask whether it is true that refugees have been relocated?  Are you stating facts or you are asking the question?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Well, could the minister responsible tell the House whether what we have read in the papers is true, that the refugees are actually being relocated?  Could he or she also tell the House the circumstances under which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Representative has been ordered to leave the country?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mrs Christine Amongin Aporu): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the member for raising the question, and I would like to respond as follows: The Country Representative for UNHCR, Mr Saihou Saidy, his term of tenure in the country has come to an end and he is destined for a new assignment by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, who has recently been here for a visit.  

Regarding his alleged expulsion, he has not been expelled.  It is a coincidence that his end of tenure coincided with his disagreement with the ministry responsible for refugees.  But he has not been officially expelled; he is going for his new assignment.  

Regarding the refugees, the Acholi Pii case, last year in the month of September, the LRA overran Acholi Pii refugee settlement in Pader District. The department of refugees relocated the refugees in question, mostly of Sudanese origin, to Kiryandongo.  Kiryandongo currently in Masindi District is over-crowded, so it is in plan that we relocate this caseload to West Nile region in the Districts of Arua and Yumbe.  

The District of Arua hosts the majority of the Sudanese refugees and another set in Moyo. Now that the district authorities of Yumbe have offered us land as Government, we are in the process of relocating the refugees to Okollo in Arua and Ikafe in Yumbe District.  

We are not forcing the refugees to go. As per the Geneva Convention, refugees are not normally forced to go where they don’t want. But what is pertaining on the ground is that one of our intermediary agencies is the one who has been provoking the refugees not to go westwards, because they want to continue benefiting from the services of the refugees. And this is where the disagreement came up; because they were encouraging the refugees not to go and yet also by our protocols, the refugees must be kept closer to their countries of origin.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, according to the Geneva Convention, the nearest refugee camp should be a minimum of 50 miles from the border of the country of origin.  Can the minister assure us that the location or the proposed refugee settlement yet to be gazetted in Yumbe will comply with those requirements?  Can we also be assured that such a re-allocation will not be a source of conflict between Uganda and Sudan? 

MRS AMONGIN APORU: Mr Speaker, we have already taken consideration of those provisions that the honourable colleague is talking about.  First of all, Ikafe in Yumbe District was formerly a refugee settlement.  In the 60s, we had the Sudanese refugees in the same place and this remains officially a Government refugee settlement.  It complies with the regulations stipulated in the Geneva Convention; it is more than 50 kilometres from the border.  

We have also been discussing with the Government of Sudan and the UNHCR representative here in Uganda about this relocation, and they are in agreement, Mr Speaker.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like further clarification from the minister, and actually assurance that her quotation that the representative of UNHCR here, his term had come to an end officially.  Can she tender documentary evidence to this House that this is the case; because the international media is saying something contrary to what she is claiming.  

Secondly, African refugees in a situation of African Union have got to be handled more delicately than just pushing them around.  Is this the policy of the ministry that refugees should be mishandled in this country, when we know very well that some Ugandans were handled properly in other countries?

MRS AMONGIN APORU: Mr Speaker, I would like once again to state that the term of tenure for Mr Saihou Saidy came to an end, and Lt. Gen. Moses Ali wrote a letter to the same effect and agreed with the High Commissioner for a replacement because this person is moving for another assignment. 

The refugees in Uganda have been handled with the greatest care.  It is on record that among the countries within the Great Lakes Region, and the world over, Uganda is one of the most hospitable countries to the refugees.  We have never mishandled the refugees - (Applause). They are enjoying the benefits that are supposed to be extended to them, Mr Speaker. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The First Deputy Prime Minister was asked to make a statement on the attack by the Pokot of Kenya on a number of villages in Kapchorwa District, and this is the Statement. 

On Friday, 11 April 2003, at around 5.00a.m. a group of about 300 Pokot warriors from Kenya attacked Kapterewo, Kwirowoti and Senedet parishes in Suam subcounty, Kapchorwa district.  They also attacked the villages of Porok, Kapriandi, Chefinyinyi and Motibey.  They attacked Uganda through Kachikorikori. Some of the attackers were armed and others were not.

On entry into Uganda - I hope honourable members have got copies of the statement; so if I read some of the words wrongly, please refer to the statement on paper. On entry into Uganda, the armed group engaged the two UPDF platoons, 30 LDUs and 29 home-guards stationed at Kapterewo while the unarmed group drove away animals and carried food and other items.  What they could not carry was destroyed.  Many Ugandan lives were lost in the incident. 

During the attack, the Ugandan security personnel bravely defended our territory and property. They were able to beat back the attackers, leaving seven of them dead.  A Pokot flag was recovered.  By midday, the situation had calmed down.

During the raid, 28 innocent Ugandans were killed, many more were injured, more than 200 houses were burnt and over 300 heads of cattle, goats, donkeys and chicken were taken away.

Honourable members, cross boarder raids are sometimes carried out in this area.  When this happens, the target is usually animals.  On this occasion, however, the raid resulted in the killing of a number of people, including those who never put up any resistance, and children who were pushed into burning houses.  Another strange aspect of the raid is that food stores were burnt. For example, a store housing 500 bags of maize belonging to one Barogi of Motimbei village was burnt down.  This has not been the practice in the past, when such raids have taken place.

Honourable members, we recall that on 1st and 4th of April 2003, a group of Ugandan Sabiny raided the Pokot of Kenya, and it is therefore possible that this was a revenge attack.

Security measures to be taken: 
Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will agree that although cross border raids are traditional in this area, there is urgent need to bring the practice to an end.  These traditional raids that result in the loss of lives and destruction of property cannot be tolerated.  

Following this incident, Government intends to do the following: 

    1. UPDF defences along the border will be reinforced.

    2. It should be recalled that some time ago Government decided to withdraw all arms that were being legally held. This gave an opportunity to bandits who continue to terrorize the population.  It was, therefore, decided to re-arm some disciplined vigilantes to ensure security in the area.  So far, 104 of them have been armed and deployed.  In addition, 230 LDUs have been trained, 73 of these opted to join and are serving with the UPDF.  The remaining 157 are being given their arms and uniforms.  We are informed by the UPDF that this is to be done today, and they will then be deployed in the area.  We will continue training and deploying more vigilantes.  These will be under the UPDF command and will help in ensuring security in the area.  

    3. Given the fact that we have a porous border, Government intends to raise the issue with the Kenyan authorities so that joint measures ensure that such incidents that take place on both sides of the border never occur again.  

May I add to this statement that there is a team of people who are going to discuss this matter with the Kenyan Government, and the team is planned to go on 23rd of this month.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR STEVEN CHEBROT (Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I would like to thank the minister for issuing this statement.  But my concern is that the statement itself is full of factual errors.  

The first error that I have noted was for the minister to start speculating what she thinks was the cause of the raid.  We as Members of Parliament from Kapchorwa held a press conference here about a month ago, sometime around March, and we informed Government that there was a Member of Parliament from Kenya called Mr Moroto, who was organising a raid into Kapchorwa.  We informed Government that this was to happen and that close to 6,000 armed people were coming to raid the people of Kapchorwa.  This was before the 1st of April.  

It is not true that the people of Kapchorwa have ever gone to Pokot.  Why do I say this?  It is because we have no capacity to counter raid the Pokot.  The Pokot are heavily armed; Government removed all our arms on a wrong premise.  We do agree that there were some problems in Kapchorwa at one stage soon after the elections, but this was basically in Tingey county; it was not in Kween county and Kongasis county.  If the people needed to be disarmed, it should have been the people of Tingey, not the people of Kongasis and Kween counties where there are frequent attacks.

Secondly, when we made this statement we had very good information from the Kenyan authorities themselves that these people were coming, and the reason why they came was not because of the counter raids from Kapchorwa.  The reason was that on the 28th of March, the Pokot of Kenya had actually crossed into Uganda with close to about 3,000 heads of cattle, and when they crossed the border –(Interruption).

DR YEKKO:  The operation by UPDF into Riwo in Kongasis County was on the 27th and 28th of February.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you very much for that clarification.  Now, when those army men went there, they removed all the 3,000 cows from the Pokot of Kenya.  These cows were put in lorries and driven to Mbale.  Some of those, which were small, were left in Kapchorwa and even up to yesterday there were 57 cows, which were in Ngenge sub-county, which were removed either today or yesterday evening.  This is what angered the Pokot to counter raid.

MR AEL ARK LODOU: The 57 cows were taken to Mbarara- (Laughter)

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, the second aspect of this incorrect information from the minister is that during the attack, the Uganda security personnel bravely defended our border and property.  They never got out of their barracks; they merely shot bombs into areas even where civilians were.  I attended one of the burials where a bomb landed and killed one person who was hiding.  The soldiers never got out of their barracks! It was only some people from the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Local Defence Units who sort of responded at around midday.  

I had called Col. Sula at around 7.00pm and informed him that there was an attack going on.  He told me that he wanted to talk to somebody from the army himself.  I asked him, “Where can I get the Army Commander here in Kampala?”  I could not get anybody to talk to. He did not believe me until I had to ring the Army Commander himself to ask him to go to Kapchorwa and contain the situation.  So, it is not true that they bravely – in fact they abandoned their duty and they did not do anything to defend the people of Kapchorwa!

As I said before, the people of Kapchorwa were disarmed on the wrong premise.  This is the only time the people of Kapchorwa need to be defended against these raids. One day it is the Karimojong attacking us, the other day we are being attacked by the Pokot, the other time we are being attacked by the Turkana; soon we shall be wiped out as a community!  So, what is Government’s response to this situation?  The Government is not serious, we informed them. 

The question is ”Why didn’t they respond when we informed them that these people were coming?”  They did not even deploy one soldier at the border and that is a border which is open. There is not even a single immigration post there; the Pokot just walk in and out!  They have kraals on one side of Uganda and on the other side of Kenya. So when they steal from the Ugandan side, they move and leave the cows on the Kenya side.  

Two, we had informed them through an earlier statement, that the Member of Parliament for Kapenguriain (Kenya), Mr Moroto, was highly involved in this affair and now 28 people have died.  A number of our houses have been burnt.  This is really unfair.

Thirdly, let me just raise this issue.  They have said what Government is going to do.  First of all, they have talked about arming the people and this is what we have been asking for.  Eight months ago, the President wrote a letter to the Army Commander himself, instructing him to give the people of Kapchorwa 600 guns.  We have that copy.  But what did the military officers do?  They did not implement that decision.  This massacre, which occurred in Kapchorwa, was preventable if we had a serious Government because some officers within the army refused to arm the people of Kapchorwa, despite the presidential directive.  How can an army officer refuse to implement a presidential directive?  

MR DOMBO:  Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for giving way.  The clarification I wanted to seek is about his information that the President wrote a letter directing that the people of Kapchorwa should be given 600 guns.  Was that conceding that the UPDF was not capable of preventing and protecting our borders from such potential provocation?  What exactly was the problem, yet the minister has just told us that the UPDF bravely defended the situation?  

DR CHEBROT: Thank you. Our experience at the border in Kapchorwa is that usually when the raiders come, the soldiers are in the barracks and these are people who just come and steal 10 or 20 cows and run away.  So, the people who can best handle the situation are either Local Defence Units or the people themselves around the border - (Interruption)

DR KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKOMU: Actually, the UPDF was strong enough to fight at this time. When the President directed the Army Commander, this was because of the pressure from the wanainchi to Government, informing them of the constant raids in the district. But by then the army had been deployed to the North.  So, this was actually a provision to cater for the security in that area. We are not really undermining the strength of UPDF.  Thank you.

MR ONEK OBALOKER: Mr Speaker, the UPDF is not sufficient in the North –(Laughter).  We are concerned because last night they raided a camp for the displaced in my sub county in Kitgum, and there were no UPDF.  They killed whoever they wanted to kill; they burnt all the houses and abducted a number of children.  The entire Kitgum district is totally covered by marauding rebels; there are no soldiers.  Our people are saying heavy equipment is seen coming southwards and about two or three brigades had moved there.  I do not know. We are equally in the same situation with Kapchorwa, but we are worse off because the countryside is no longer in the Government hands. So, this is the information I wanted to give.  

Government should be very honest because this issue of the executive trying to joke around with protecting non-functional positions is not helping this country.  We need to be straight and functional. The minister should speak facts to enable us help this Government to do the proper job. There is no point why she should lie here in the House.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please wind up! We agreed that the ministerial statement should take about 20 to 30 minutes.

DR CHEBROT: The third strategy, which the Government made, was in connection with the Kapchorwa people to recruit 600 LDUs’ to prevent these cattle raids.  Now, what the Government did after they had recruited these people was to convince them to join the UPDF, but that was not the main purpose: The main purpose for the Kapchorwa people to recruit these people was to defend us.  

Now, they went ahead and asked the boys that, “Do you want to join UPDF, our salary is 140,000/=, but if you become an LDU, you will only earn 16,000/=”.  So, as you can see from the report, they say 73 of those were recruited to defend us, because of the inability of Government to defend us. But they again recruited them to join the UPDF!  

I thought there was a procedure for joining UPDF; that is what we were told by the minister.  Is that not true?  If there is any military person here- if people want to join the UPDF, announcements are made and people go to join UPDF but you do not recruit LDU who have been recruited by the local people themselves! 

Lastly, what action does Government want to take; I don’t see the humanitarian aspect of it! The Minister of Disaster is here, they are talking of what they want to do, they are not talking of what they will do to the 300 homes which were burnt and people are living without food and all their shops were looted. Now, what humanitarian aspect is there which I do not even see in this report that was made hurriedly?  Children were thrown into the fire, people have no food, and Government is not even moving to the area to save the situation! The Minister for Disaster is actually the minister for Disaster itself, because they have not even gone to Kapchorwa to see the situation, and how can they make a report without going there –(Interruption)

MRS APORU: I want to thank hon. Chebrot for giving way so that I can give information.  Mr Speaker –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: Please, allow the minister to say what she wants to say.

MRS APORU: Mr Speaker, when the honourable members of Parliament from Kapchorwa wrote a letter to His Excellency the President, on the 11th of April, we received a copy of the letter and my minister met a team that came from Kapchorwa.  As the Office of the Prime Minister, we extend our sympathies to the people of Kapchorwa for the disaster that had befallen them.  We regret it. The cattle raid today has taken another dimension; there is a gun, there is a vehicle and commercialisation of the cattle raids.  We regret this unfortunate incident that has befallen the people of Kapchorwa.  

Furthermore, Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister instructed the First Deputy Prime Minister, who is the Minister of Internal Affairs, to set an inter-ministerial committee to address the issue of this attack by the Pokot of Kenya to the people of Kapchorwa.  Once again, Mr Speaker, we regret the attack. 

On the humanitarian situation, all the Members of Parliament from Kapchorwa- I have personally spoken to them and we have moved as follows:  

This morning, I chaired a meeting of Humanitarian Partners UNOCA, UNWFP, Action Aid, Red Cross, ADRA Uganda and we have agreed to set up an emergency intervention for three months to extend humanitarian assistance to the people of Kapchorwa.  

World Food Program is going to provide food which shall be transported to the people who are affected.  Red Cross, our long-term partner, is going to provide blankets, kitchen sets and jerricans.  

What is pertaining on the ground: we have not synchronized the figures, we have the District Disaster Management Committee; we have got Red Cross; we have got Action Aid but the figures of the affected population is not yet synchronized and the team is going for a joint assessment on Wednesday so that we can address the issue of supporting the people.  We are not going to wait until this final report is in place, but we are going ahead to extend humanitarian support to these people.  We are just discussing the route to take to deliver humanitarian support to the people of Kapchorwa.  

So, Mr Speaker, I want to assure the Members of Parliament and the country at large that we are working hard to make sure that we support these people.  Normally when an accident occurs, people become so sentimental and emotional, but I want to say that let us keep firm; we shall serve the people within the shortest time possible because you know very well that reaching Kapchorwa is also very difficult; it is now experiencing heavy rain.  So, we have to plan the safest route, which takes us to Kapchorwa.  

I want also to say that as we plan our intervention priorities, one is food, priority two is shelter, priority three is health and priority four is agricultural seeds and inputs which we shall serve the affected people.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, Dr Chebrot, wind up.

DR CHEBROT: I am winding up, Sir.  Lastly, I think we demand an apology from Government for failing to do its constitutional duty to protect citizens.  That statement is not contained in this report, people lost their lives; they lost their property and the only thing which has not been decentralized is security. Security matters are a responsibility of the central government, and you have a constitutional responsibility to protect your citizens.  In this instance, despite the fact that you were informed, you failed as Government to protect your citizens.  We demand an apology.

The minister mentioned something about people who are going to Kenya to have bilateral discussions.  We would like to know who is going to be in these talks, because Members of Parliament from Kapchorwa would like to be among them so that they can be able to highlight the issues that affect them at the border. 

Lastly, the issue of compensation, which the Minister for Disaster Preparedness has not talked about; Government refused to listen to us; we demand compensation for those who lost their lives and property.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Indeed, it is very sad to see that this kind of thing has happened again due to the failure of the Government to protect the citizens of this country.  

The two points that come out in the statement arouse anger from anybody who was listening to this statement. Number one- this is on page 2. "It has not been the practice in the past for the Pokot to kill people and rob our cattle.” It has never happened in the past; why has it happened?  

We have been told the reason. Soldiers raided the Pokot when they came to graze their cows in Uganda and officers of the Government took 3,000 cows.  There is also a statement somebody stated on a point of information that some of the cows which were taken are now in Mbarara.  It is not the first time that cows have gone to Mbarara.  People from Mbarara itself have gone to court and testified that cows which were stolen from that area were taken to Mbarara and caused a certain disease which did not exist in that area before.

We would like clarification from the Government.  Are they going to pick areas to protect or do they want the whole of the East and the North to be in camps?  Here are the productive Sabiny people who have not been beggars and now they have got to go to the camps! And Government explanation is that they have got people to donate to them free food and clothing!  They have never wanted that before; all they want is protection from the Government so that they can go about their daily work.  They don’t want to become beggars.  

When this kind of things happens in some areas, Government is ready to protect those people:  When there was danger in the Western Region, we went all the way to Gbagdolite to ensure that there was protection in that area.  Why don’t we do the same thing in the North and the East? (Applause).  Is this thing pre-planned or are we seeing spontaneous action going on in the country?  Where else can the citizens of this country look for protection, if it is not to their Government? What is happening to the Government? We are failing to protect the people and some of the things happening are just unbelievable.  

How do you remove guns from the people when they have warned you for a long time that there is a plan to attack an area, and absolutely nothing is done?  What kind of protection of the citizens is that?  How can you- like it happened in North Eastern Teso; there were LDUs who were removed before replacement and then the Karimojong came and attacked the area and killed the people.  What protection are we expecting from the Government?  Are we seriously protecting the people of this country or are we just joking?  

I would like to move a motion that this House should reject this report.  We would like to record an official displeasure of the Government for failure to protect the citizens of this country.  I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Our constitution is very clear on the defence and security of this country. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will soon have to name those people who disturb members who are contributing.  I know I can do it, but this is a warning.

MR SABIITI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Our constitution is very clear on the role of Government, and particularly as far as the security of this country is concerned.  Article 209 (a) states: "to preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda.”  The same constitution empowers the Executive to use the institutions of Government to provide security to the people of this country.

About a month ago, Mr Speaker, one Member of Parliament, hon. Amuriat, moved a motion on this Floor.  He moved a very, very important motion, which was supported by all Members of Parliament that the security in the eastern part of Uganda was under threat, particularly from the Karimojong and the neighbouring country.  We requested the Government to move in very fast and provide security.  It seems nothing was done, and when you read the minister's statement on page 2, he states: “Following the incident, Government will do the following…"  

It appears the motion which was passed by this Parliament, was not taken seriously.  We should have expected the Minister of Internal Affairs, and of Defence to come here and tell us that what Parliament recommended and requested for has been implemented.  It is amazing to find nearly half of the country under threat; internal insecurity has continued to develop.  

So we feel that if this government is not in charge, surely something must be done. If you take over a government, your main responsibility is to be in charge, and to make sure that your people are protected, that there is enough food for them and people are not being killed. So, Mr Speaker, I find it strange to learn from page 3 that the same government is coming out to devise an alternative system of providing security for this country. 

They are saying they are now arming civilians and the LDUs, and it is very unfortunate to hear a statement to the effect that those who had guns illegally but were removed are now going to be re-armed. We have the UPDF, we have the Police, and you are aware that the Ministry of Defence is given about Shs 300 billion every year. Recently, 23 percent of the entire budget was diverted to provide security. But to find that at this hour in this century, the people of Uganda cannot be protected when we are providing resources and we are denying other areas resources is very amazing. 

Mr Speaker, I support this motion which has been presented by the honourable member that some of us are not happy about the way the security matters of this country are being handled. Thank you.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is a very sad moment, and it is even more sad when you come to realise that the cause of our problem is ourselves. We occasioned a whole United Nations machinery to investigate our own army in Congo and they came up with a list of looters. And we are now looting in Kenya. When you have the wrong army, where do you run to? 

This is a serious situation facing our country. Our borders are not safe, our neighbours are not safe with us, and therefore, we cannot be safe with ourselves. Is it because what we provide for the Army is not adequate? Is it because what we budget here for the Army is not adequate? Everyday they are asking for more and more money. Where does it go? What does it do? When you hear the stories coming from the field where our children are, some of them even have no uniforms, they have no boots, and they are walking around in slippers - torn slippers, torn uniforms! 

For 17 years we have been talking of building barracks for them, and there is no single barracks to show for it. Instead they are all in mama ingia pole pole. We have asked for a law to come to this Parliament to deal with the welfare of the Army, and the Ministry of Defence has refused, up to now, to bring this law. So, what are we expected to do, as a Parliament? I think we had better express our displeasure, and reject this statement. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
 
DR ARAPKISSA YEKKO (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the minister on the statement she has made, but I want to make three comments. One is about the arming of the LDUs. 

Some time last year, when the security situation in the district deteriorated, the President wrote a letter to the Army Commander that LDUs be re-armed. That instruction was not carried out until about a month ago. Four hundred of them were recruited, and when they were passing out they were given the option that hon. Chebrot has indicated here, and many of them went to join the UPDF. 

We have been told that 73 of them opted to join the UPDF, and that 157 of them are to be armed and deployed as LDUs; that is very good. Yesterday when we were passing through Mbale, we found they were offloading guns from Moroto and the LDUs who had been dropped to Mbale were waiting to be taken back today. So, I thank Government for that. But there is still a balance of about 250 who are still in Kapchorwa. We urge the Government to arm those ones; the 250 who are still in Kapchorwa, to boost the security.

Point number two is the causes of the raids into Bukwa. This has been a process. From October last year, there has been a series of raids into, especially my county. They raided a place called Kabagirya, they raided Sundet, they raided Ngenge; and most of those animals pass through the Pokot of Uganda - that is in the constituency of hon. Lolem - and enter into the Pokot of Kenya. Then there were other series of raids into Kaproron sub-county and into Bukwa. There was also this UPDF operation in Riwo. So it is not the raid on 1st and 4th of this month by Sabiny. There has been a series of raids by the Pokot of Kenya, starting all the way from October last year. 

I think the main reason, because even last week when we went for the POKATUSA meeting – POKATUSA is an NGO which tries to bring peace between the Pokot, the Karimojong, the Sabiny and the Turkana. A Member of Parliament, hon. Moroto from Kenya, attended the meeting and he raised the issue that they were very bitter about their 3,000 heads of cattle, which were taken by the UPDF. The Uganda Government has denied knowledge that somehow those animals disappeared into Uganda. 

When this raid happened, we visited the area over the weekend, but what we saw is disheartening. Other than the area district officials, there was no representative at all from the central government; no minister of any sort has ever visited that area. I imagine if this raid took place in the county of Rwampara, which hon. Kategaya represents, His Excellency and other top officials would have visited the area by the swiftest possible means to see what had happened – that is if 28 people got massacred in Rwampara County.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, following this, when I assess the political mood of the people in the district, the NRM or Movement Government which has been scoring over 90 percent, is now rated at less than 10 percent. So, unless Government moves in - something is terrible on that side. Thank you very much.

MS MUGERWA NAMAGGWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement, and I would also like to pray for the souls of the dead persons. May they rest in eternal peace! It is a pity that this type of condolence was not expressed in the Minister’s statement. (Applause).  

I would like to note that Uganda’s sovereignty has been invaded and it has not been protected by the concerned ministry, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I would have expected the minister’s statement to say that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has already sent a protest note to the Government of Kenya for the invasion from their country, but this is missing. As such, I would like to support what hon. Chebrot said that probably we reject this statement, so that it comes out when it is properly prepared.

Mr Speaker, let me just make a general observation as far as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is concerned. Other ministries have taken over its role. It is not promoting Uganda’s interests abroad; it is not promoting Uganda’s voice in terms of what Uganda should be. Because, if we get strangers coming to attack our people, even killing people within Uganda - 28 Ugandans versus seven of theirs who died - it is a tragedy! And the ministry is keeping quiet! 

I would like to call upon this ministry to even be appearing in Parliament, because for two weeks, for a month, you do not see foreign affairs. Even if the Prime Minister is there, the Prime Minister cannot be everything. Prime Minister, are you volunteering - I would like to ask him this question - to take over the responsibility of all the ministries? Because, Ministry of Foreign Affairs is not here, and it has not been here for two months! All the time they are not here when such issues are raised.  

Mr Speaker, I stood up to raise this general comment, that actually the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should play its role. Let it protect the interests of Uganda. Let it not allow other ministries to contact other governments when it is actually in existence, with about ten ministers.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to make a general comment on this observation. A lot of the assistance we get from abroad is going to things which are not developmental. When I look at the list that has been read by the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, it is a big list of foreigners helping us on some things, which are not developmental. These people should be helping us to develop such areas like Kapchorwa. But you ask them to get us food, you ask them to bring clothes; it is a pity! We can handle this type of matter, and let such assistance go to development issues. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKWOMU (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am bereaved because I have lost 28 supporters or constituents. The history of cattle thefts has just been touched slightly, but it is a case, which has been on for the last so many years, even before some of us were born – about 50 years now. 

At the beginning, it was just an exchange of arrows and spears, and it was all one way. We were always the losers, always the defenders until we also acquired guns after the fall of Amin.  That is when we protected ourselves properly. But in most cases, if ever we go there to bring animals, we go to recover them. We do not provoke; we just trace them and bring them back. 

The question at hand is what is quoted about 1st and 4th of April, when the Sabiny went for a raid.  These Pokot had come and raided on 28th and 29th of March and they took many heads of cattle. So, our boys, and a few others who had been given to them, had to say, “No, we have to trace where these animals are”. Indeed they recovered them, but not all that were taken on those two days. So, it was just a spot check, and it was just a matter of recovery. 

The main motive of this strike is what transpired from the operation which was carried out by the UPDF. This was just the immediate cause of this attack. We had warned Government much earlier before the operation took place that the Kenyan MPs were mobilising their people, and that they were ready to come and strike any time. It was neglected.  

On Thursday, 10th of this month, hon. Moroto of Kapenguria constituency held a meeting, as if he was flagging off his members for the raid, in a place called Serewo. This is not very far from the border –(Interjection)- yes, he was there to flag them off.  

It is also reported that hon. Rotino, who is a Member of Parliament for Singor, bordering Turkana - and not Kapchorwa - also had a part to play. He delivered his raiders in two lorries, right up to Chepchoina, which is the nearest trading centre just across the border, instructing them to strike at night. But the raiders said, “These people are dangerous, you cannot hit them at night. They are good at fighting at night”. So they waited until 4.00 a.m. and they struck. So, the motive of their organisation, to us, is not very clear. 

To make matters worse, according to eyewitnesses, those who were at the frontline and those who had been at the meeting before they came to strike, there is an equivalent of LDUs, which is Kenya Police Reserve (KPR). It is a local defence unit, which was actually spotted during the raid, by the sound of their guns. The Pokot are normally known to own AK-47s, but the Kenya Police Reserve is armed with SMGs. And from the experience and the suffering these people have undergone, even from the sound alone, they can know.

I am told that the General Service Unit of Kenya really did a lot for us. As they wanted to cross to Kenya, they also hit them. They killed some of them and withdrew some of these clothes from the KPR. That actually is something that should be taken into consideration. Why should the KPR be involved in a cattle raid, and yet they are government-employed personnel?  

All this, Mr Speaker, comes from negligence, as I earlier on said. We are just relying on our local intelligence network. We have relatives across, they report to us as to what is happening, as to when they are coming to strike. We get that information and forward it to the leadership in the district, but nothing takes place. And when it comes to recovering animals from the Pokot, they say we have gone to rustle. 

I would suggest that the earlier the better. We could send a team from either this House, or from Government, to the ground to find out from the wanainchi what really transpired, and their view about what will happen. 

I also want to know whether we have any active veterans of ESO in that place. This was a foreign force coming to attack Uganda, and yet we have got a whole directorate of External Security Organisation. Was their information neglected? Was it not received? Or are those people not there at all?

Mr Speaker, my people have this to say about the action, which the minister has highlighted somehow. They demand that they be given permanent and strong security from the UPDF. And I request that the unit concerned should consult members of the detach, which witnessed this raid. We are reliably told they stayed in their andakis until the war was over.  They should be able to tell us how fierce the Pokot are. 

They should be able to tell us what numbers came to attack us, what type of weapons they came with, and what role the LDU play during such a raid. What is the role of the LDUs, and what weapons would they need if they had to counter this terrible group of people? I would also suggest that they should also be told how to behave at the border when there is no chaos.

About the LDUs, I think there is a promise that they are going to arm our young men. I also request that they get a field commander who is an indigenous man; one who may know all the routes to take and how to counter these Pokot. But of course, they must be in the company of the UPDF. 

My people strongly say that if Government has failed to provide enough security through the UPDF and the LDUs, in the past the President had given them courtesy of owning guns as long as they registered them. They got guns and registered them. Out of the 763 that were voluntarily returned on request by Government, some were privately owned. They bought them from I do not know where. Now they request that if Government cannot come to their rescue, let them be given that courtesy. They say they will register them and utilise them properly. Police records have it that ownership of guns during that time was actually very negligible. They were meant for personal defence.  

Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, my request on relief is that these people have lost all the property they could sell for treatment. May I request Government, through the hon. Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, that those being treated in Kitale Hospital be assisted with some drugs? Government hospitals in Uganda should be provided with more drugs. And please, if it is possible, go around and see what happens. 

Although I encourage what is already suggested, it is a pity. On 23rd is when the Ugandan delegation will go to Kenya, but I wish it could have been earlier than that. When the memories are still very fresh you can see the reactions of our people and what is needed on the ground. 

To wind up, may I request the House to observe a minute of silence for those we shall never see again? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to ask the Minister to respond. According to the decision made by the Business Committee, we should spend about 30 minutes on ministerial statements, but now we have spent beyond an hour on this. It is also true that as a result of our debate, somebody has brought up a motion which we have heard. Before I put the question to it, I would ask the minister to respond and then we proceed.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry for being late but I was handling other Government business. A Member of Parliament has suggested that we did not convey our condolences to the affected, and I want to state categorically that we conveyed our condolences to those who lost their dear ones, and of course there was also loss of property.

I want to thank Dr Chebrot because he rang me and informed me of what was happening. I did ask the Minister of Defence to ensure that immediate steps be taken to handle this matter. It is a very serious matter because it involves our relations with Kenya and we have rightly said that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should have been represented here today. Really most of those people have a lot of assignments abroad and so on, but the arrangement is that if they cannot be here, they should ask a minister to take charge so that that minister answers for them.

If they are not here and they do not ask a colleague to take charge, then it is very sad, to say the least. Of course I shall take appropriate measures –(Laughter)– to ensure that this problem is properly cured. 

May I also say that I did ask hon. Kategaya to hold an inter-ministerial meeting involving Internal Affairs, Defence and the department that handles disaster - and of course Foreign Affairs would also be involved. The point is that this inter-ministerial meeting should consider handling those who have lost lives and property. So, the issues are extremely urgent and important. And of course, the Finance Ministry also has to attend this meeting. 

Hon. Aporu from the department of Disaster Preparedness was supposed to go and assess the extent of damage, but as I speak now, the Second Deputy Premier is on leave of a few days, handling a very important matter. So, she had to be here. But some other people have gone to assess the extent of damage, and the punitive measures that must be taken. 

Let me assure you that this is a very grave matter and we should ensure it does not recur. This is an invasion really, and it has international implications. Kenya and Uganda have good relations and Kenya should ensure that –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One of the very serious statements made in the House was the fact that this attack was premeditated. In other words, there is a group of people in Kenya who organized the raid. Does Government, through its intelligence system, have any way of telling that there is some danger at the door that must be prevented before it in fact occurs? That is question number one.

The second clarification is; it has also been stated that the reason these people organized a counter-raid was that our own army, the UPDF, raided them and took their cattle away. One honourable member has even said that some of the animals are actually in Mbarara. The point anyway is that they are actually in Uganda, after being raided by our own army! Is Government aware of this? If so, have they taken any measures to investigate and even bring to book the people who committed this very serious offence against our neighbouring country? Thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, the implication of a statement that the cows raided in Kapchworwa were found in Mbarara is very grave. It has implications tending to fascism, and the Prime Minister should come up and categorically state whether or not this is true. If it is true, identify where those cows are. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes you take things lightly and say things like “the cows are in Mbarara”. But unless you can substantiate them, you are causing ill feelings amongst yourselves. Somebody simply stands up and says, “they are in Mbarara.”  Where in Mbarara? Who took them there? These are serious matters. So, please do not use these debates to cause animosity amongst yourselves. 

People simply stand up on a point of information and say, “they are in Mbarara, they are in Bunyoro,” when actually they cannot substantiate that. You are poisoning the minds of your colleagues. Please desist from that. I do not want to interfere with your freedom, but unless you can come up and say, “so and so took them and they are in such a place” - sometimes some of the information you can keep to yourself and talk about it casually outside. 

When you talk of Mbarara, you are actually implicating the people of that area and saying that they benefited from this. Please, do not use the opportunity you have here to just make statements that you cannot substantiate. They create ill feelings. As I see it, that has already caused some ill feelings amongst members.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, on this issue of cattle being taken by some of our soldiers, I want to inform the Prime Minister and the House. Lest we forget, on the 14th of February, I made a personal statement here. I did inform this House that on the 27th of January this year, our brothers from Karamoja came to Otuke with about 10,000 heads of cattle, which they were grazing within Otuke. The local people had accepted them because there was no other way. They were even not bothering us. 

However, all of a sudden, the Army came on the 26th, with their helicopter, and hit at these Karimojong herdsmen and their cattle got scattered. The army managed to recover 5,000 heads of cattle, and brought them to Aloi Government Farm, from where they made this cattle disappear. This has now brought terrible enmity between the people of Karamoja and Otuke. As I speak now, the Government has failed to provide security for the people of Otuke. It is the main cause of insecurity and displacement in Otuke now. 

The President has directed that a battalion - similar to the situation in Kapchorwa – be placed in Otuke. Hon. Eriya Kategaya, the Minister of Higher Education and Salim Saleh were there when he directed that this be implemented before the end of this week. As I speak now, not a single soldier has been taken to Otuke.  

This seems to be a cycle, Mr Speaker, and I think that this House must be more serious. We seem to be sitting on fire, and the Army is provoking cattle theft all over the country. This is most unfair and the Prime Minister should address this issue more seriously, especially when it is now being internationalised. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable members for the statements made – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Somebody wants to give you more information.

MR ETONU: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. I would like to give him this information also. On the 27th of February, the UPDF helped to recover cows that had been raided by the Karimojong - from Bokora I think - it is my colleague’s constituency. When the cows were recovered, they were moved to Amuria in my constituency, to a swamp called Olumot in Komolo Parish, between Usuk and Amuria counties. 

Arrangements were made for these cows to be returned to the Karimojong or the Iteso who had lost them. However, a day or two later, these cows disappeared yet they were being looked after by the UPDF. These are the cows that were to be given back to the Karimojong and some Iteso who had lost them! And this is a true story, not a lie.

DR YEKKO: Mr Speaker, why I mentioned that the 57 cows were driven to Mbarara is that on 29 March 2003, there were some cows raided from my constituency and taken by the UPDF up to Ngenge sub-county in Kween County. On the 29th of March, a vehicle with the numbers UP 1179, a lorry that used to be for us but is now manned by the UPDF, looted the cows and took them to Mbarara.  (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my view is that whereas you could say the cows were taken by the UPDF, singling out the destination is a problem. You could say the UPDF took the cattle, but locating them to an area is a problem because you may not substantiate it. Please, let us wind up this business.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The first question amounted to asking how efficacious our intelligence system is. That is the heart of the question. I want to assure you that it is efficacious but sometimes it has loopholes, because it is not helped by the population. When the population gives accurate and prompt information, it enhances its capacity to do its work. So, I take the point that we all have the duty to give information - accurate and impromptu information - to the intelligence organs of the state. If you discover that they are failing in taking appropriate action, the relevant minister should be informed verbally and in writing, and corrective measures will be taken. 

With regard to the involvement of the Army in raiding cattle, I would like to state that our army is facing a lot of challenges. So, I think that as we criticise it, we should also thank it because that army is handling a lot of problems, including defending porous borders. Our borders are extremely porous. We do have neighbours who are called states but those are not states because they lack territorial integration. Their capacity to establish central control over subordinate units is very limited. To this extent they are hardly states, as we understand them, because they lack the attributes of a state. Consequently, our army and other security organs are greatly taxed. 

Be that as it may, if we discover that some members of the security organs are doing something wrong, it should be reported in a concrete manner so that those people could be punished. 

Regarding the destiny of the cattle, the Speaker has given us very good advice. This matter should not be tribalised. This is a very serious matter and does not originate from Ankole as such. This is a very important matter and I would hate to make assumptions that these cattle found their destiny in Ankole or Mbarara. 

If anybody has serious, accurate and important information, I suggest it be given to the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is chairing the inter-ministerial meeting. It is required to solve these problems. And I do ask you to give information and to appear in person so that subsequent questions could be asked.

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Could I be protected from hon. Dombo’s tyranny? (Laughter).  

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has answered many of the questions, but there are some questions that I should answer. For instance, hon. Chebrot asked for the members of the team that is going to Kenya to handle this matter. Mr Speaker, I wish to say that the minister, my senior colleague, the First Deputy Prime Minister - as the Prime Minister has indicated - was tasked with calling an inter-ministerial meeting. That meeting is to take place and all these matters should be decided then. The technical committee -(Interruption) (_Mr Dombo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: When you stand up, I have to notice you first and say, “Hon. Dombo”, but do not start to address us before I have said so.

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker -(Laughter)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want, for the benefit of the future Hansard readers who may not be privy to this debate, to appreciate the circumstances under which we are debating, and the jovial atmosphere. Could the Minister clarify on what she means when she talks about “Dombo tyranny”? It is something that must be clarified for the benefit of the people who will read the Hansard so many years from now. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There could have been feigned tyranny and I –(Interruption) 

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I wish to clarify that that tyranny was from his eyes –(Laughter)- as well as from his –(Laughter)- may I be allowed to continue? 

When the inter-ministerial meeting takes place all these issues that have been raised will be brought to their attention.

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Dombo and hon. Gagawala to sit as if they are in their sitting rooms? (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: I think they have been moved by the persuasive speech by the honourable minister. (Laughter).  

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on this issue. I think there is a motion on the Floor, which we are supposed to dispose of – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is still part of this debate, and we shall see how to conclude this.

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, hon. Chebrot also raised an issue about the humanitarian aspect of this, and I am glad my colleague, hon. Christine Aporu, was here to handle that.  

Mr Speaker, hon. Mallinga gave the impression that this government intends to round up everybody in the eastern region and have them end up in camps. I wish to say that is not true. These are not situations that the Government pre-determines; but when they come up the Government tries to find solutions. 

Some of these solutions are of course not the best, but surely for a member to sit here and tell this House that Government intends to have everybody in the Eastern region end up in camps, I think that is not fair. Government is doing its best to make sure that the people are protected. We may not be doing what needs to be done as the ideal, but we are doing our best.

I think hon. Mwondha was making a personal assessment of what he sees as the capacity of the Army, and I have no comment on that.  

The honourable Member for Kongasis also proposed that Members of Parliament be part of the team that will be sent to Kenya. I agree with him and I will bring that to the attention of the First Deputy Prime Minister who will be chairing the inter-ministerial committee. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement by the Minister was about what happened to our district of Kapchorwa. This was subjected to debate, but during the debate, two honourable members moved a motion to the effect that this House rejects the statement, and it further records its displeasure on how the Government has handled the problem of the attack by the Pokot of Kenya on the people of Kapchorwa District. 

This was the motion and it is before you now to dispose of. I think the minister has finished her statement, now I want put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I really wish to apologize for interrupting you as we move to the next item. But this matter of cattle raiding and so on seems to be expanding beyond the expectation of this House.

Mr Speaker, in your absence, on the 19th of last month, the House moved a motion that the Government deploys a protective force within Karamoja and the neighbouring districts. The minister was requested to report within seven days. 

That report has not been forthcoming, and I hasten to add that probably, because of the failure by the minister to make a definitive report–(Interjection) - I know there was an ad hoc verbal report made by the Minister of State for Defence sometime back, but this House was so serious on the 19th that they demanded a report within seven days. It fell on the 26th, but the 26th was the day when the political arm of the Movement was having some meeting or picnic, or a holiday in Kyankwanzi and so this House was not meeting. So after that, we want this.  

So, Mr Speaker, really, it is on you now that before we go for Easter, can we have this report?  Because you have heard from the honourable Member of Parliament, Onek, about what is happening in Kitgum. I have a very serious report from Lira, and Teso is the same. Mr Speaker, when can we have this report?

THE SPEAKER: I was not here when you moved the motion, but the Minister of State for Defence came and made a statement. I think it was not comprehensive but she promised to give a comprehensive report. But they were given seven days, the statement was made, but it was not adequate enough to satisfy us and she promised to bring another statement. I do not know where she is now, but we will definitely remind her to do that. I think we should observe a minute’s silence in respect of those who were killed.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, before the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, came in, you had honourably accorded me an opportunity to raise a matter of public concern. May I do so, now that he has come in? 

THE SPEAKER: No, maybe it will come tomorrow after the Communication from the Chair, because that is when you should have made it. We are now dealing with different business.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Public Finance and Accountability Bill, 2002” be read a Second Time.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded. Proceed.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, honourable members, the Public Finance and Accountability Bill was presented to Parliament and read the First Time on 18 July 2002. When enacted into law, it will replace the Public Finance Act, 1964. 

It will provide greater control by Parliament, of the utilization of public resources and the implementation of the national Budget. The bill is in line with the provisions of the 1995 Constitution. Its objective is to provide for the development of an economic and fiscal policy framework for this country. It is intended, among other things, to achieve the following:

1.	Satisfy the constitutional obligations of the Executive to be fully accountable to this august House and to the people of Uganda in the use and safekeeping of public funds;

2.	to improve on transparency and accountability in the use of public resources;

3.	to facilitate the targeting of scarce resources and the effective application of those resources; and

4.	to prescribe responsibilities of persons entrusted with financial management in Government.

Mr Speaker, this bill seeks to provide mechanisms and procedures for ensuring that all public resources are properly accounted for, and that accounting officers failing to account for public resources are held personally liable therefor.

The bill also seeks to regulate the borrowing of money by Government and other authorities of the state. It is such an important bill, and the relevant committees have scrutinised it. I call upon honourable members to support the bill overwhelmingly. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, the Public Finance and Accountability Bill 2002, which will be 2003 once it is passed, was laid on the Table and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for detailed scrutiny.

The Committee has accomplished the task assigned to it and now wishes to report its findings and recommendations to the House, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure.

The background to this bill is well known.  Government has been pursuing strategic changes in public finance management systems, in order to achieve a stable economic environment by improved efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure management.

This strategy is further aimed at fighting poverty by ensuring that funds allocated to poverty eradication programmes are not diverted or misused in any manner. 

The methodology the Committee followed was to hold a number of meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and officials of the same ministry. 

The Committee also scrutinized the Public Finance Act, 1964, which is being repealed, and the provisions of the Constitution that will be operationalized once this Act comes into force, especially articles 154, 156, 159, among others.  

The Committee also compared the provisions of the bill with those of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Bill, 2002, which Parliament has already passed.  

A two-day workshop was held on the bill and a number of committees and stakeholders attended. The committees that attended include: Local Government Accounts Committee, the Budget Committee, the Committee on National Economy, and the Public Accounts Committee.  

The advocacy and civil society groups, and governmental organizations, which attended the workshop, included: 

    • Uganda Debt Network 
    • Institute of Chartered Accountants 
    • Uganda Manufacturers Association 
    • Decentralization Secretariat 
    • Uganda Investment Authority 
    • Law Reform Commission 
    • Constitutional Review Commission, and 
    • Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry.  

The financial implications of the bill, as required by Section 10 of the Budget Act, are attached to this report, for your scrutiny.  

The object of the bill, as already stated by the minister, includes, among other things, addressing the key issue of prescribing responsibilities of persons entrusted with financial management in Government. The purpose, as already stated, is to satisfy the constitutional obligation for Government to be fully accountable to the nation, through Parliament, for use and safekeeping of public funds.  

Secondly, the bill also addresses the issues of strengthening the regulation of borrowing by Government, and auditing of Government and state enterprises and authorities. This, again, is to facilitate the targeting of scarce resources to priority areas of development. 

The bill provides for comprehensive development of the economic and fiscal policy framework to regulate financial management of Government. 

The bill also addresses the issue of basic practices in budgeting and financial management by specifying the accounting standards and systems to be used throughout Government. This also calls for proper and appropriate internal control systems and coherent internal audit functions, in order to improve, as the minister has said, transparency and accountability in the use of public resources.  

The bill further provides for a contingency fund for national emergencies as provided for in the Constitution. This again is better, for it enables Government to respond to unforeseen and undeterminable events at the time of budgeting.  

The bill vests power to borrow money, issuance of guarantees, and acceptance of loans with the minister responsible for finance. It also provides a legal framework through which local governments can raise funds. 

The bill further provides for the preparation of audits for examination and the examination of accounts by the Auditor General. It further provides for the value for money audits, which is a strategy for fighting poverty by ensuring that funds, which are allocated for poverty eradication and other programmes, are not diverted.  

Our observation, Mr Speaker, is that the bill addresses the key issues in the management of public finances, and it attempts to strengthen control by creating various levels of auditing, which are aimed at improving accountability and transparency.  

The committee also observed that the Public Finance and Accountability Bill, 2002 will operationalize the provisions of the 1995 Constitution, particularly Article 164, which gives more powers to Parliament in ensuring full accountability.  

The bill is consolidating the existing laws relating to financial management and accountability.  

The bill also provides for a reporting mechanism of the local government accounts to the central government and Parliament.

The Committee observed with concern that, the independence and the capacity of the Auditor General and his office is presently weak and needs to be strengthened, given the additional roles and duties attached to the office by this bill.  

Mr Speaker, the bill takes into consideration the increased professional demands for basic practices and current concepts of transparency and accountability by proposing the creation of a new post of Accountant General, who will be responsible for the Government’s accounts.  

We, therefore, recommend that all ministries, departments, local governments, state enterprises and authorities, and any other persons who handle public funds should be sensitised on the provisions of this law. 

Two, Government should only guarantee private sector loans if, and only if, these loans are intended to protect public interests.  

The capacity and independence of the Auditor General to perform his or her responsibilities should be strengthened to enable him/her perform additional duties in line with Article 163 of the Constitution and the roles proposed in this law.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the bill recognizes the need to strengthen the financial management in the public sector, to ensure increased accountability, transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the use of public resources.  

The committee, therefore, wishes to thank all those who participated in the Committee meetings and wishes to request this august House to pass this bill with the proposed amendments. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the Committee, for the report.  Now the debate is open.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for finally trying to simplify the law regarding public finance and expenditure, and trying to make improvements in the old existing law.  

I would also like to thank the Committee for taking their time in scrutinizing the bill and finally coming up with a report to this House. However, Mr Speaker, there are issues that either the Minister or the Committee may have overlooked, which I wish to raise with a view to getting certain clarifications, which may be for my benefit and the benefit of the taxpayers out there.  

Mr Speaker, I agree that there may be times when Government may have to guarantee loans for private organizations. However, I have not got any justification or explanation as to why funds to finance those guarantees should be met from public funds. I think we need a bit more explanation as to why the taxpayer should pay for guarantees, albeit in the national interest, but which finally get accrued to private individuals.  

Mr Speaker, I would also like to get a few clarifications about the audit functions. This House has raised a number of concerns, particularly on the proliferation of accounts referred to as classified expenditure. The Minister has not addressed this issue. And the committee, apparently, has not also addressed this issue, despite reference in their committee to the strengthening of the role of the Auditor General.  

I think the Minister of Finance should guide the Executive on how to establish classified accounts, how they should be run and how they should be audited. This would, I think, clear the air on the general opinion that classified accounts are capable of abuse. 

Besides that, Mr Speaker, there had been a tendency for some of the classified accounts to be run by individuals in their private capacity, on private accounts, without the knowledge of the Accountant General. I think this is capable of abuse. It should be addressed and appropriate measures to plug such leakages should be taken to ensure that the public funds are safe. 

Mr Speaker, the minister has proposed certain penalties for officers who handle public finances wrongly. I understand this is for public officers who are ordinarily in the civil service, and who are subordinate officers in public enterprises. Can I be given an explanation as to why there is no provision whatsoever, for penalties against the executives who may not ordinarily be referred to as civil servants? 

I have examples in mind; what happens if a minister gives a directive, which subsequently results into loss of public funds? That is not provided for here. It is only ordinary public officers who handle funds who are being called to book, but those who give instructions, which may lead to the loss of public funds, walk away scot-free! I need to be told what is being done about that. 

Mr Speaker, we have been labouring to cultivate a spirit of partnership between the Executive and Parliament -(Interruption) 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to refer you to Article 164(2) of the Constitution:  

“Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.” 

Political leaders are aware of this Article. It is a very important Article. I do not know whether your contribution was that this Article should have appeared in what the Minister of State read. But clearly, this is a very important safeguard. I thank you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for the information. I wish that information had been given to his minister. The purpose of the legislation is actually to give a way of implementing the provisions of the Constitution, and definitely to provide for penalties other than refunding. Suppose he does not refund?  The Constitution is silent. 

So, Parliament is under obligation to clarify the minds of the constitution framers and to plug any lacuna in the law to make sure the big fish do not escape. 

Mr Speaker, before the Rt hon. Prime Minister rose, I was reminding Parliament that we have, time and again, talked about good partnership between the Executive and Parliament. We have laboured on this point more and more, particularly with the Minister of Finance. 

Although in clause 3(2) it says that the Minister will keep Parliament informed, Mr Speaker, we have records that there are times when we have asked the Minister of Finance to provide us with information and that information has never been forthcoming, to the extent that Parliament has been forced to register its displeasure. 

I would have been happier if we had sanctions spelt out in this public financial bill as to what Parliament can do if the minister does not voluntarily give information as provided for in the law. I think it is becoming a bit irritating.  Time and again, we even go to the extent of passing resolutions seeking for information. What happens if we get an uncooperative minister? I think that can cause a lot of problems.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, the chairman of the committee implied that the Public Finance Act was repealed.  I have looked at the bill and there is nowhere at all where it is specifically mentioned that the Public Finance Act is repealed. Instead, they talk of this law taking precedence over other laws. I am not sure that that is the same as a total repeal of the Public Finance Act. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JOHN ROBERTS AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank members of the committee for this precise job they have produced for this House. Mr Speaker, the intentions of the bill are good only and only if we can define whom the implementers will be. The regulation in the bill for financial management –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, because you may be influenced by what the previous speaker has said. I see here in Clause 47, the Public Finance Act, Cap 149; the Local Loans Act, Cap 154 and the External Loans Act, Cap 159 are repealed. It is there. I do not know; you can proceed.

MR AACHILLA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just on a point of saying that one of the objectives of the bill is to have a regulation on financial management of Government. For a long time in this country, there has been a question on knowing the sources of funds that run this country. It is important, while we are going to legislate on this law, to know how much is going to be available for this country. How much we would like to spend and how much we shall really need to run the affairs of this country.

And to do all that, Mr Speaker, it is important that under this law, the Committee spells out the responsibilities of persons entrusted to manage the affairs of funds in this country, and the penalties that are attached to them. This will help us to know exactly what we intend to run as programmes for this country. And this should not only apply to public officers as spelt out in the bill. There is an element, which we should not forget; that even the Executive and even Parliament, including the Judiciary, should be held responsible for the sake of knowing what should be done in the public affairs of this country.  

I would like to point it out very clearly that most of the problems of this country have been very close to the element of corruption. This law should help us go hand in hand with the instruments that we have put in place to fight corruption. So, I am sure the Committee has in mind, just as I, the fact that we should strengthen all the institutions of Government that we have put in place to fight corruption in this country. And also, to see that the element of nepotism and sectarianism in some organs of Government, especially in the areas of handling public funds, is made to come to lower minimal levels.  

My worry in this bill is how shall we really have committed people who have to implement this bill. The law itself is going to be good. Is it going to remain a paper job or are there Ugandans who are going to be held responsible, who are going to be assigned this duty? Are they going to remain committed, are they going to be faithful and relieve this country, relieve the children of this country, relieve our grand children of the burden of indebtedness which is put to us by the world powers, by IMF, by the funds that we borrow from outside? 

We know very well that our children - as we talk now, Mr Speaker, under the Early Childhood Nutrition project, I am told we are borrowing funds and the children we have not yet produced, the children who are still in the wombs are going to be responsible and eventually they will pay. How shall we relieve these children of this kind of burden if we do not put a law, which is going to be well implemented, which is going to be financed to make sure that it takes root in this country?

Mr Speaker, the institutions of Government like the Inspector General of Government, the Auditor General's Office and the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity - I do remember at one moment here the Minister of State for Integrity was saying that she does not have the funds to run and make sure that she can be able to fight corruption. Now that we are going to have this law, and I am sure hand in hand with the rest of the instruments we have put in place, these elements should be made free of the imprisonment that has left some of these institutions to remain inactive. These institutions should be relieved of alienation from public interest in favour of handling individual interest.

The law stipulates that there should be audit for value for money. This is true, Mr Speaker.  Down on the ground you will find that there are quite a number of projects, which are being implemented in this country, but we always adore audits on paper. Very good reports appear on paper. A law now like this one, which is going to help us as parliamentarians and as the Executive to see that we have an audit for value for money, it is going to be very good.

Mr Speaker, this law should capture the central message of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP), whose sole central message is pro-poor economic growth. I know most of our areas, including the place I represent, Jie, are purely a poverty-ridden society, where they have subscribed without their intention to belong there.
 
Unless we see how best we can make sure that we fight for the poor peoples’ assets and productivity being implemented in this country, we shall have no future. I am still saying that the commitments of all the people who are implementing this law, their transparency and realistic declaration against corruption are important. We can say we want to fight corruption, but if there is nothing that is seen on the ground that we are really demonstrating that kind of feeling, Mr Speaker, we are not destined for a good end.

Lastly, I know for sure I had this point to support the motion for the fact that Karamoja, which is partly and largely suffering from poverty, is just a result of corruption, is a result of lack of transparency in implementing most of the intended programmes, and lack of commitment by many officers who go to the field. And this is what exactly Karamoja is paying in its own currency. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I support the motion.

PROF. LATIGO OGENGA (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me also to thank the Committee for a very good report which they have given us, and a very detailed analysis that they made of the bill.

I would also like to thank the ministry for bringing forth this bill, which will help us to manage better the financial resources that we have. I am a Member of the Committee on National Economy and we have always hustled with the minister on meeting some of the conditionalities, and I know that this particular reform is tied to some of the support that we have on our budget.  It makes our life easy when the ministry does what it agrees to do.

Now, turning to the report, Mr Speaker, I would like to start by really acknowledging that this reform is an excellent reform that, if properly implemented, would help us. I participated in the workshop, and it was made clear that this reform would help, not only central government but also local government. 

However, for this reform to have any great meaning, particularly in the context of the development of this country, Government must recognise that you can efficiently manage whatever resources you have, but if you do not direct it properly, the outcome of that management will be very minimal. In this context, therefore, I would like to urge the Ministry of Finance and Government to quickly implement the National Planning Authority so that this country, which is underdeveloped and will not be developed by the forces of the market but by deliberate investment of resources in key areas, can have the framework for development.

It is imperative that the National Planning Authority takes charge of what should be done for the development of this country. We can no longer rely on we politicians, standing up to declare that this project has to be implemented because project is like nutrition. You can have all the meat, if you do not have the vitamin, the meat may not do what it is supposed to do in the body. And to be able to have that coordinated approach, you must have a clear road map to where you want to go as a country.  At the moment, this is not there and this is my biggest concern. 

Over and over - and I shall not tire from repeating that this empty Medium Term Expenditure Framework cannot be a plan for development. It is a framework for spending. So, let us first have a clear framework for development that will influence your MTEF, and therefore, ultimately your financial accountability method will tell us whether the resources are being effectively managed.

Secondly, I have seen that the issue of contingency funds has been addressed in this bill.  In the last report of the Committee on Budget, contingency fund was also referred to. I would like to reiterate my concern, because we have seen in this financial year that even the budget, which we passed, was changed. 

One begins to get very worried that if we had a pot of money somewhere, which we call contingency funds and it is supposed to be used for emergencies and we are a very imaginative lot, we can stretch the definition of emergency to any level. It is, therefore, very important in this bill to put a lower cup on what we mean by emergency or what we do not mean by emergency, particularly in using such funds for political purposes. 

It will be a disaster for this country because there are genuine emergencies that will always emerge. But there is also un-genuine or forced emergencies that will always emerge when the opportunity is there in terms of availability of funds. So, it would be important for the committee to really strongly consider this.
 The other thing that I wanted to mention is to thank the committee for including local government in the aspect of this bill very clearly. Now, local governments are our biggest problem in terms of financial accountability at the moment. This law will not remedy that problem. Concurrent with the implementation of this law, Government should look for resources to train, not on pilot basis - because to many of the things we have done, you do in this district and in that district it dies - but on a nation-wide basis, to train accounting officers and also to equip accounting offices as is proposed in one of the loans that we passed connected with this as quickly as possible.

And in this regard, I would like to emphasize that, that training and that equipping should not be undermined by insecurity. The district where I come from is very insecure. It gets even more insecure financially if it is left without attention. Therefore, I will call upon the minister concerned that if by the time you are implementing this, some of our districts are still there, please work with us so that we can ensure that the training and equipping of our districts is done.

Mr Speaker, I thank the ministry for considering the inclusion of the position of Accountant General. I think this will ease the process of flow of information from Government to organs of Parliament that deal with accountability issues.

I also concur with the concern of the committee on the capacity of the Auditor General. I know that right now there are officials of the Auditor General at the regional level, and in some cases there is representation at the district level, but those are not enough. I would ask the Ministry of Finance to consider liasing with the Auditor General so that when district audits are made, copies of those reports are forwarded to Members of Parliament of those areas, because it helps us in our oversight role in the districts.

Finally, I once again thank the committee and agree with their recommendations and conclusions.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA (Women Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report, but I have some questions. Did you try to harmonise the existing laws with this so that it will be implementable? Because, when you say that this bill will be able to stop diverting or misusing funds that have been sent to districts for particular programmes, have you looked at the decentralisation law? Do you think this law is going to address that?
 
Then two, when you look at the first page of the report, the background 2.0 “Government has been pursuing strategic changes in public financial management systems in order to achieve a stable economic environment by improved efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure management.”  What do you mean by Government? Do you mean the Executive or all the three arms? Do you include local governments or you are only looking at the Executive? Do you think the problem is the law?  When you look at what happens where funds have been diverted, where funds have been misused, misappropriated, is the problem the law?  Is the existing law not enough to address this?  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, let me give the example of local governments. Local governments generate their local revenue. During the presidential campaigns you know what happened.  Our President said people should pay tax of Shs 3,000.  If I am wrong, Mr Minister of Finance, you can give me information. Now, another candidate said, that was Dr Besigye, “You will not pay taxes”. During our campaigns, some of you were promising “When you elect me you will not pay taxes” -(Interruptions). Why do you not listen? I am coming to say what I said. 

Now, local governments are not generating enough revenue from taxes, and some of you, Members of Parliament, go to the extent of telling people not to pay taxes! This even happens in Bugiri District where I come from. 

Now here we are, thinking the law will address this problem. Why do we not begin with ourselves? Why can the President not come out to say what he said?  What did he mean by saying that? Did he mean everybody or people who are beginners, and beginners of what level?  

Now you think this law is going to address diverting funds and misusing funds. Is it not going instead to give more tactics, more techniques to the local governments to find a way of misappropriating these funds? Is the problem the law or the monitoring bit of it, and evaluation?  People have given the example of the Nutrition and Early Childhood Education project. It is winding up, but what effect is there on the ground?  

They have been sending funds for classroom construction, are these tenders got by the people from within the locality? What effect has it brought to the area?  Look at a village where they are constructing a school. Is the community really participating to see that they really fight the poverty in the area? 

Is this law going to address this when people are suffering from jiggers in Busoga? That is a sign of poverty. Let somebody challenge me; anybody from Busoga say whether there is nobody with jiggers in your constituency.  That is poverty!  People cannot even access enough water!

Lastly on 4.0 - the financial implications; that the financial implications certificate was presented. They have been presenting the financial implications certificates whenever they bring bills, but when it comes to budgeting, they twist around and say, “no money”. So, that means the Ministry of Finance has always presented certificates to please the ministry that has brought that bill, to please us the MPs that they are really following the Budget Act. But when it comes to budgeting, they do not budget for the activities they showed us in the financial implication certificate; they say “no funds.”  Are you doing it for formality?  

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA: Thank you very much, my sister for giving way for me to give this information.  Actually, I was also analysing the financial implications given by the minister and signed by the Minister of Finance. And when I was looking at the columns where he indicates salaries and wages, 2002 and 2003, go to the next financial year 2003 and 2004 up to 2005, he has indicated nil and yet the Committee has come out to recommend that there is need to create a new job of an Accountant General. So, I was wondering whether there is need for creation of a position of Accountant General.  Will these people not require salaries? 

When you look at the objectives of this bill as you have indicated to us, we are going to have people carrying out the work of value for audits. Will they not be catered for?  What does it mean?  So, I was about to put this question to the Chairperson whether the Committee took time to analyse this financial implication. The reason why we demanded for these financial implications is to understand whether the law we are passing is catered for in the budget and the Medium Term Budget Framework. So, the Committee did not assist us here and I would have wished the minister to assist us here.  If there is creation of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But are you not going to contribute?  Do you not intend to contribute?

MRS HYUHA: I am not sure, Mr Speaker, whether you will give me an opportunity or not. So, I was giving information.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, hon. Hyuha Dorothy. So, Mr Chairperson of the Committee, that was more or less a question to you. Did you study that certificate?  Did you ask him, because you did not give us an answer in the report? 

Honourable minister, even when you read this report, it shows that the Auditor General’s Office needs more manpower. Still your financial certificate does not indicate whether you are now - you see, you are going to strengthen, by doing what? Has the law been the problem or manpower in the office?  

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to urge my colleagues that please, let us not always look at the financial implication certificate given by the ministry.  When we get these certificates, we should even relate them to the budgets because the Executive has always presented certificates. 

When it comes to budgeting, they remember the certificates they signed. Then when we make the budgets, at the time of releasing funds, they forget the budget and release as they wish. So I look at it that they are kind of looking at us as people who do not analyse issues. Please, we are just compiling. So please be careful. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

DR OKULO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Committee and its chairman for the good work done on this law. 

Mr Speaker, this law, in my opinion, requires to be complemented by the National Planning Authority law. I would like to agree with hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo that for a poor, resource-deficient country, we must have long-term development plans against which we can mobilise resources - financial, human and technical. 

Without a National Planning Authority, which is focussing on planning on a long term basis for the development of this country and for fostering more equitable distribution of resources and development for this country, it does not matter what financial management and accountability law you have. The effect of finance as mobilised under the strength of the financial law will not be seen as we have seen in the last 17 years. 

We have mobilised billions and billions of dollars; we have enjoyed the best external goodwill, both in terms of finance and political support that this country has ever enjoyed before. But the effect, the impact on development is minimal compared to previous experiences we had in this country. 

I can say this with certainty because I have been at the core of planning the development of this country. Where we used to have five-year development plans, we were always moving in the right direction. This is a country, which for the last 17 years has not built a single new secondary school; it has not built a single new hospital - (Interjection) 

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: With due respect to my elder, it would be very unfair to sit here while I hear an elder say that there is not a single new secondary school which has been built in Uganda. Yes, I am clamouring for a district, but I must appreciate that the Government of Uganda led by Y.K. Museveni has built a new seed secondary in my constituency. Only that it has been built directly from the money of this Parliament. So, I could not stomach it as the elder was speaking. I think I have to correct it. 

Is he in order to say that there is no single new secondary school, which has been built under this Government, yet my constituency has consumed a new secondary school, which I would like to invite the honourable Member to come and see? It is called Namukonge Senior Secondary School.

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  The speaker holding the Floor is giving false information to this august House.  Mr Speaker, I chair the Committee on Social Services, and I have served on the Committee on Social Services since 1996 to date. As I talk now, Kamuli District is going to construct a hospital and health centres. It has even broken the ground. It has started the construction and we passed this loan on this Floor where the honourable Member participated. 

In the last financial year, Mr Speaker and honourable members, in its policy statement, the Ministry of Education indicated to us that it has completed nine seed secondary schools. 

Is he in order, Mr Speaker, to give a statement that this government has never constructed any secondary school? Is he in order to give us false information? I could even give a long list, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable Member, you are the one who has said there is no single secondary school in the last 17 years built by Government. Can you substantiate before I make a ruling?

DR OKULO: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable Members who rose on points of order have exonerated me. If the Government is going –(interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, let us start with hon. Wambuzi.

DR OKULO: Well, I accept to concede that by chance, there is one in hon. Wambuzi’s - but, Mr Speaker, a secondary school in 17 years compared to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think this is very simple, because hon. Wambuzi just said at least in his district because we are not going to go through all the Members to say what is happening in their districts. I think you realise that your statement was not accurate. Can you please correct it so that we proceed?

DR OKULO: Mr Speaker, I read policy statements of all ministries, particularly those which deliver social services.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, you particularised secondary schools; that in the 17 years Government has not built any. I think now that there is an example that in Kamuli there is a secondary school and then others would raise it, can you please - so that we proceed?

DR OKULO: Well, let honourable Members testify for whatever schools they have and as for hon. Wambuzi, I would like him to take me to see that school. I would take this offer- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable Member, I have to decide on this because somebody has stood up and said you have contrary evidence to what he has said. I see the best view of what has been tested on by the honourable Member is for you to withdraw and proceed with another argument.

DR OKULO EPAK: Based on the information I have been given, I concede that some few – (Laughter)- secondary schools have been built over 17 years.  

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much. I want to inform hon. Dr Okulo Epak that Mubende road, the one from Mityana – his last statement was “no schools, no hospitals, no roads”. I remember to have travelled in the early 1980s on Mubende road, and recently I remember to have travelled on that road. It is a new road. Tirinyi road is a new road, and many other roads - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the point is made; that the statement was inaccurate.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Sir. I am rising on a point of information. The honourable Member holding the Floor has said that Government has not built hospitals, but I would like the House to know that this government moved from a position of monuments to the position of functioning. That is why it is a policy of this government to build health centres with surgical wards and doctors – (Applause) - not only in districts but also in sub-counties. Therefore, I would like the honourable Member to know that it is not a matter of hospitals; it is a matter of taking services to the people. I thank you.  

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform hon. Dr. Okulo Epak that it is during the current regime that we have had the best road in the whole of Africa, that is the road from Iganga through Tirinyi and through Mbale. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have got overwhelming evidence on this issue that the statement was inaccurate. Can we proceed? Because it was on the issue of roads, hospitals and secondary schools and I have said there is overwhelming evidence.

DR OKULO: Hon. Speaker, I speak as a technician. As far as roads are concerned, we have been upgrading and not making additional new roads. If it is a question of upgrading from first class murram to tarmack, yes, but you come and show me the difference between the kilometres of road which were available in this country in the 1960s and 1970s and the kilometres which we have today. The honourable Minister in charge of roads is sitting here in front of me. Both the kilometreage of trunk roads and of feeder roads remain the same – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we are going to have people on the debate. Let him continue and finish his debate other than a ping pong game. Really, proceed.

DR OKULO: I hold on to my statement as far as roads are concerned and I would like people to make a total difference between rehabilitation, maintenance and upgrading. If you upgrade a road from murram to tarmac, you have not added a single kilometre of road.  

Mr Speaker, on the contrary, in some parts of this country, some roads have become impassable and unmotorable. I would like to submit that the National Planning Authority – Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is information we want from the Minister of  - (Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: No, you refused information and I am also refusing that one now – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Is it?  No, I do not refuse information.  It is up to you. (Mr Awuzu rose_) 
You stood on a point of information; give the information. I think he has sat down because he has allowed you to give the information.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Dr Okulo Epak for giving way. I would like to inform the House that the last bit of information hon. Dr Okulo Epak has given to the House is not correct, because when he says that more roads are getting closed and so on, that is not quite correct. Because when this government came into power in 1986, more than 50 per cent of the feeder roads were impassable. But currently, we are maintaining more than 70 per cent of the roads, which means that they are actually passable. 

When the government came into power in 1986, most of the tarmack roads were potholed, including those in Kampala City. And now, almost all of them have been rehabilitated. I do not understand what he means when he says that when you up-grade a road from murram to tarmac, you have added nothing. I do not understand that completely.  

Government is adding a lot of tarmac to our existing roads and most of you, I believe, are motorists. Definitely driving on a first class tarmack road is much more comfortable than driving on a first class murram road.  Thank you.

DR OKULO: Fortunately, I am a member of the Committee on Works, Communications and Housing, and I have already raised those questions in the committee and the minister has answered them. Now, I do not want to call the minister any names. We shall tackle that in the committee.

Mr Speaker, we have to be very honest. You see, I am personally very honest and I make a statement on which I am firm. If I say we still have the same kilometres of road today as we used to have, except some roads have become unmotorable, of course they may have been 50 per cent unmotorable sometime ago, but I am saying some have become unmotorable, and this is true. Which roads have we constructed in Naguru Hill? In the Estates there, the roads are being constructed by pneumatic tyre pressures of lorries transporting building materials.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, Her Excellency, the Vice President, Member for Kigulu also – (Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: Oh, with Her Excellency, the Vice President, I am most obliged.

THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Dr Wandira Kazibwe): Thank you for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. When I sit and listen to this debate which is cum-technical, I wonder whether the Member on the Floor understands that when you talk about roads and the quality of a road, it is not the number of kilometres that matters. It is the time you take to move from distance A to distance B.

In other words, when you are talking about distances these days, you do not say 80 kilometres; you say, “it is one hour’s drive”. That is what it means to do a road.  So if I was taking five hours to drive from here to Jinja, or to Kigulu South, which is about 100 kilometres, now I take one and half hours, it means I have actually added in terms of mileage value. Therefore, we cannot stand here in these modern times and talk about distances in terms of kilometres.  It is time; how long it takes you to go from space A to space B. So I would like to add that to the knowledge of the member on the floor so that he counts his distances in terms of time taken, but not in terms of distance. Thank you.

DR OKULO: Mr Speaker, that is medical engineering -(Laughter). I will need to be lectured on medical or surgical engineering. It is quite true most of the work we have done here very successfully is surgery on roads which have been suffering from potholes. Probably Her Excellency, the Vice President understands that operation better.

Mr Speaker, the lamentable thing I want to say, and I beg your indulgence; the examples I was given should not carry you away. The most important point I was making is that we ought to be serious with the National Planning Authority. I have not seen a single legislation we passed here which took that long to be implemented. It is only the National Planning Authority, which has taken so long to be implemented, and yet to me it is most complementary to the Finance and Accountability law, because we are mobilising finances to invest in a plan, not just for the sake of it. Therefore, I would really beg all of us - you forget the examples; those are disputable; they are subject to your own knowledge of the issues we are dealing with and sometimes sentiments. But the object of my remark was that we must do something about the National Planning Authority.

Secondly Sir, this law will continue to be undermined by lack of qualified persons to manage our finances. This runs throughout. This law also will continue to be undermined by lack of seriousness of the accounting officers to comply with other supplementary laws to this one, like financial regulations. This law will mostly be undermined by the lack of capacity and independence of the office of the Auditor General. 

I am, therefore, saying that after passing this law and since for Parliament, accountability and oversight is our most important responsibility, these aspects must be improved in order to make sure that this law can be as effective as it is intended.  Otherwise, it will be just as good as any good law, which is very nice to keep on a shelf.  

I am glad I attended a workshop that the ministry is concerned about improving financial management at the centre. But the issues of accountability, capacity of the Auditor General’s office to hold accounting officers into account, if not addressed, will continue to undermine this law. 

Mr Speaker, in the report, objective number one is exactly what I was saying. The public finance and Accountability Bill is intended to address the issue of prescribing the responsibilities of persons entrusted with financial management in Government.  The accounting officers are very wanting, and I had hoped, as Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, that each Financial Year, we get smaller and slimmer audit reports.  

On the contrary, the audit reports are increasing in volume. They are becoming even more voluminous and most of the offences are mere negligence and failing to comply with the financial regulations. Therefore, penalties for lack of compliance must be improved in order to enforce accountability. 

The law courts pass only one sentence in case of theft and embezzlement.  So, the person serves the sentence and then comes back to enjoy the money stolen.  The law courts should be forced to apply restitution.  It is there in the law but I do not know why they do not apply.  They should apply restitution. Once somebody is accused of embezzling and is put in prison, he should come back and be made to pay back the sums embezzled, plus interest.  Otherwise, people will simply enjoy embezzlement and a holiday in prison to come back to have the luxury of the stolen money.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

LT. JIMMY KINOBE (Katikamu County North, Luwero District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Committee for this good report and I want to thank Government for this bill, which will go a long way in consolidating the pieces of legislation that refer to accountability, which were scattered in very many pieces. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to thank the ministry for carrying out consultations that involved many stakeholders. I also attended the workshop, which was organised. But I only want to say that I am a bit disappointed that the concerns we raised that concern Local Government are not reflected in the amendments that have been presented by the Committee, because at that time, we were debating the bill which had already left Government.

Mr Speaker, another area on which I want to show my disappointment, is on the offences and penalties. One of the biggest problems we have been having is how to recommend for enforcement of sanctions against those officers who hold public offices but fail to comply with the regulations that are stipulated as they perform their work. 

That was even complicated by the fact that many of these pieces of legislation were scattered, leaving the bodies that are monitoring to use their own sense of judgement. I do not know even what to call it because sometimes you get confronted with a situation; an officer was supposed to have used money, he was supposed to have accounted for it, raise particular documents according the regulations. After identifying that he did not, you look at the sanctions, there is completely nothing. 

The best you can do is to refer him to the Police, and you know how corruption has worked in this society. These officers end up bribing all the investigating officers and you lose all the cases. As hon. Dr Okulo Epak has just said, it has been very difficult to detect fraud, let alone even to convict anybody. But with this improvement of having penalties and offences in the same legislation, we only need to bring on board more offences that relate to the conduct of the officers in the public offices. 

When you look at Clause 43, it talks about offences which do not relate to the appointed Accounting Officers. I think we may have to bridge that gap at the time of amendments.

Secondly, officers who themselves do not comply with the regulations have sometimes led the institutions they head to lose financing. 

Mr Speaker, I have a document here that was issued by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education, dated 8 February. He was writing informing us as parliamentarians that the outlined districts would not access school facilitation grants for the third quarter. The reason they were giving was no submission of mandatory reports. But when you ask yourself, “who is supposed to submit the mandatory reports?” These are the respective officers who use this money and are supposed to do their work, but when the money is withheld, what happens? It means that all the other programmes, all the innocent beneficiaries are going to suffer simply because one single officer did not do what he was supposed to do or did not do what he is paid to do.  

My home district, Luwero District, is top on this list. For the last three months all UPE programmes are paralysed simply because the Accounting Officer and his staff below did not do what they were supposed to have done. I strongly advocate that as we make this law, let us make specific sanctions against the officers themselves who are supposed to do the work other than punishing those behind them, yet they are doing all that in trust of the people who support them.

Mr Speaker, another area that I wanted the Committee Chairperson to help me is the fate of the accounting regulations that are not specified here. When you look at the financial accounting regulations, they outline all the responsibilities of officers in the Local Governments. But clause 43(1), when we talked of repealing, it did not even mention any of the financial accounting regulations that handle the Local Government structures. So, Mr Speaker, I want to know the effect of this law on the financial accounting regulations in the Local Government structures.  

Mr Speaker, where we stand today, Local Governments are becoming very crucial in service delivery. I have figures here from the Budget Office that indicate the increasing disbursements. In the Financial Year of 1999/2000, decentralised structures received about 20 per cent of that budget, which was amounting to about Shs350 billion then.  The subsequent year, 2000/2001, the percentage increased to 23 per cent, which was amounting to Shs512 billion. In 2001/2002, the disbursements increased almost to Shs700 billion, which was about 23 per cent again, but the figure is higher.  

The projections I have here for the 2003/2004 is over Shs700 billion. This means that we are decentralising more funds than ever before but unfortunately we have not effectively followed up the monitoring of these funds in the Local Government structures.  

Honourable members, you all come from those districts of ours, you know what is going on Construction of classrooms, which collapse on the day of inauguration, officers who are supposed to contract out services but half the money is shared by them. We are talking about loss of revenue. I am surprised that loss of revenue from the tendered services is because people do not pay. But when you look at how much is supposed to be generated, it is actually more. But half of that money is shared between the officers who award tenders and they favour particular people who have given them commission, and subsequently, they will tell you that the revenue has dropped. That area also should be looked into. 

Officers who occupy offices and do that work on behalf of the people should be personally held responsible, and if possible, as hon. Okulo Epak has outlined, we should even put in restitution. By the way, this one does not even talk about imprisonment; it talks of scattering the deduction over a period of time. Supposing the person gets about Shs200,000 and he has –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Do you think every part of the law is in this law? Do you stop the functioning of other laws? You think a person who commits that offence is therefore free because the law is not here? Aren’t there other laws that can deal with that person? There are many laws scattered, which can deal with the situation that you are talking about other than thinking that everything has got to be put in this law. This is my view.

LT. KINOBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would entirely agree with you, but what I read when we were in the workshop, this is a result of the difficulties to implement the provisions we had in the old legislation. It is now trying to address a problem and does not comprehensively address it. Some of us are now in those areas where we monitor on your behalf. If we do not point it out, I do not know whether we shall get an adequate remedy. But this area has had one problem, that short of the Penal Code, which you are talking about, which also has a very lengthy and difficult process. It starts with investigation, CID and so on, which have problems. If we had specific offences as they outlined, because the principle of offences was imported in this bill, so I am talking about the inadequacy of the offences and the sanctions that were imported in this bill as still wanting.

Mr Speaker, another aspect I wanted to talk about is the audit. I appreciate that this bill is going to address the problem of the Auditor General. But I think the problem of the Auditor General needs a comprehensive solution by coming out with an independent bill to allow autonomy of the Auditor General so that he can be able to hire and fire. 

We have been having problems where auditors raise reports and possibly you observe that in the process, they were compromised. But when I interacted with the Auditor General, he told me that he is limited. Even where he observes that some of these auditors should have been got rid of, he does not have a say to deal with them. I think it is better if we provided an independent bill and autonomy to the Auditor General whereby possibly he could even access more funding to build up capacity to take on the workload that is at hand. 

As I speak now, Mr Speaker, audit has reached sub-county levels but most of the sub-county reports are made by private auditors on behalf of the Auditor General. I believe if the Auditor General was given autonomy and given enough money, he would work on the capacity and even be able to get rid of those officers who are now tarnishing the image of his department. Possibly, when we come up with that bill, we should also specify particular offences by auditors. I think sanctions should also be put on auditors who do not do what they are supposed to do as auditors. 
If you are an auditor, you are the eye of Parliament; you compile an audit report. I have a case in mind. 

When we were examining a case of one district, we realised that some of the accounts that had been cleared by the auditors as having documents certifying the accountability actually did not have the documents. When we instituted a special audit, it went back and found that there was connivance between the accounting officer and the auditor of that day to clear this expenditure as accounted for when in actual fact it had not been. But even after observing this, what else do you have to do other than pointing out? 

So, I think at that stage, I do not know whether we can put something here where auditors own their work and when there is a problem, and it is observed that in the process of doing their work, they were also not honest, something should be done to them. There must be in respect to the work of the auditors, because everybody relies on audit reports.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to support the principle of consolidating this law into one legislation. That will make our work easier. But I pray that the Chairman, as we proceed, helps me to understand the fate of the financial accounting regulations that take care of the Local government structures. The problems we have been having in implementing recommendations that come from the centre, hon. Members, you are aware that even when the IGG makes a recommendation after finding a problem, the district can refuse. It has happened in several cases where the IGG pointed out that action should have been taken to the CAO but the Chairman and the Council said, “for us we are satisfied and that is enough.” So, I think that area also needs to be studied and we get appropriate remedies. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a holy week.  So I think it is good that we are debating something that we as Parliament are supposed to do. If you remember our history very well, a lot of Parliaments, especially the British Commonwealth Parliaments, were actually set to see how the Executive uses money, how the king taxes people and how he uses that money. Many times they did not agree. In fact sometimes, some Kings would be beheaded; sometimes Parliaments would be dissolved and so on. So, I see some evidence of that. But definitely for our democracy, it is very healthy that this bill, which was written on the 27 May 2002 and the report written on the 13 December 2002 has finally come to this House to be debated. 

Now, in this Holy Week, I am really glad to see that the Vice President has honoured us with her presence. Madam, we welcome you. 

Now, I would like to thank the Committee and the ministry for working together. The objective of the bill is spelt on page one. But really when you look at it, the major objective is, how do we get money into the consolidated fund and how do we get it out? Because this consolidated fund is like a lake. There is input and outflow and if you just control the outflow and you do not care about the inflow, you have a problem. Similarly, if there is a lot of inflow but you do not care about the outflow, you have a problem. So, it is our duty as Parliament to ensure that the consolidated fund is taken care of.  

Now, look at page - I have the original Bill - articles 20 and 21 on page 24: “Loans, Guarantees and Grants”. I am glad that something has been said about these loans and guarantees because that is input into the consolidated fund. These loans are going to be paid. It may look simple, 0.7 per cent paid over 40 years and all that. But by that time our children will be the ones paying, by the way, some of us intend to be here 40 years from now. So, we shall be there and really seeing how our children are suffering. So it is important that we do not leave a big rope hanging around our children’s necks in form of loans and debts. 

Many members have contributed on monitoring and evaluation. I think it is very, very, important because many times we have been focusing on what we put in and what we get out. That is a very, very, simplistic way of monitoring and evaluation. In fact, according to the World Bank, we should look at how much money we have put in; output; how many buildings, how many students have been educated? Output; what is the level of education, what is the level of health, what is the welfare of health? And then impact; what has it done to the economy? Do you have a healthy population? 

Many times you find that we do very well in terms of input and we also do very well in terms of output because we put in money, we give money to the Ministry of Education and they build schools. That is fine, but what is the quality of those schools? In the villages, they call the hon. Minister of State for Education, Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire, kanyama because every time she goes there, she shakes those doors, and they fall. So, you could say either she is too strong or the doors are too weak. But you see it is a door as far as we are concerned. They say it is a door, one door but it is a lousy door; it is one wall; it is a lousy wall. So, the output is fine, but what is it going to do to the level of education? What is it going to do to the level of health? 

So, we should go beyond output and look at outcomes and impact. For instance, UN releases a report every year on Human Development, and by the way, this year I am contributing also because I am a member of the UN task force on hunger. So we have been writing something that will go into that Human Development Report. When you look at indices for Uganda, although we put in a lot of resources and we get outputs, the outcome does not quite add up. 

So, when we are monitoring - hon. Kinobe, you were pointing out these things - look beyond the outputs; look beyond buildings; look beyond the teachers that have come out of colleges; look beyond the number of students that have gone through UPE. Look at - what is the quality of education; what is the impact on the society; what is it doing to the economy. Those are more important than just ending at the level of outputs.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, there is something and that is efficiency, although it is not mentioned here. Efficiency is something that we are really suffering from in a lot of the African countries and a lot of developing countries in general, because we tend to do thing manually. You see, if my father is not efficient in farming - because he digs with a hoe; it is manual. When I come here, I go to the office, you look for a form, they go and look for a manual file. Everything is manual and there is no permanent record. When you give me a document like this, I call this a dead end unless there is soft copy of it, unless there is another copy which I can get instantly anytime I need it.  Now, the problem with a lot of our documents is, they are dead ends. You write a letter, it is filed, that is unless the secretary is there to give it to you. Tough luck; you cannot get anything. But suppose we have a system whereby whatever is written, you have a soft copy of it. 

For a lot of countries, they call this electronic government, whereby anything that has been written must be filed somewhere and then anybody who has access to it, anybody who has been given a copy can get at it by the touch of a button. In this country, it is possible but unfortunately we have not got our systems working well. 
I have tried to talk to the relevant people, I think now I should go to the younger generation, to the Vice-President maybe. Because I have talked to Prime Minister; I talked to the First Deputy Prime Minister; may be I should go to the younger generation so that - I am glad the Minister of Public Service asked me today so that we start this dialogue, because, really we are hurting ourselves. 

In this Parliament, if the Speaker gives us the agenda for the week, if you misplace your document and you try to look for it, God bless you. I had to scan the whole thing and I took it to the Clerk and said “this is what you should do. If you want I can donate this scanner. This scanner is US$63 only. This Parliament should have this so that at least, you can have a soft copy of everything, and you re-organise it so that you can cross check.” 

If any of you have been lucky to go to Malaysia or Mauritius or to any of those countries; when you go to a minister's office, he can just touch a button and say, “this is Mauritius”. Touch another button, “this is Malaysia”, touch another button, “this is my ministry, these are the workers, and this is the salary they get”; just like that. Here if you are lucky, somebody may not even tell you how many staff they are employing in the ministry. If you were running a private company, it would go under. There is no way you can run anything without business information.

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you, Dr Nkuuhe. Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Member on the Floor to remember one time when I stood here and declared that there was a lot of functional illiteracy and the 6th Parliament was up in arms. That is exactly what I was talking about.  Functional illiteracy does not mean you do not see, you do not hear. It is just that you have an inability to maximise the resources around you and put them to effect.  So, we have all these computers, we have the University with so many people who can help us do things, but the illiteracy may be among our generation. I must say I am not among the young ones; we are really functionally illiterate and what you are talking about is indeed correct.  

But I also wanted to give you information that also because of your input, we are also moving in the right direction. Thank you very much.

MR MWANDHA: I would like to thank hon. Nkuuhe for raising these matters. I always get intrigued whenever he raises these matters; but I know for certain that at least informally; hon. Nkuuhe has been helping us, that is Parliament, to really improve on our communication in the field of IT. I know now some of our reports are going on the Internet and maybe the Hansard will soon be going on the Internet. In other Parliaments, even this bill would be on the Internet. You do not have to be bothered to look for your copy; you can look at it before you come to the House, if you want you can run a copy out. But how is it that hon. Nkuuhe still has this problem of even getting a small thing like a scanner and yet we have so many expensive computers? You cannot get a scanner to get some of these documents scanned so that they can be put on the system? What is the problem?

DR NKUUHE: I thank the hon. Vice-President and for - of course, I cannot answer this because we can talk about that privately, because really technology has to sit on sociological base. That is part of the problem we have.  That if a lot of people focus on technology and forget the sociology in which it is going to operate, then you have a problem. That is why when we are buying equipment and so on, you must see, why is it that we are buying it; and the systems we have, are they not better? Can’t we improve on them; and then if we are going to buy equipment, then what equipment? So that you see the machine is not coming to be the boss, you are the boss.  But anyway, that will take long.

The final point I wanted to raise was this - by the way, Madam Vice-President, I will be very, very happy and I will put my immense energies at your disposal any time. (Laughter). It is at disposal to Government. All those efforts at electronic Government - if people’s minds are reading other things, sorry, I am not that type.

Now Article 41, bank accounts. In fact, there is a very important section under miscellaneous. This miscellaneous section is dealing with opening bank accounts by public officers.  You remember what happened with International Credit Bank and those kind of banks where people opened accounts and then the banks were faulty, the people probably knew about it. I am really glad a thing like that has come. Because for a public officer who is responsible to put public money in a bank without finding out the health of that bank, in my view, it is criminal and we have suffered as a result. So, I am glad a thing like that has come. We can keep on sealing those loopholes until they are all finished. Of course, you can never seal all loopholes, otherwise you have no work, but we can make every effort to make sure that there are very few and ineffective. I thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee.   

PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman Representaive, Luwero):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My area of concern is on page 6 where they are wrapping up the recommendations, but I will also thank the Committee for their work. They say that the bill takes into consideration the increased professional demands of modern concepts of transparency and accountability. I will leave out the other part and take this one to be applicable to all levels of accountability. Here I want to zero down on the Local Governments, mainly the two wings; the civil service technical staff and elected leaders especially the executives.  

You have the chairman who is an executive chairman, then you have his or her committee and they call themselves ministers; minister of finance instead of secretary for finance; minister of works. These people being elected leaders with minimal - with due respect - some of them minimal education. Definitely, they are not really conversant with some of the areas they are secretaries for. You have somebody as Secretary for Works, then has an engineer; you have Secretary for Health, then has the district medical director. 

It will be very useful therefore on these recommendations to have more than just sensitising because the first recommendation is all Ministries, Departments, Local Government, State Enterprises and Authorities and any other person who handles public funds should be sensitised on the provisions of this law. That is very good. Let them be sensitised on the provision of this law. That means telling them of the working and that this law exists.  

Usually, these seminars are one-day events. How about training and orientation courses for those secretaries who handle sensitive areas, like the Secretary for Finance, who may not have a financial background? We are not going to remove them but I think they need re-orientation. They need in-service training to make them move nearer to the technical staff they are working with. 

We have problems because some of these people are forced or enticed into colluding with the technical staff to do wrong, because they do not know or they do not understand exactly what they are supposed to do. When Members of Parliament intervene when money is being lost, we end up being blackmailed. We know what has happened to some Members of Parliament. 

Let me be specific; hon. Kinobe was blackmailed. That is what I think, because I know what is going on. I know of the road for which he is said to have stolen a bulldozer. Definitely, that was for cover-up, and he was the only man who came in to rectify a problem. Instead of recognising that, they went around. I do not know whether these people were hired or whether they were really sincere, and they started blackmailing him. This may not be only in our district but there may be many more affected districts. 

Even when you come to LC III chairpersons and secretaries, they are handling a lot of money and they are handling big programmes. So, definitely, there should be a provision for more training in different arts, especially where we do not have strict regulations on the qualifications required before these people get these posts. 

To me as a professional person, I still feel that education is a very important thing. Professionalism is very important if one is going to do his or her work diligently. I will not claim that I could go and dissect a person; I will just run away when I see blood. And other people would not go to the lake because they have an allergy to that. When they look at the water they start vomiting. On water, me I do not care. 

Mr Speaker, that is what I had to say. At a later date when we come to look at the provisions of the amendments, we should put in a strong provision about that aspect so that we bridge the gap between the technical staff and the elected leaders who become technical staff by nature of their work. I thank you.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota North, Mpigi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is just a small concern over the contents of page 12 of the Bill - the creation of the position of Accountant General. 

As you have heard, the problem is not lack of a control system because already we have offices that control our finances. For example, we have the office of the IGG, the Auditor General and the Secretary to the Treasury. All these offices could do the work if well facilitated. 

I have a problem in my district, Mr Speaker. Funds have been misused. I have been going to the IGG’s office about it but all the time I go there, he says he has no facilities to check this. This office was created for that purpose but they are not doing what they are actually supposed to be doing! This applies to the Auditor General too. There is a lot of duplication of roles at the districts and  -(Interruption)

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you for giving way for this information. Thank you, Mr Speaker. The trend of the debate has been that we need professionalism, and Government is realising that one of the ways to actually ensure accountability is to have professional ethics. 

In many of the professions that have been around for a long time, you find that within Government there is somebody who carries the torch for that profession. For instance, in my profession, we have a Surgeon General, and you do have a Solicitor General in the legal profession. So, it is in that range that we are trying to actually professionalize people within Government and in the service so that we know that when you are in Government, this is the torchbearer for your profession. They would be the ones to help you streamline your activities. Otherwise, we have found that putting laws in place without having professional ethics followed up within the profession and within Government, has not helped. And this is working in other countries. 

So, it is not going to be duplication of roles. The Secretary to the Treasury is dealing with disbursing money to the different ministries. The Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Finance is actually the accounting officer for that ministry. I just wanted to clarify that so that you could build your contribution along those lines. Thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: I thank you, your Excellency, for that information. However, I think such an office could be established under the Treasury, for it to control or oversee our finances instead of creating another autonomous office.

THE SPEAKER: Where is this Accountant General going to work; in which ministry? Is it not in the Treasury? It is in the same ministry and not in a different department.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you for that information. My concern, Mr Speaker, is that we recently passed a law on the National Planning Authority but this has not been implemented.

THE SPEAKER: But this point has been taken up really. Many have contributed about that. Could you contribute on another? The absence of an effective planning authority was brought up by hon. Latigo and hon. Okulo Epak. Anyway, proceed.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you. My concern is that Parliament has passed laws and authorised the establishment of such offices like the National Planning Authority, but up to now they have not been formalised. Mr Speaker, it would have been better for us to leave out this Accountant General and only facilitate and improve on the existing offices. Members are asking –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that the post of the Accountant General is actually a re-designation of an existing post of the former Director, Treasury Office of Accounts. So, it is not a creation of an entirely new office outside the Ministry of Finance. It is an enhancement, as Her Excellency has alluded, of the post in order to be able to attract the best brains available onto the market and to be able to oversee the accounting function in Government. Thank you.

MR OGOLA: Mr Speaker, that was the initial title during the colonial days. It was changed around 1965 or 1966, and what we are doing is simply going back to what originally used to exist. And that is the problem with Africa. We change things then we go back to colonial ones because they are better. Thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you for that information. However, I think that at that time we did not have other offices like that of the IGG and Auditor General. So, –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the IGG’s work is statutory; he works somewhere else. The Accountant General is going to be working in the Ministry of Finance, in charge of accounting work. As Her Excellency the Vice President told you, this is the torchbearer of accountants. 

And you have been told that actually the post is there but the question is that of designating it. That is why perhaps in the certificate of financial implications they did not show a salary for this. Already the person is there. The IGG is working in a different place, the CID is in Police and so forth.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is that members are asking for the impact on the ground, of all the money we get as donations and as revenue. The reason is the creation of all these offices. 

As hon. Sebagereka said, there are a lot of offices and a lot of administrative costs that are unnecessary. In fact in future I will propose that we have a regional Auditor General. Say, for example, in Buganda we get one internal auditor, and each district has one, and all these are being paid. They waste time and I do not think there is even enough work for them to do at the district.  

I conclude by saying that I still insist that clause 7 of this Bill should be deleted.

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I must first apologise for standing up to talk. Because of the heavy duties in the Public Accounts Committee, it is not possible for us to be on this committee. In fact I suggest that in future the Finance Committee should be upgraded to a permanent committee of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to talk. I thank Government for having come up with this Bill to operationalise Chapters 11 and 9 of the Constitution. It was long overdue. 

Secondly, I would like to thank the committee for the job well done. You have really looked at the issues and I thank you very much for the good job you have done. However, I would like to put across a few important issues, which I think need the concentration of Parliament.

One is this accountability we talk about, of the funds that have been disbursed to ministries and local governments. Yes, we need accountability but we also need accountability for the responsibility given to people to do certain things. That is why this afternoon we are asking Government why the responsibility we gave them of providing us with security is not taken up in some parts of this country. 

I am saying this because, particularly in local governments, the law is very clear. The Constitution is very clear about how to raise funds for local governments. However, I do not see the penalties in this law in case local governments and councils have failed to raise funds to run these issues. They are failing to raise funds when sources of revenue are available! In this case they are not accounting for the responsibilities accorded to them in this Constitution, and the law.

Take a city like Kampala. We have immense problems: roads, health and the many mosquitoes around, but if you look at how much money they generate, you wonder! Actually we are collecting about 30 percent. I had a chance to visit a number of municipalities outside Uganda and most of them operate at 90 per cent or 70 percent, and this is why these local councils and municipalities are now pressuring Government to transfer more funds to them, instead of first accounting for the responsibilities we gave them through this Constitution. 

So, I expected a clause somewhere in this law, which provides that if somebody fails in his duty - particularly an accounting officer - if he fails in raising the required revenue, something should be done. I am requesting the chairperson to look at that and advise me if you have tackled it. However, I am not happy with the accountability of the responsibilities accorded to the district councils and the municipalities.

Secondly, you have heard from hon. Kinobe that between 30 and 40 percent of the entire revenue of district councils are transfers from the central Government. In my opinion, this increase is unjustifiable because of what I have stated so far. We should, therefore, if we are to continue increasing the transfers to local governments, first look at what they are collecting. If they are supposed to collect 60 percent as additional revenue and they collect 10, we should also try to reduce the percentage of transfer. 

Because really - I do not know whether we decentralised too fast, but there is total chaos in local governments. The management of public funds in local governments is unbelievably chaotic. When the Local Government Public Accounts Committee came in to see what is going on, you could see the whole politics at play. In local councils, what is being done now is only politics from LC I, LC II, LC III, LC IV, LCV. It is politics! When you come to the management, the delivery of service in these areas by the responsible officers, functions given by constitutional law are actually operated at about five percent. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we must put a demand, perhaps through this law, about how to help these local governments. We had put a certain equation in the Constitution but I think this should be revisited. It should be revisited, if they want power and politics. If they want power, they should utilise that power to generate revenue to make sure that the people are fully served. 

If you look, for example, at how tenders are being granted, rules and procedures do exist but there is a lot of politics involved. That is why you find that transfers sent to the local governments tend to be messed up, because the monitoring is not there. The capacity is not there and things are done haphazardly. Therefore, I request that there is need for this law to further look at the responsibilities given to those people. We should define them and attach certain penalties for those people who do not adhere to what is stated in the law. 

With those remarks, Mr Speaker, I thank you very much and I thank the chairman, and Government for having come up with this beautiful Bill. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, that is the close of the general debate. The chairperson of the Committee and the minister may have responses to make on some of the queries raised. They should go and prepare this so that tomorrow when we come back, the chairperson will make his submission and then the minister will wind up. Then we shall proceed to the Committee Stage. With this, we come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 April 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)







