Wednesday, 14 April 2004
  
Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this meeting and I hope you had an enjoyable Easter weekend. I will start by informing you that in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon is hon. John Richard Cockwell, Member of the Legislative Council of the Falkland Islands. (Applause) He is here to attend the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Legislative meeting from 18–24 April this year. You are most welcome, honourable, to Uganda and to the Parliament of Uganda.

Honourable members, before we continue, I received sad news yesterday. This is a written communication from hon. Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo. It reads: “Allow me, hon. Speaker, to inform you and Parliament of the death of my father, Mzee Cecilio Latigo, that occurred at Ambrozio Memorial Hospital Kalongo, Pader District on Holy Saturday, 10 April 2004 at around 5.00 p.m. 

My father was one of the pioneer teachers in my community; he started teaching in 1930 and retired in 1960. At the time of his death, he was 95 years old. My father lived an exemplary life as a father and teacher and a devout Catholic. We consider his demise on Holy Saturday as most significant and reassurance of God’s favour towards him. 

We thank the Almighty for his life and for what he has done for us and for the good of our country and people. On account of my father’s death, I shall be travelling home on Tuesday. We shall bury him on Wednesday.

My family and I shall sincerely appreciate your conveyance of this news of my father’s death to my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, and the entire staff of Parliament.” This is the sad news, which I have received. I think we should observe a minute’s silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: This is from the National Planning Authority. They are arranging a civic workshop, which will take place between 16th and 17th of April. This is to inform you that Members of Parliament are able to attend and, therefore, they are arranging this workshop for Members of the Budget Committee, Committee on National Economy and the Committee on Finance. You are advised to attend this workshop because it is likely to assist you to understand more the work of the National Planning Authority.  

Then the Bank of Uganda has arranged a one-day non-residential workshop scheduled on Friday, 16th at the International Conference Centre starting at 8.00 a.m. The workshop targets Members of the Finance Committee, Trade and Industry and National Economy Committees. You are also advised to attend this meeting.

2.33
MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A couple of weeks ago, you have been – probably the Clerk has been indicating that there would be a Private Member’s Bill in form of a motion about the abolition of graduated tax in this country. Apart from the worries that came up after seeing it being pushed forward again and again, now the last straw is to see that even that tiny hope seems to be fading away because we do not see any indication that this motion will one day be tabled. So, I am just requesting you to tell us something regarding this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Well, when there is a motion, there must be a person to move it. And if you bring a Bill here, your motion for leave, you must table it and then time will be allocated for its handling. As far as I know, there is a distinguished Member of this Parliament who is following up this matter, and I know the discussions we held with him, he knows the time when this matter will come up. But I do not have your motion. But hon. Okulo Epak has got a motion and he knows exactly what is happening to it.  

2.35
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Mr Speaker, I am sorry, you have put me in a difficult situation. I think the honourable member is right. On our Order Papers we normally show business to follow. And for some time it was on top of matters to follow, then it went to the bottom and today it is not even included in matters to follow. I am equally worried, particularly following our discussions yesterday that it is not even shown that it is following soon.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think my reply is correct in that I do not have a motion from him. I have your motion, and as far as that is concerned, we know where we have reached.

2.36
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Mr Speaker, in the past week up to now, when one opens papers you find grotesque stories about torture being meted out by the security agencies on innocent people –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed in the past that matters that you can allude to are the matters contained in the Communication from the Chair. But should there be a very urgent matter, which you think you want to raise after the Communication from the Chair, the practice is that you should see the Speaker and say, “Well, something has cropped up that is very urgent. I want to say something about it,” and then the Speaker will definitely accommodate it. In my communication I have not talked about any torture but since you have said it has been there for a week and you think you want to bring it up, please come and see me. Definitely I will accommodate you.

MR SEKIKUBO: Possibly, Mr Speaker, on the documents we have been sent into out pigeonholes from the United States department, from the Amnesty International and from the Human Rights Watch; I thought you ought to have known about them, and in your communication you could allude to one.

THE SPEAKER: No. Unfortunately, I am a Member for Bukoto Central but there are many things for Bukoto Central, which I cannot say because of where you placed me. As a Speaker, I just receive motions and then process them and communicate the matter that is directly with me. But since you have seen it and there are many Members of Parliament who are expressing this, they can bring it up but I cannot really comment on it. Because once I start, I will put myself in a position to seek clarification, information, then I will be participating in the debates and I do not want to do it.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ACCESS TO INFORMATION 
BILL, 2004

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Mr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Access to Information Bill, 2004” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but is there a certificate?

MR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, the certificate is on your desk we sent it yesterday.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I must confess that I have not seen it but I believe you that perhaps you sent it. The best we can do is to trace it with the Clerk because normally I do not get these documents, they are sent to the Clerk. Maybe we give you time to look for it and then the Clerk can send it. But I believe you must have sent it.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I must say that I am extremely delighted that this Bill has been tabled for first reading in this House - or is about to be tabled. However, I wish to register my protest to this House about the manner in which the minister has handled this matter. One, I have had the opportunity to read the Bill which was published by him and the draft which I gave him. What the minister did or what Government did was just to plagiarise my work. I think this is intellectual theft! It is true, when a private member comes up with this initiative, they should be supported.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, let us finish this business first, then we can see how we proceed with it. Let us formally deal with this matter then we shall see how to handle your complaint.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether you are going to give me opportunity to say something about it and wind –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It will depend. Let us get it formally, then we shall see what to do.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Mr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me the second opportunity to formally lay on Table the Bill entitled, “The Access to Information Bill, 2004.” I have laid it on Table in addition to the Certificate of Financial Implications from the Ministry of Finance. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to scrutinise and then make a report to the House. 

Well, honourable member, this is the first reading and it does not attract debate. I know you have valid reasons, I do not doubt the merits of your complaints, but I will suggest that since this matter is going to the committee, you will have to go to the committee and the minister will also be summoned to the committee. That is where you will make your case. He will be able to answer and I believe the committee, before the second reading is done, they will present a report including your objections or your reservations, then Parliament will be in position to make contributions to the matters, which you are trying to raise. But I sympathise with you if this is what you did because I remember that you are the one who moved a Private Member’s Bill, and we had given you leave and we said we work together. If this has not been done - but we shall see. I think it is better that way.

2.43
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, with a lot of humility, I need your clarification. Parliament is entitled and empowered to pass laws at any stage, in order for Parliament to be seen to be doing its work properly. Are we not entitled to dismiss a Bill if we perceive bad motives even from the very start?

THE SPEAKER: Parliament operates under a Constitution and Rules of Procedure determined by Parliament itself. I am not saying that we are accepting it or we are not, but as we proceed with the procedure, maybe if you have convincing reasons we may reject this Bill. But that will come as we progress with the Bill. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, before this Bill goes to the appropriate committee can we not dismiss it?

THE SPEAKER: Well, the procedure is well known. What you can do, you can go and bring a motion to have the Bill rejected. So long as the motion is brought in accordance to our rules, we shall handle it and see what to do with the Bill.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, when hon. Katuntu came and proposed that the Minister of Information was dragging his feet about bringing forward this Bill, he volunteered and he said actually the minister could own it. Is it really correct again now to start accusing the minister of obliging the original request of this Parliament? Are we not confusing or sort of maligning the frontbench even if they are sort of inadequate in doing things –(Laughter) - but they have started doing things.  

Certainly, for me as a Member for Bulamogi, who has been demanding for my district all along, and the frontbench has started doing something, I start hoping that maybe my district will come forward. But now if we started reversing the gear like this, Mr Speaker, I get really frightened.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think we should be fair to hon. Katuntu. He raised a matter, I advised him on what to do and he accepted my ruling. Now you are attacking something, which does not exist. I think it is unfair. We should keep that matter until the appropriate time –(Mr Katuntu rose_)- no, I really thank you that you appreciated.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I want to address the general principle. A Member of Parliament using our rules, does his research, compiles information, is ready to move a Bill under the private members’ arrangement, and all of a sudden the minister responsible hijacks the material, which the member has actually compiled. This is going to discourage other members from moving Private Members’ Bills.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us do things in accordance with our rules. There was a first reading and that does not attract any debate. The Bill has been sent to the committee to handle, and hon. Katuntu was advised and he accepted. Now you are dragging up another debate on the same issue, which we shall debate, if necessary, in future. Let the matter concerning that particular subject end here.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to present a brief to Parliament on the financings from the International Development Association (IDA), the African Development Fund (ADF), and from the NORDIC Development Fund (NDF), for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project (SMMRP). I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, let the document be handled by the appropriate committee and they report back.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on a matter of agreements, which are normally brought to this august House for approval. The way I look at this particular paper, which is laid before us, eventually it is going to lead to a proposal for an agreement between these agencies and our Government. Subsequent to that, if there is an on-lending situation, again agreements are made between the government and other parties. Such agreements are never brought to us for scrutiny.  

I will give an example, Mr Speaker. At the moment, we are debating in the Committee on Finance an agreement between our Government and a certain company called BIDCO. For all practical purposes, that agreement is a fait accompli between the government and other parties on money, which we had borrowed from another organisation.  

Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance as to whether we should have an additional rule in our procedure that before the government gets into an agreement with any other party, that agreement should be brought to this august House for scrutiny. Otherwise, if we have any objections or proposal for amendments, they have no consequence or if they are very convincing, it means we can declare that agreement null and void and it would carry serious financial penalty to our agreement.  So, I am seeking your guidance, should we have a rule to that effect or have I forgotten how we should normally handle the situation? I am seeking your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Since you are suggesting that we amend the rules and include that requirement, I have no objection. I think you can use the procedure and look at our rules; maybe we can overhaul our rules and take care of what you are suggesting. I have nothing to say other than encourage you to take the necessary steps to include that in our rules.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For once we are going to handle them.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, our Constitution, notably Article 159, is very elaborate about how matters related to finance and borrowing should be handled.  At this point in time, since the Leader of Government Business is present, we would like to know when Government finds it necessary to let Members of Parliament know about certain agreements, and find it not necessary for other agreements not to be exposed to the Members of Parliament. I believe the Government of Uganda, well represented now on the frontbench, has the capacity to let us know that difference. Otherwise, we are worried the way we are ambushed with reference to Article 159 of the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: Now, your clarification is connected with which business?

MR LUKYAMUZI: My clarification is very elaborate. I am saying it seems we have double standards about how we approve matters related to finance. And I quoted Article 159 of the Constitution, which mandates Parliament to check matters related to borrowing and I am saying, in view of that, how come that we have double standards? Could the Leader of Government Business explain to us when it becomes necessary for us to know about certain agreements and when it is not?

THE SPEAKER: Could you substantiate on what you mean when you say “double standards”? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: That is right, Mr Speaker. Good enough the agreement related to borrowing, which has just been articulated by the Minister of Finance, is made known to us. But it is also on record that some time back it was the newspapers, which let us know about an agreement, which had been signed between BIDCO and the Government of Uganda. If it were not the newspapers, we would not have known, and we were ambushed because public money is being spent without our knowledge -(Mr Rukutana rose_). I am very clear about my challenge and it is directed to the Leader of Government Business.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to make this clarification. Some agreements by law require ratification or approval of Parliament; those are brought here. Some others do not require such ratification and there is no need to bring them here.

MR ALINTUMA: Mr Speaker, if you recall, last year we almost had a head-on collision with the former Minister, hon. Muruli Mukasa. I was confirming the fact that the linkage between Government and Parliament is broken down mainly because the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee of Parliament is completely cut off from the activities of Government. And yet in our understanding and in the understanding of the public, that committee is working as a linkage between Government and Parliament letting each know what the other is attempting to do. 

I was repeatedly telling the minister and he vividly objected to what I was saying. I was saying that our committee simply remains by name; we actually have no idea about what the government does.

When hon. Aggrey Awori comes up and says that Parliament should be informed of most of the agreements that are made, the truth is, our committee chairperson should actually be the information link. He should be able to watch over for all the agreements we make with foreign agencies. And as I speak now the disturbing thing is that –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order, committed to the defence of our Constitution. Article 159(2) is very elaborate on how matters related to borrowing in this country should be treated and there are no double standards. So, is the honourable member in order to make remarks, which negate this constitutional provision, which I am about to read?

THE SPEAKER: But when you say “the honourable member”, are you referring to Alintuma Nsambu who is on the Floor?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Both the minister and Alintuma Nsambu.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Lubaga South, there is a document, which is going to the committee. I think it is about borrowing or something like that. It is better that if you have any matter you want to raise about the way we scrutinise, we recommend you go to this committee, make your case and the case will be really included in the report that will come here. That way when it comes back, it will give you a platform from which you can make your observation. But let us leave this matter because it is not hanging on any issue, which we are currently dealing with. You may have a point, but bring it at an appropriate time when we are dealing with actual business rather than contributing generally.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION 
AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE PETITION OF WORKERS OF UGANDA PRINTING AND PUBLISHING CORPORATION

2.58
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the petition to Parliament by the workers of the Uganda Printing and Publishing Association (UPPC).

Intoduction

On 8 July 2003, some employees of Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation, through Mr John O. Kiiza, petitioned the Speaker of Parliament to look into the mismanagement and mistreatment of workers at UPPC. The petition followed earlier petitions to the Office of the President, Inspector General of Government and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Mr Speaker, you referred the petition to the Parliamentary Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to study the issues involved and make recommendations for solutions. The committee has accordingly studied the issues concerning UPPC, interviewed workers, management of the corporation and the Minister of State in charge of Privatisation, and also the Minister for the Presidency under which this corporation falls.

The report is divided into five sections: The introduction, background to UPPC, the petition, methodology, findings and recommendations.  

Background to UPPC

Mr Speaker, honourable members, UPPC was established by an Act of Parliament in 1992 as a corporate body with the following objectives -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, do you intend to read it verbatim or you are summarising this report?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, given the nature of our recommendations, I think it is very important that members appreciate every part of the report. (Applause) The report is not very big. Given my speed of reading reports, it is going to be very short.  

Mr Speaker, the objectives were:

• To turn the government printer into an effective and efficient resource. 

• To improve the administration of government business by providing improved printing services.

• To increase the productivity levels of the printery.

• To improve on the capacity and quality of the printery services available to the government.  

UPPC was originally classified in Class II in the PERD Statute, 1993, that is, the public enterprises where government is supposed to retain majority shareholding. It was, however, reclassified from Class II to Class IV where Government is required fully to divest itself from the organisation.

The Petition

The following issues were raised in the petition:

- There was non-remittance of the standard members’ contributions to NSSF.
- UPPC Board of Directors extended tenure of office illegally.
- There was direct theft of the company’s property.
- Management embezzlement of company funds through paying commissions to brokers.
- They were paying ghost retrenchees/workers.
- Management were paying themselves weekly allowances contrary to the existing regulations.
- There was an increase of management salaries without increasing salaries of the other employees.
- Management was paying itself huge sums of money through an incentive scheme that was abused.
- Management purchased four faulty computers at Shs 94 million.
- The top management loaned themselves huge amounts of money.
-That they awarded themselves trips abroad.
- That there was tribalism and nepotism in recruitment at the work place resulting into embezzlement.
- Management’s failure to hold negotiations with the worker’s union.
- That there were inflated prices for the Managing Director’s furniture.
- That they forced workers to accept privatisation through Management Employee Buy Out.
- That there was mistreatment of workers.

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the Minister in charge of the Presidency and the Minister of State for Finance in charge of Privatisation.  

The committee also held meetings, under oath, with the Board of Directors of UPPC, management of UPPC and some of the petitioners, and the Uganda Printers, Journalists, Media, Paper and Allied Employees’ Union.  

The committee also visited the corporation premises in Entebbe to examine and assess the situation at site.  

The committee further scrutinised the following documents:

- The Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation Statute, 1992.
- The PERD Statute 1993.
- The petitioners’ documents.
- A written response to the petitioners from the management of UPPC.
- Auditor-General’s report for the year ended 30 June 2001.
- Estimates of income and expenditure for year ended 2001/02.
- Inspector General of Government reports on UPPC.
- Response from the union.
- Relevant minutes of UPPC’s board meetings.

Findings

Non-remittance of members’ contributions to NSSF:  The petitioners alleged that management does not remit employees’ NSSF contributions. The management had not made payments for 17 months (December 1997 to April 1999).

Observations

• It was true there was non-remittance of NSSF members’ contributions in the past, and according to management, this was due to lack of funds. It was, therefore, wrong on the part of management of UPPC not to remit members’ deductions on schedule because delay of that attracts penalty.

• There is, however, evidence of payment of the standard contributions in arrears as per the employer payments statement. 

Recommendation

Mr Speaker, we recommend that UPPC should in future adhere to NSSF regulations by remitting members’ contributions in time, as non-remittance is a violation of the law.

Boards Extended Tenure of Office

Members of the board at the time of the petition were:

• Hon. Akisoferi Michael Ogola	– Chairman
• Mr Samuel Lutwama Bisase	- Member
• Mrs Rhoda Kalema		- Member
• Mr Nicholas Oluka		- Member        
• Mr Leo Loading Obonyo	- Member 
•Mr Mugisa Christopher		- Member 
• Ms Elizabeth Sekabembe Bakawa was Secretary and at the same time Managing Director of the Corporation.

Observation

Under the UPPC Statute, “A member of the Board of Directors shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment for not more than two consecutive terms.” 

The current board was appointed on April 1993, and their first term of office ended April 1996. If they had been reappointed, their third and last term would have expired April 2002.

Recommendation
 
Notwithstanding the pending privatisation, a new board of directors should be appointed.

Theft of Company Property

The petitioners alleged that the Chairman of the Board, hon. Ogola, Managing Director, Mrs Elizabeth Bakawa and Administration Manager, Mrs Hope Rwaguma, directly participated in the theft of a Gestetner Printing Machine worth Shs 20 million around March 2002.

Observations

• Management reported the loss of the Gestetner 313 printing machine to Police, Case No. CRB 158-2000 on 31 March 2000. Police carried out investigations and insurance has agreed to indemnify the corporation by paying Shs 4.5 million. The management reported that the book value of the machine was Shs 6.0 million at the time.

• Management did not react quickly to report the theft of the printing machine to the Police. The reporting was much later and the committee wondered why there was such a delay.  

• There was no disciplinary action taken against the people directly responsible for looking after the machine, for example, the guard on duty at that time and the person who keeps the keys.

• The committee members on the visit to UPPC observed that there was negligence on the part of management and it was difficult to steal a machine, which is as heavy as that from UPPC without insider knowledge. 

• There was no evidence, however, that the members of the board were involved.

• The gap of Shs 15.5 million between the amounts the insurers are indemnifying and the petitioner’s value is very wide.

Recommendations

• Disciplinary measures should be taken against management not only for negligence, but also for reporting the loss to Police very late.

• The people responsible for looking after the machine should be disciplined.

• Management should pursue the payment from the insurance worth Shs 4.5 million and the difference of Shs 1.5 million from the book value should be formally written off.

Paying Commission to Brokers

Mr Speaker, honourable members, the other petition was that management has a trick of paying commission to brokers and the money is paid to only one person in the names of Kenneth Sseguya, who later shares the proceeds with management.

Observations

• There are letters showing appointment of marketing and promotion agents, but there is no response from the agents. However, there is no evidence that promotion and marketing agents were appointed competitively. Management does not deny that the commission is paid to only one person, Mr Kenneth Sseguya. There was no evidence that the increase in the sales was a result of the promotion and marketing agents since Government is still the biggest client of UPPC, contributing 80 percent of its sales.

• Despite the fact that the commission was approved by the board, it varies from five percent to 10 per cent at the discretion of management. There is, therefore, no policy document that is followed.  

• There is no evidence that the commission agent was paying tax on his commission income. The committee failed to reach him despite several attempts.

Recommendations
 
• The new board should revise the commission policy and standardise it. 
• Commission agents should be sourced on competitive basis.
• Efforts should be made by the Ministry of Finance to recover the taxes from the commission agent since he has not paid it on his commission income.

Paying Ghost Workers

Members observed that no ghost retrenchees were paid because there was no evidence from the lists available to the committee.

Weekend Allowance for Managers
  
Members observed that the apparent lack of petty cash policy seemed to have been taken advantage of. On the visit to the UPPC, the committee looked at the petty cashbook and there was evidence that management was spending petty cash weekly on items like entertainment and medical care. 

The committee was not convinced that all the items covered under petty cash should be there. The board has no standard amount of petty cash.

Recommendations

• The board should put in place a policy on petty cash management. 

• The Auditor-General should carry out a special audit covering the period between 1993 to-date.

Increase of Management Salaries

The committee found no evidence in the minutes of the board and correspondents from the board/management. The salary schedule, however, revealed that there were salary increments.

Recommendations

• Salary increments should be carried out by the board, notwithstanding the pending privatisation and it should cut across the board to cover all the workers. 

• The money, which was illegally received by management, should be recovered from the salary earnings immediately.

Incentive Scheme

Honourable members, the committee made the following observations:

• It is true bonus is a third of the top management’s salaries and the board approved the incentive scheme. The incentive would be paid when there was an increase in sales without incurring any extra costs. There was no evidence that management first established that the sales targets had been achieved without any extra cost and they would even award themselves on orders before they received payments from the clients.

• The total amount paid under the scheme was Shs 20,883,300 against overtime for non-management staff, of Shs 212,157,854. The assertion by management that workers earned more than managers is not true. The overtime is an entitlement in Uganda while the incentive scheme allowance/bonus that could have accrued to all employees is not.

• The incentive scheme and overtime allowance are not comparable. The scheme was being abused, as it was difficult to determine if management was in compliance with its terms.  

Recommendations

• The incentive schemes should be scrapped immediately and any outstanding payments accruing from the scheme to management be forfeited.  

• Should there be need for the scheme in future, it should be based on profitability of the company and at the end of the year, covering all workers.

Purchase of Computers

The committee looked at tax invoices of US $30,780.60 (Shs 53.8 million) and two payment vouchers of Shs 16.3 and Shs 25 million.  

The committee could not confirm the petitioners’ allegations but noted the price of the computers on the tax invoice had been inflated compared to the competitive prices at the time.  

Recommendation

All purchases by the corporation should conform to the Public Procurement and Accountability Act.

Loans  to Management

Members observed that the management car loan scheme was approved by the board on 1 September 1998. It was intended to facilitate staff whose nature of work required them to have ready transport. It was believed at the time that the scheme would serve as a motivation for greater output by the corporation’s employees.

Officers who are entitled to corporation transport would not qualify for the scheme unless they forfeited their transport entitlement.  

The UPPC managers’ car loan scheme was modified to provide for the repayment of the loan, the reimbursement of running costs and accumulation of savings for major repairs. The maximum loan amount was Shs 15 million. The corporation would pay mileage allowance to the borrower at the following rates:
 
• Shs 700 for the first 600 kilometres per month and 
• Shs 230 for extra mileage thereafter.

In addition, the UPPC budget for 2001/02 provided for 6.5 litres of fuel per day for each of the five management staff. 

The mileage allowance was strictly to used as follows:

• Loan repayment - retained by the corporation

• Reimbursement - paid to the borrower.

• Savings - retained by the corporation. The savings would be used to purchase a replacement vehicle or settle any outstanding loan when the borrower leaves the corporation. What a scenario!

The car loan scheme was like a gift to management since it covered the purchase of the vehicle, repayment of the loan, running and maintenance cost of the vehicle, plus savings. The loans were however got with the board’s authority.

Honourable members, the scheme was abused. For example in September 2002, the Managing Director was paid by management, mileage of Shs 700,000 equivalent to 1,820 kilometres. The Managing Director got the loan before the approval of the board, the finance and tender committees. The committee established that the MD had repaid her loan. The repayment of the MD’s loan was by deduction from the allowances that were referred to as “transport allowance” above. This contradicts her terms and conditions of service that allows the MD free transport and a driver.

The committee observed that the Board of Directors was responsible for the defective loan scheme and misuse of corporation funds. This contradicts the argument that UPPC has financial constraints and they had failed to remit workers’ contributions to NSSF.

Recommendations

• The board should not allow management to borrow from the company that is financially constrained.

• Any savings from the management car scheme should revert to UPPC.

• The amount of mileage allowance that should be claimed by management should be limited to less than Shs 400,000 per month until that time when the financial position of UPPC has improved.

• Management should pay the loan themselves rather than UPPC paying itself.

Trips Abroad

There was no evidence to confirm the allegation that management offered themselves trips abroad.

Nepotism and Tribalism at UPPC

The following were said to be relatives of the Managing Director and Administrative Manager.  These are: Ms Hope Harimwamani, Zalwango Damalie, Bambeera Grace and Asiimwe Constance.

Observation

UPPC management did not explicitly deny the allegation. There was evidence of payment to Ms Hope Harimwamani of Shs 1.017 million in April 2001 (for one month) whereas her basic salary was Shs 230,000. 

The committee did not find any genuine recruitment policy and no appointment letters for the above-mentioned workers were available.

Recommendation

Mr Speaker and honourable members, UPPC should develop a human resource manual, which should be adhered to. 

Management Negotiations with Union

The terms and conditions of service at UPPC have not changed for a number of years.

Permission to allow UPPC to negotiate with the workers union has taken long though the committee did not receive official document instituting the embargo on negotiations.

Recommendation

Both the President’s Office and the Ministry of Finance should urgently come out with a clear policy on management of the transition period of the corporation during the privatisation process.

Managing Director’s Furniture

The board ratified the purchase of furniture for the Managing Director’s office and residence amounting to Shs 17.7 million. The furniture was not budgeted for. The committee could not verify that the purported attached minutes were authentic as they were not signed and dated. The terms and conditions of service for the Managing Director submitted to the committee did not specify the entitlement to furniture at a private residence.  

The Capital Account that had to be approved by the board was used. The approval to purchase the furniture was done retrospectively.

Honourable members, the payment of Shs 3.1 million for furniture remained suspicious as the original document has white wash and the proforma invoice was faxed at 00.24 hours, 6 April 1998, that is 24 minutes after midnight. It was written on 12 July 2002, has a Supreme Furnishers Stamp of 12 July 2002, and was paid on 28 June 2002 on cheque No. 005116.  

Supreme Furnishers acknowledged receipt of the money on 13 July 2002, and the proforma invoice has been crossed both on the amount and item. The payment has no invoice and the original item on proforma invoice was a washing machine. The furniture was bought at Shs 17.6 million.

Housing Allowance for Management

Members observed that management also extended the number of months that could be paid in advance for house rent from six months to twelve months. The rent advance payments were not taxed as required by the law. However, the Managing Director has instructed her chief accountant to recover all outstanding taxes and tax allowances with effect from 1 November 2002.  

The Shs 3.1 million could have been misappropriated. The furniture the Managing Director took to her personal house is irregular because the Managing Director is paid housing allowance. There was no satisfactory explanation as to why the Managing Director vacated her official house to spend on furniture and yet continue to receive housing allowance.

Recommendations

• Management should refund all the money they have overpaid themselves illegally.  

• Management should pay all the outstanding taxes in arrears.  

• The Managing Director should pay the excess money spent on furniture.  

• The Shs 3.1 million overpaid for furniture should be recovered by the UPPC management.

• The Auditor-General should ensure that all the financial anomalies at the corporation are corrected accordingly.

Privatisation

Petition

Honourable members, workers were forced to sign that they want UPPC to be privatised through the Management Employee Buy Out (MEBO) that would guarantee employees buy shares in UPPC.

Observations

1. Seven employees who appeared on the list of those who want to buy UPPC through MEBO did not sign. 

2. Twenty workers were not included on the list, thus 27 workers may not have embraced the privatisation of UPPC through MEBO. The Privatisation Unit determines the mode of privatisation of privatising public enterprises.

3. UPPC currently faces the challenge of capitalisation to upgrade its machinery, processes and human resource capital. The committee on its visit to UPPC and from the documents verified show a request by the Managing Director seeking permission to sell off some of the assets of UPPC to settle Uganda Revenue Authority outstanding bills. This appears to be a result of absence of working capital, and mismanagement of resources.

4. Even if some workers may not have embraced the privatisation of UPPC through MEBO, under the Public Enterprises and Restructuring Act, 1993, Privatisation Unit determines the mode of privatising an enterprise. Management only expressed a wish for the MEBO. 

5. The committee found the allegation baseless.

Recommendation

The PERD Statute should be amended to move UPPC from Class IV to Class 1 of the First Schedule of the Statute.

Mistreatment of Workers

Observations:

1. Mr Okello was absent from duty because he had been erroneously arrested by the Police.

2. Police released Mr Okello because he had no case to answer.

3. The explanation by management that he was dismissed because he deserted did not hold because they knew he was in Police custody and he was, therefore, right to take UPPC to court for unfair dismissal.

Recommendation

Mr Okello should be reinstated and/or paid all his benefits. The Managing Director should be personally held responsible for any claims in case Mr Okello wins the case in court.  

Honourable members, these are general observations, and very important ones. 

The loan with a grace period of two years, repayment period of ten years and interest rate of 6.5 percent was inherited from the Ministry of Finance when UPPC was established in 1992. The UPPC Statute, 1992, section 20(3) provides that: “All contracts, debts, engagements and liabilities of Government attributed to the Government Printer immediately before the date of commencement of this Statute shall on that date become contracts, debts, engagements and liabilities of the Corporation”.  

This money had been received as a grant to purchase the printery equipment in order to handle important Government work especially printing of Uganda laws at the time. Interestingly, while Government imported the machine for the said purpose, it went ahead and advertised for the job internationally and awarded the tender to a foreign company thus rendering the equipment idle and useless.  

There is no clear arrangement between Ministry of Finance and UPPC on loan repayment and the loan has accumulated to the tune of Shs 1.5 billion as a result of discrepancies in servicing the loan.

Honourable members, the current Government does not utilise the printer for all the work and most of it is done outside the country in spite of the installed capacity of that printery with good quality work and efficiency. 

We were told and we examined documents that this printery at one time was printing currency for some of our neighbours. 

Outstanding Taxes and Liabilities

UPPC has not paid taxes to the tune of Shs 163.8 million, and owes trade creditors a total of Shs 19.2 million.

Bad Debts

The committee established that Government owed UPPC a lot of money from various government ministries and was proposing to write them off.

Capacity Utilisation

During the financial year 2001/2002, the printery operated at 25 percent of its installed capacity and this was the same the previous financial year and the year after.

Management of the Corporation

The committee observed that the corporation is poorly managed in terms of financial and human resources.  

Recommendations

1. Government should pay all the money it owes UPPC to enable the corporation pay its debts and the Ministry of Finance should recover the money from defaulting ministries, at source.

2. UPPC should clear its tax obligations and reduce its tax burden.

3. The loan owed to UPPC by Government should be treated as Government contribution and be written back to Ministry of Finance.

4. Government should use UPPC not only for saving money, but also to increase capacity utilization. The printing of Government work in one secure place has an added advantage of standardization, security of the documents, efficiency and reduction in fraud and forgery.

5. The Minister should invoke the provisions of section 6(2) of the UPPC Statute, which states that: “Not withstanding the provision of sub-section (1) the minister, after approval by Cabinet, may by statutory instrument direct any minister or department to have its printing and publishing work done at the Corporation”.  

This will increase capacity utilization of the corporation and save Government a lot of money spent on such activities locally and abroad.  

6. The PERD statute of 1993 should be amended in order to classify UPPC from Class IV to Class I so that Government wholly owns it due to its strategic importance. If Government is unable to fund the corporation, it can organize a management contract.

7. Management should urgently be changed to enhance accountability and efficiency.

Honourable Speaker, honourable members, in conclusion, the UPPC is a strategic institution due to the established nature of work and should, therefore, be saved from collapse as revealed in the evidence given by both workers and management. This is due to its security printing consideration and essential services rendered by UPPC in respect of publication of gazettes, legislation, budget speeches, among others. Government should, therefore, wholly retain UPPC.

Honourable members, during the budget speech you know workers are locked out for fear of leaking out secrets to the business community. You might find it very difficult to do the same if you went to Nkurumah road to print budget speeches. Would they not leak? I think Government should have its own kitchen, and printing of documents we have seen here and the cards we receive here in Parliament. We have different logos from different ministries, because they are printed in different places. This is why we have a lot of forgery in printing graduated tax tickets and other official documents.

The issue of retaining it as a public enterprise in class I should be considered seriously by this House. It is the view of the committee that Government will reduce printing costs, maintain standards of official documents, secure classified documents, minimize forgery and create employment.

There is need to bridge the gap between management and workers. This may be achieved by firing the top managers who have been responsible for mismanagement of the corporation.  

There was co-operation from all witnesses and the committee is grateful to all those who volunteered information and those who appeared without hesitation. 

The committee begs the House to adopt the report and the recommendations therein. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you chairperson, and committee for work well done. But before we proceed, I find it irresistible not to mention my pleasure to see that hon. Patrick Mwondha is with us after a long time. You are most welcome. (Applause)
  
3.36
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues, and thank you and the Deputy Speaker for all the commiserations you have made to me, throughout my difficult time of sickness. Many of you trekked all the way and came to see me. I am very grateful that you managed to find time in your busy schedules to visit me. Once again, I thank you, Mr Speaker, and the House. (Applause)

MRS SSENTONGO: As a member of the Committee on Finance, I just wanted to make one correction that is in regard to the lost machine. According to the report it shows that there was no report made to the Police. The report was made, but what surprised the committee is that they reported much later after the theft of the machine. Where was this report made? The machine was stolen from Entebbe but management took the report to CPS, Kampala. We all got surprised and shocked to learn of such a thing. So, when we are debating this kind of report we must be careful. There is a lot hidden into this report and we must be careful when we are considering it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, you are saying the report is not reflecting the true account of things as they happened?  

MRS SSENTONGO:  No, it does -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, this is a report by the committee. Members have signed this report and we are bound to consider this report as presented. I think she has the general case, but since the entire committee did not consider it, we may now have a problem taking into account that particular statement. You known what happens to reports when they are disowned, don’t you? I think we rather – we are not disputing your account but I am only guiding members that now we cannot correct a report, which has already been presented.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I think I come short of ruling my colleague out of order because what she is talking of is covered in the report, on page 4. It is all covered in the report. I can read it for her: “Management did not react quickly to report the theft of the printing of the machine. The report was much later and the committee wondered why there was such a delay.”

MRS SSENTONGO: My worry was about where was the report made. The report was made in Kampala instead of Entebbe. So, I want to guide the House that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There could be many reasons for reporting to Nateete rather than reporting to Katwe. Ddepending on the assessment of the efficiency or the involvement of the Police, you may suspect them. When you suspect something then you report to a bigger – but I think let us take the report as it is.

3.35
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, there are many questions arising from what the member of the committee has just stated to the minds of those who are not members of this committee. I would like to know more and the complete story about the stolen machine. I would like to seek clarification in the following way:

The Police post that would have received the first information should have been Entebbe. The management preferred to come to Kampala, as we are now being made to know. May I know from the committee, what were the fundamental reasons to justify that? During their time of inquiry for the report, why was the report not made immediately at Entebbe Police Station and instead made at Central Police Station, Kampala? What was the constraint and what was the impediment that was encountered by the management to make them feel safer that they should report to Kampala Central Police Station and not Entebbe?

Secondly, we are also being made to know that the management did not stick closely to discipline, those people who were supposed to guard this machine – the guards on duty, for example. Why was that the case?  

Lastly, it is also stated that this machine was a heavy one and it could not have been stolen without the knowledge of an insider. Did the committee, in its own investigations, find out what were the various constraints that made it difficult for the management to discipline those people who were guards on duty?  

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we are going to deal with the report. Part of what hon. Eresu has said is a contribution to the report, but part of it would require us to make further investigations into the matter. I do not think we should do that because then we have to call the management and that will be another inquiry. You can criticize the report, but embarking on a further inquiry will really be a futile exercise. Let us see the strengths and weaknesses of the report; you can point them out, but let us proceed with the debate.

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, I seek for your guidance on two sections: one, whether the petition that is being made and allegations being made are referring to our colleague, hon. Akisoferi Ogola, who is part of us? 

Two, if this is the case, would it be worthwhile for us to debate and take a decision when the member is here, particularly looking at the Leadership Code on the area of conflicts of interests when a decision is being taken or being discussed to a member who is part of that issue?

THE SPEAKER: Which part of the report are you talking about?  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I want to clarify to members, on page 3, the Chairman of the Board is our Colleague, hon. Ogola, and he is with us in the House.

THE SPEAKER: I have looked at this report, that is page 3 to page 4 and they say: “Notwithstanding the pending privatization, a new Board of Directors should be appointed.” It seems that the term of the board has expired, and it is not hon. Ogola to appoint himself, it is the Minister to appoint him.  This is a case, which is backed up by the provisions of the Act. What is prejudicial there?

MRS ZZIWA: I just wanted to find out, Mr Speaker, whether the committee accorded him an opportunity to hear from him, having realized that he was such a key factor in the institution they were investigating.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the chairman then the Hon. Ogola will –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Hon. Ogola appeared before the committee and he co-operated with us. We found no problem with him, and our recommendations are very clear. I think what is disturbing members is that they received these reports early and they do not have them. But most of these issues that are being raised are contained in the report.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see anything really prejudicial there; the term expired. If the minister wants to re-appoint or appoint others, it is really up to the minister.

PROF. KASENENE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. As the report indicated, UPPC was incorporated in January this year, and by implication the term of the board has expired and the new board is going to be put in place. We are in the process of consulting in order to form a new board. As soon as the consultations are over, a new board is going to be in place, and the honourable member will not be on that board.  

3.48
MR MICHAEL OGOLA (West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad to be able to say few words about this report. The allegations that gave rise to the investigations of the Committees on Finance and National Economy are apparently written by someone, who is supposed to be an employee of the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation. But we did inform the committee that a person by the name of John Kiiza is not known in the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation. He is not an employee there, but it is him who is supposed to have written the allegations and supposedly with some members of the union. 

They also found it necessary to send their report to where they thought probably they would be heard best and this was to the State House. I found it necessary to bring the matter back to Parliament and Mr Speaker you assigned this duty to the Committee on Finance. I was summoned together with the board of management to appear before the committee and we were very obliging. We answered most of the questions, if not all of them, with absolute candidness. We also appreciated the fact that even though this faceless character alleges many things, even a dirty cloud has a sliver lining. So, I may be proving this in his absentia but this is useful because this is a national property, this is a Government property and it deserves to be handled carefully. So, we did not mind the fact that we were called into this by allegations of someone who pretended to be a worker but was not.  

Mr Speaker, a good number of observations by the committee are valid in their own context. However, we wanted the committee to know and what we told them was that when we were appointed members of the committee, it was way back in 1993 by the former Prime Minister Kintu Musoke after the Act forming the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation was passed in 1992. About the same time Government was then interested in privatization and as the privatization was carried out there were some areas where Government showed they were not interested at all. 

So, we found ourselves there and a good number of us, I can tell you there was hon. Manzi Tumubweine who later became a Minister in Government, hon. Ambassador Kirabo Kya Maria who has been an Ambassador to Italy, Mr Sam Bisase a celebrated auditor in town, the former Minister hon. Rhoda Kalema, a Commissioner in the Ministry of Finance, Oluka, an engineer and computer expert L.L. Obonyo (Interruption)

MR RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, hon. Ogola was one of the witnesses. He appeared before the committee. We asked him many things and the committee has only picked out those we considered to be of substance to this House. Is he procedurally right now to appear in the House as if he is responding to queries we asked him some time ago?

MRS MASIKO: I think it is also very difficult on our part to debate a report where the Member of Parliament was a chairman of a board and imagine the board he was supervising, the whole group of people have been implicated. Therefore, it would be appropriate if one were free to discuss without him around so that we are able to air out whatever we want to talk about.

MR OGOLA: Mr Speaker, I would be prepared to leave the House to make everyone at ease. But I would like to request that the report leaves out fundamental accusations against me and it is silent completely and yet these allegations were already made public. So, I demand that I be exonerated because those allegations were lies. Once I am exonerated, I will walk out, your honour. I am prepared to do so.

THE SPEAKER: So, he is going to point out the weaknesses or the gaps in the repot. After that you leave and we take into account what you have said.

MRS ZZIWA: Would this be procedurally right, particularly considering that that would come in as a personal explanation? Under the circumstances we would really like to know.

THE SPEAKER: No, he is saying that there are gaps in the report you want to consider without hearing his side of the story. The problem is, he was here when the report was read and he is saying something was left out. He wants to point them out and then you assess them. Otherwise, when are you going to afford him the opportunity to bring up the gaps after you have adopted the report? Please, continue and after you have finished you go out.

MR OGOLA: Thank you, Sir. First, there was an allegation that there was nepotism. I employed my daughter by the name of Arinaitwe somebody –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it said so?

MR OGOLA: The committee called me and I denied that vigorously and I know I denied it because it is an honest position of mine. I never had my daughter working there or my son or my cousin - (Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, the committee has given a very elaborate report on the petitions that were presented to this Parliament and the report has been distributed to all members. Would it not be procedurally correct if the honourable member holding the Floor could, if he so wishes, make a comprehensive response to the report as it proceeds from page 1 to the last page? That way it would be considered alongside this report for this House to be able take a more informed position on these matters. 

Because I have not come across any statement in this report where the honourable member is being accused and yet he is still bringing the same matters to the Floor. Would it not be procedurally correct if he could also make a comprehensive response to this report of the committee, which has been presented instead of  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have made the point. The point is this, honourable members, the dilemma we have is that the report was read when the member was here. He says that there is certain key information, which was not considered by the committee and the committee has finalized its work. The honourable member is saying we get something in writing and we compare the two. But that would be further investigations as I see. That would mean we do not proceed with debating this until we have got that written statement from him.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I do understand that the member’s right to participate in the proceedings of this House is inalienable except when it is a breach of the proceedings of the august House. Would it be proper for us to exclude a member on a matter, which is nothing to do with the proceedings of the House except an accusation from outside? His right to be heard and proceed and participate in the proceedings in this august House is inalienable, except when it is a matter of breach on the proceedings of the august House.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what the honourable member has said is that he is willing to go out but he wanted to give us these facts. Hon. Katirima has suggested that let him give this in writing and we consider it together with the report. What is better? May be we get it in writing, there are more details, and then we embark on the report. But definitely we cannot close him out, now he is here and he says there are weaknesses here and there, we cannot say, “We cannot listen to you”.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the House that the problem we are having is that people are contributing without the report. I want to refer to hon. Ogola specifically to say that serious accusations were left out on page 4, 5.3: Theft of company’s property. “The petitioner has alleged that the Chairman of the Board, hon. A. Ogola, Managing Director, Ms Elizabeth Bakawa, Administrative Manager, Mrs Hope Rwagoma, directly participated in the theft of a Gestetner machine worth Shs 20 million around march 2000.” 

So, it is not true that we have left that point out. We have made observations and recommendations. We did not find evidence that he was directly involved. So, I do not know why there is a lot of fuss, may be people should go and collect the copies of their report and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, honourable chairman, you have made a report but somebody thinks that, “No, there things are lacking”. You cannot come up and say, “No, there is nothing lacking”. What I can do is that since hon. Ogola has some knowledge of what happened, we should give him an opportunity to present this in writing and then we shall consider the two together. Otherwise, I do not see how I say, “Do not talk”. It is not fair. 

Hon. Ogola, since the report affects you in one way or the other, why don’t you get some time and you write down your view? We can postpone the debate until we have got what you have and we consider it. That will be better. 

MR OGOLA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am ready to take your advice. The only reason I am saying that there were allegations against me, I was invited by the committee, I answered questions put to me, and those are the answers I thought would come out clearly. 

That was not the only issue; the other issue is that I stole Shs 96 million.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable member, we are giving you time. You take time to write and we shall consider it. But do it as soon as possible because we want to dispose of this report before the end of that month. I think it is better that way.

Honourable members, because of that development we have come to the end of today’s business. But I want to make this statement from the Electoral Commission.  

Honourable members, as you may recall some time back the Electoral Commission drew your attention to the request for us to have our records updated and also to encourage our voters to do the same. For two days, April 15th to 16th, the Electoral Commission officers will have a desk in the Members’ Lounge, on the 3rd Floor, here in Parliament House to enable you have your record updated. It has transpired that some of us are not in the records of the Electoral Commission; this may be by mistake. So, they will come here tomorrow, the 15th, and on the 16th, to give us an opportunity to check the records. If you are not there, then they can register you in your particular polling station or constituency.  

This is a service, which is being brought to us here, although we should have gone to our respective constituencies. This will start at 9.00 a.m. tomorrow. So, please go and check and see whether you are there. If you are not, then they will record you. This will help you to encourage your voters to go and register because this process is a continuous one so that when time comes for voting everybody is there.

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.04 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 April 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)



