Wednesday, 14 April 2010

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)
 
The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I am sorry that yesterday I was not with you. I had gone for burial but this morning I was happy to read in the papers that you were able to dispose of a Bill within 30 minutes. Thank you very much and congratulations! I appeal to you that you use the same speed for other Bills that are essential for proper elections in Uganda. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

(I) REQUEST TO BORROW JAPANESE YEN 3,395,000,000 FROM JAPAN INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AGENCY (JICA) FOR FINANCING THE UPGRADING OF GULU – NIMULE ROAD PROJECT UNDER THE TRANSPORT SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (TSDP)
 
2.50
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Mr Speaker, I am sorry to report that my colleague is not yet here, but she is in the corridors and just about to arrive.

(II) REQUEST TO BORROW JPY 5,406,000,000 (US$55.0 M) FROM JAPAN INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AGENCY (JICA) TO CO-FINANCE THE INTERCONNECTION OF ELECTRIC GRIDS OF THE 5 NILE EQUATORIAL LAKE COUNTRIES

2.51
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Mr Speaker, once again I regret to report that my colleague is yet to arrive, but she should be here in less than 48 seconds. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON DISTRIBUTION OF JOBS IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE

THE SPEAKER: Where are the copies? Okay. Read the statement and let the copies be distributed. 

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker, the copies are on the way coming. If I can be allowed to read the statement - the honourable member who raised the issue has a copy. 

THE SPEAKER: We are all interested in having copies, but since you said the copies are available, we believe you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Through you, can we be advised when we shall have those copies? We are going to debate her statement and – 

THE SPEAKER: The copies are coming.

MR KATUNTU: What I was asking, Mr Speaker, is when will they be available?

THE SPEAKER: We have not been able to deal with the two items – Okay, you read your statement.

MRS SEZI: Thank you Mr Speaker. During the sitting of Parliament on the 24 February 2010, hon. Reagan Okumu, MP Aswa County, Gulu District, raised the matter of senior appointment to Government departments, UPDF, Police, Prisons, statutory authorities and agencies. He expressed dissatisfaction with the job distribution in the Public Service. In the honourable member’s view, the job distribution was badly tilted. 

Parliament requested Government to provide information regarding these appointments taking into account regional distribution. 

The objective of this statement is to inform Parliament about how appointments are made in the Public Service.

The historical perspective

Mr Speaker, it should be noted that the distribution of public officers in Uganda is not by design. To a greater extent, it has its roots from historical perspectives ushered in by the colonial administration whereby certain sections of Ugandans were made dominant in particular engagements.

Further, civil strife and wars in the northern part of the country has affected development in these areas in general and the education system in particular. Consequently, this has impacted on the competitiveness of Public Service jobs. (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Let her read her statement.

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, I am providing the special contribution to meet the interventions, particularly in the north and northern east. You will see it in the statement as soon as it is distributed.

It is important to note how appointments are made in the Public Service in order to determine whether the job distribution in the Public Service is badly tilted. 

All appointments –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, we are really at a loss. Firstly, the minister has refused to tell us when this statement will be available. Secondly, she is going into details for which we will need to refer to, but we have no statement. Really, if she wanted us to debate her statement, I propose –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members want copies but the copies are not here. Since we do not have any other item, proceedings are suspended for 10 minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended at 2.56 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.15 p.m. _)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, business was suspended to enable the minister get copies for honourable members but since this is taking time, I suggest that as we are waiting, we move to the second item or statement, and that is the statement of the Minister of Health. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. Based on the traditional conduct of business in this House, where we come here and suspend some issue for a moment and it gets into oblivion for good - this is a very important issue and it is the matter for which we had a break! It has taken too long and if I may be allowed to recall that many other issues had gone forever when we were waiting for them the next morning or afternoon. 

One time we had the Minister of Internal Affairs promising us that he was going to bring a statement following the deaths in Makerere. It was supposed to be brought the following morning, but it has never been brought. We are waiting for many other statements. This one has taken a lot of time. I would beg for your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that we insist on this statement to come. Because this business is going to eat up our time and we shall find other things taking up the place of this important issue.

MR SPEAKER: We have not backtracked on that. What I am saying is that we save time by getting another statement as we wait for copies of the statement. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF LONG LASTING 
INSECTICIDE TREATED NETS

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE)(Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On behalf of the Ministry of Health, we found it very prudent that we give this information to the august House so that we move together. 

You remember, Mr Speaker, in August 2005, the Global Fund suspended implementation of its grants to Uganda and disbanded the Programme Management Unit. Government then engaged the services of a caretaker management firm, that is, Ernst & Young, for management of lifesaving interventions. This resulted from mismanagement of Global Fund grants. 

During the transitional period, the government has been negotiating with the Global Fund on how to provide fiduciary insurance while using the Global Fund grants. The government, therefore, proposed the use of national mechanisms, in a strategy paper named “The Long-term Institutional Arrangements, for the Better Management and Fiduciary Assurance for the Global Fund Investments.” 

The Global Fund Secretariat gave no objection to this arrangement. The Health Policy Advisory Committee (Health Sector Coordination Committee) and the Partnership Committee (AIDS Response Coordination Committee) have assumed the roles of the Country Coordinating Mechanism (CCM). The Country Coordinating Mechanism and the Principle Recipient perform functions of grant oversight, programme management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation, support supervision and reporting. 

Mr Speaker, I am pleased to inform you that the Global Fund grants have resumed flowing normally. The Government of Uganda successfully applied for funding from the Global Fund to procure and distribute 17,666,984 Long Lasting Insecticide treated Nets in the Round Seven grant signed in July 2008. 

The Round Seven grant has a total of 17,666,984 Long Lasting Insecticide treated Nets. Phase 1 will constitute 7,295,850 costed at US$ 40,985,476.50 and will be distributed to pregnant women and children under five years of age. 

In the initial proposal, it has been estimated that this quantity of Long Lasting Insecticide treated Nets would be distributed during 2008-2013. However, the government proposes to accelerate the process in order to procure and distribute the Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets by December 2010 including the phase 2 nets, to meet the Abuja target of universal coverage with Long Lasting Insecticide treated Nets.

The procurement process for the phase 1 Long Lasting Insecticide treated Nets was done through Voluntary Pooled Procurement (VPP) organised globally by the Global Fund, who secured a Voluntary Pooled Procurement agent called Population Services International based in Washington DC. 

PSI has contracted a local affiliate in Uganda called Programme for Accelerated Health Communication and Education (PACE) to manage the delivery of the Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets up to the sub-county level. Below the sub-county level, the distribution will be conducted through the national structures.

Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to provide information to members of parliament on this important intervention and seek your support in explaining the intervention and mobilising the appropriate response from the public in order to achieve maximum results in the control of Malaria.

I would like to say that as much as we are using this measure, and within this budget year we propose that – it is a strategy to go for vector control of Malaria, and we also think that preventive measures should be taken. We think within this budget year 2010/11, we shall also have internal residual spraying and larvae site chemicals. 

Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets distribution strategies:

Selection of the main target population

Allocation of nets to the sub-counties has been done to prioritise people in sub-counties that have not received Long Lasting Insecticide treated Nets in the last three years, and those who received nets that are expiring and need replacement. The populations from these sub-counties were then quantified using population projections of 2010 from the 2002 census data and percentage based estimations for pregnant women and children under five. That is between five percent and 25 percent respectively, also based on census data.

Distribution agents

The Ministry of Health has contracted 16 pre-qualified civil society organisations. The ministry will sign contracts with these civil society organisations detailing the modalities of operation, reporting and accountability regarding the campaign process. The majority of the civil society organisations will be responsible for the distribution of the nets within the districts. A few will conduct behavioural change communication or both activities.

Pre-distribution plan:

Phase mass campaigns

This will be to ensure equitable distribution of the nets. The government has planned to distribute the nets through mass campaigns, in a phased approach, region by region following the delivery cycles.

The phasing of regions has been based on the levels of coverage following the targeted distribution period 2005 to 2009 such that the low coverage regions will be served before the high coverage regions until the entire country is covered. There is an annex of the distribution orders.

Pre-distribution activities:

The campaign will involve pre-distribution activities, which will include: Review of the Long Lasting Insecticide treated Nets; procurement and transportation contracts; placement of the nets orders considering the VPP approach; sampling and testing the nets; storage of the nets; communication support; training of the distribution teams; orientation of central supervisors from the Ministry of Health staff and civil society organisations; training of portable data assistants; pre-visits to districts and transportation; and the clearance of the nets.

Stakeholder participation

The exercise will involve members of parliament, district, sub-county, parish and local council one leaders, and village health teams. Each of these has very specific roles to play during the distribution exercise. We found it better to include political leaders, Mr Speaker, because the recent exercise of polio where we included members of parliament and other political leaders yielded almost 99 percent of results.

Registration and targeted beneficiaries

The distribution activities will include registration of all pregnant women and children below five. However, we will also register all household members with their occupants so that once this round of distribution is completed, in a subsequent round a possible inverse coverage can be implemented easily using these same village registers.

Storage facilities

The Ministry of Health has already communicated to all chief administrative officers in the concerned districts to identify and secure storage space at each sub-county. And all central region districts have confirmed to be having storage space in each of the sub-counties to benefit. 

Post distribution activities

Follow-up on the use of Long Lasting Insecticide treated Nets. 

The post distribution activities will include the “hang-up your Long Lasting Insecticide treated Net” campaign integrated with the behavioural change communication, monitoring, supervision and evaluation of the exercise. This will cut across the whole exercise and the post evaluation coverage and utilisation survey.

Coverage and utilization survey

The coverage and utilisation survey shall be conducted two months after the campaign to establish the effectiveness of this campaign.

Security of supplies

To minimize leakage, the nets will be secured by the supplier before delivery to the sub-counties. The Voluntary Pooled Procurement contracted agent, the programme for accelerated health communication and education, will carry out strategy of the nets at a central location in Kampala, break bulk and load quantities into smaller trucks for delivery to the sub-counties. 

The programme for accelerated health communication and education will ensure security of the nets. It is their responsibility to identify and hire appropriate storage.

Delivery at the district and sub-county level

Once the nets are cleared by National Drug Authority and Uganda National Bureau of Standards, the programme for accelerated health communication and education will directly deliver the nets to the sub-county stores. At this point, the nets will change hands from the programme for accelerated health communication and education to the contracted civil society organisation in the presence of the district and sub-county leadership. The nets will then be counted and receipt of will be properly acknowledged by the civil society organisation that will ensure their safety through distribution to the end users.

Monitoring and evaluation

The Ministry of Health and district health teams will be mainly responsible for monitoring and supervision of the entire campaign. According to the planned campaign activities, there will be rigorous advocacy and information education communication exercises before, during and after the actual distribution of the nets to the households.

A national launch and breakfast targeting the Members of Parliament and other influential figures at the national level has been planned. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I request honourable colleagues to note that the planned accelerated Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets distribution activity is a major drive towards control of Malaria in Uganda.

I also call upon them to support this intervention by way of information dissemination, participation, community mobilisation, supervision and monitoring. Thank you very much, for listening to me, honourable colleagues. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much hon. Minister; save I must say that the words, “Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets”, have been overused. They could have been used once and resorted to an abbreviation to refer to them. Anyway, thank you very much. (Laughter)

3.32
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for this statement. However, I wish to seek clarification on some issues. 

On page 5, the minister talks about participation of the stakeholders and mentions annexure one, which I incidentally have not had the opportunity to look at. I do not know whether my colleagues have seen it, but the copy of the statement that I have does not have that annexure. So, the role to be played by the political class is not clear to some of us. He has said that as Members of Parliament, we shall be involved in the distribution, but I do not know how the mechanism will be worked out in that regard. 

Secondly, let me say something about the choice of the target group. Pregnant women and children below five years. I do not know the criteria that was used to determine this age for children; for the pregnant women it is understandable. Why not 10 years for children? Are you saying you do not have enough capacity? Is it a question of funds? We need to get some clarification in that regard. 

Again, Mr Speaker, I see that the original arrangement was to spread out the exercise up to 2013, but now it has been brought forward and specifically to December 2010, yet you and I know what will be happening in this country during that time – we will be in the heat of campaigns. So, I do not know how this programme is going to be executed alongside the hectic campaigns we shall be having. I hope it will not be construed as bribery because it is a crime to distribute goodies during that period. I do not know why the minister considered it necessary to bring the programme forward. Why didn’t you leave it to the earlier arrangement of spreading it out to 2013? What could be the reasons that forced you to do that? Otherwise, I thank you for delivering this statement. I hope it will work out to curb –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, are you affected if this exercise is implemented in the shorter rather than in the longer term?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, it is good the minister has mentioned something about the Abuja Protocol. We have, time and again, said that the Abuja Protocol is quite instrumental and there are targets that are more of a priority than even this Long Lasting–(Interjections)– yes, I earlier on mentioned this on the Floor of this Houseand I wish to reiterate it. The primary target for curbing Malaria in this country – forget about the Millennium  Development Goals – under the Abuja Protocol, we committed ourselves, as a country, that we would commit 15 percent of our budget to the health sector. Now, what is the position as of today? Before we even talk about distributing these nets, have we complied with that? We have not! Look, the percentage is now less than 10, yet under the Abuja Protocol, it is supposed to be 15. So, we are just beating around the bush by trying to handle matters in a manner, which is not systematic. Let us start with the primary objectives.

But all said and done, Mr Speaker, I appreciate this venture only that I need clarifications on those issues. I thank you very much.

3.37
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice in thanking the minister for this statement. First, I would like to seek clarification from the minister, what the lifespan of these Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets is.

Two, I would like to find out from the minister the mechanisms that have been put in place in order to protect and prevent the leakages of these nets from being sold in shops. I remember sometime back in the Seventh Parliament some of the nets that were distributed were later found in shops. So, what mechanisms are you going to put in place to prevent this from happening?

Thirdly, I am happy that the minister has said that his ministry is going to venture into a detailed mechanism of trying to completely eradicate Malaria from Uganda. I wish the ministry takes this on because this is what will, in the end, address the issue of Malaria. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.39
DR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would also like to thank the minister for the statement.

I would like to seek clarification in regard to the pre-distribution activities. There is a long list of pre-distribution activities, but what I do not see is how you are preparing the recipients on the appropriate use of these nets. I am saying this because the ease of setting up these nets will depend on the type of house and bedding one has. It might be easier for one to hang this net if they have a raised bed and it will be difficult for those who use floored beds, especially in areas that have been under insurgency. 

I am also wondering whether there are other paraphernalia that will come with these nets, for example, setting-up frames or providing them with means on how to improvise some sort of frame for hanging these nets. Otherwise, if we ignore all that, we may end up with a situation of misuse where some people may end up using some of the nets in making shirts and so on.

We may also need monitoring activities to ascertain whether the nets have been put to use. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from hon. Baba Diri.

3.40
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for the statement. I know that these Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets are very important in the process of eradicating Malaria.

But what I would like to know - since we have also been empowered to ensure that they are evenly distributed to the people - in every home, I assume, on average there are children below the age of five. Are you going to give each child a mosquito net? Or will you give an average of two or three nets per family. How are they going to be distributed? 

Lastly, I would like to emphasise again, these NGOs that you have entrusted to distribute; are they going to do this work voluntarily or are you going to give them something? I am saying this because if they are not given anything, they may end up selling our nets. So, what are you paying them to ensure that they do not sell off these nets? Thank you.

3.42
MS SUZAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few questions for the minister. One, on page three; I would like the minister to tell us the criteria that they will use to select the civil society organisations that they are going to work with in the distribution of these nets.

Secondly, I would like to say that I am not convinced about the distribution strategy, because I understand this is not the most sustainable and effective strategy for distribution of these nets.

Mr Speaker, hon. Lukwago queried why pregnant women and children below five years. We all know that pregnant women and children below five years are more vulnerable to Malaria in this country. So, I think they should be given first priority, and according to the demographic and health survey report of 2006, it is clearly reported that pregnant women and children below five years are more vulnerable to Malaria. So, they need serious attention.

I would also like to know from the minister about the timing for the distribution. The timing for distribution is suspect in this case; NRM may use these supplies –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, my colleagues who are familiar with the writings of Chinua Achebe would know the story of a tortoise which fell into a pit latrine and stayed there for two market weeks. When they came to pull him out, he said, “Quick, quick, I cannot stand the stench.” Now, we have lived without these nets for ages, surely, we can wait for another week or two; it is not going to make much difference. (Laughter) 

My problem here is the timing of the distribution of these nets. As my colleague is saying, I think we are likely to use it for some political mileage. Thank you. 

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for that information. 

Lastly, I would also like to know from the minister why he has not mentioned anything about the mechanism to ensure that these mosquito nets are not used for fishing, especially by the people who live by the lake shores. Some people use these nets for fishing. (Laughter) 

Otherwise, we support this initiative by Government. We see that this is the only hope to fight Malaria other than using DDT. The use of DDT is so primitive, especially in Uganda, because it was outlawed 40 years ago. So, I do not expect anybody to mention DDT. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.48
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for presenting this statement. In my opinion, what is being done today or planned to be done as mentioned in this report should have started much earlier. Today, we have Malaria problems that have gone beyond preventive measures. More and more children and pregnant mothers are suffering due to lack of drugs in health centres. 

The cure has to be addressed alongside the issue of prevention. What are we going to do about those who already carry the disease? The exercise here is to prevent the spread of Malaria, but what about the cure? I would like to urge, therefore, the Ministry of Health to consider, side-by-side, the exercise of prevention with intensive treatment – intensive handling of the problem of Malaria by curing and providing medicines to the health centres.

We also have a problem of sustainability and continuity. On my own behalf, and on behalf of the people of Obongi, whom I represent here, I would like to ask, what mechanisms do we have in place to help people continue on their own should the ministry fail to provide nets? Where will the people get the funds to get such Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.50
MRS BEATRICE BYENKYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My comments are very few and brief. One of them is to do with the civil society organisations. The other time when they came into the district, they were working on their own and they had instructions that they should not work with the local leaders. In fact, in Hoima, they got lost; they did not know the actual places and they ended up distributing in places where they ought not to. So, this time, we wish to be told of the CSOs that are to come so that we can easily monitor and probably be of help to them. 

The other time, they distributed four nets per household and that one net should be for the master of the home –(Interjections)– yes, at least in Hoima that was the information that was circulated around. That it should be for the man, and the other three nets were for the younger children. 

However, you do find that in some homes, there are about five children below five, not necessarily biological children of that family, but they are being taken care of. So, we should increase on the number of nets per household.

Then, there was an anomaly, only depending on the LCs. In the areas near the town, the nets were sold. It is a fact that they were sold at a price ranging between Shs 2,000 to Shs 5,000. The LCs connived with some of the people who were being given nets and they would say, “You are supposed to get four nets, but once I give you the other four, they will be mine.” So, at least a third of the nets in the town were sold. We should try to avoid the selling off of the nets this time. 

We should also sensitise the people on how to use these nets. In fact, it is true that on the lake shores, the people end up misusing the nets for fishing and others use them as lining curtains or as tablecloths. Others put them on as night dresses or even as a wedding dress. People do look at the nets as an opportunity –(Laughter)– we may laugh at these things, but we see them among our people. So, we should sensitise the populace about how to use these nets. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.53
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the honourable minister for the statement. But I am convinced that efficiency was at the heart of deciding on the distribution model. 

The minister on page 3 of the statement indicates that the ministry will use 16 pre-qualified civil society organisations, and we envisage that this contract to be signed, definitely has a cost implication, which the minister and the statement, all through, have been very quiet about. 

The clarification that I would like to seek from the honourable minister is that, if you considered the stock of the nets that you hope to distribute throughout the country against the stated amount of money to be spent, this House would also be glad to get an indication on how efficiently you hope to distribute these nets, because there is no indication on what the cost of distribution of the nets will be. That is the clarification I would wish to seek from the honourable minister. Thank you very much.

3.55
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable minister for the information and the strategic plan the Ministry of Health has made to distribute mosquito nets. I am not very happy, because the mosquito nets may not eradicate Malaria, but at least they will reduce the level of Malaria that people get.

Of the things that we have in this country, Malaria is one of the worst killer diseases, and we should look at Malaria very critically, and not to only use nets, but use the spraying method as well, to eradicate Malaria. The question is, what do we use for spraying?  DDT; I think we accepted in this House, that one-time DDT spraying is quite good, and that we can use it in this country. Why? We have experiences. 

Personally, I have a lot of experience on DDT use; there was DDT powder one time. My father used to preserve beans with DDT powder and we all ate those beans and non of us died and I am still healthy -(Laughter)- yes! And we also used to - it can be primitive, but if it is available, it is better than a mosquito net. Because one; it will protect almost everybody and the whole family, but here we have mosquito nets which are very few and because they are few, we are now saying we need to only give to pregnant mothers and children under five, which means it is an emergency type of situation. If we really need to eradicate Malaria in Uganda, we have to accept the spraying of DDT and finish -(Interjections)- yes!

I also want to thank the ministry for coming out with the mosquito nets. I know that the mosquito nets may not be quite enough, but it is better than nothing. Members of parliament here need to plan together with the Ministry of Health on how we can eradicate Malaria in this country, because it is a fast killer; actually it kills more than AIDS which we work so hard to fight. Thank you.

3.58
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Mr Speaker, the distribution of mosquito nets is a great preventive mechanism against the spread of Malaria, and I would like to laud the ministry for taking this bold step. I hope they do it very effectively. I am concerned that the district of Kampala is not included among those districts due for first deliveries, and yet Kampala has got a very serious problem of Malaria because of the fact that most of it is in a wetland. 

Many people have constructed in wetlands which are breeding grounds for mosquitoes. So, I am wondering why Kampala is not among the urgent cases that have been listed.

Number two; in line with this, and of very great concern is that expired Malaria drugs are finding their way into the market. All of us know that expired drugs have got fatal side effects and we are questioning the negligence of either the ministry or National Medical Stores on how these expired Malaria drugs are finding their way into the market. We are having so many cases in Kampala and the cases are fatal. Kids are getting blind and many other side effects —

MS KAMYA: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. The issues that my colleague, hon. Mabikke, is raising with respect to Kampala’s share of national programmes are very important. The information I want to give my colleague as he develops that point is that most Government programmes do not actually include Kampala. 

With regard to UPE and USE, Kampala benefits up to two percent only; Kampala is not a beneficiary of the rural electrification programme -(Interjections)- yes, until recently. Kampala until recently was not a beneficiary of the NAADS programme, because it is assumed that the people of Kampala are rich, but for us who live in the slums of Kampala, we know that children do not go to school; and we know that people practically live in trenches. 

Hon. Member, as you develop the point about Kampala, this House should know that while Kampala contributes 80 percent to the treasury, it is highly marginalised in Government programmes. I thank you.

MR MABIKKE: Yes, I think that is why we need federalism. You forgot to say that.

Finally, I would like to ask the honourable minister to say something about the issue of these expired Malaria drugs. Thank you very much.

4.04
MR ACHIA REMEGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the minister with regard to the cost of these nets. On page 2, paragraph three says that of the 17.6 million nets, they are going to purchase 7.2 million nets using 40 million, equivalent to US$ 5,476.5. A simple calculation indicates that each net would cost about US$ 6 -(Interjections)- each treated net will cost US$ 6 excluding the cost of transporting it, storing it, distributing it, sensitisation and all of that. 

Mr Speaker, I want to know from the minister whether this was the cheapest provider of this type of net -

THE SPEAKER: You mean, you are suggesting that US$ 6 is too much?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: It is on the high side. Ordinarily -

THE SPEAKER: That is Shs 10,000.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, that is about Shs 12,000. Ordinarily, treated nets in Kampala cost about Shs 10,000 and you have heard from one honourable member that because they are fungible, some people even go ahead and sell them at Shs 2,000 to Shs 5,000.

If you go ahead and - now with about US$ 41 million you are able to buy 7 million nets from the 17.6 million; that leaves a total of 10.4 million not bought. If we go by the same arithmetic, it would cost another 50 to 60 million to buy the balance of nets left. That brings the total budget to over US$ 100 million, which is about Shs 200 billion. We are going to spend about Shs 200 billion on nets. Is this the cheapest provider of these nets? Are we being cost-effective by spending Shs 200 billion on 17.6 million nets?

Secondly, this is not clear and yet it is very important. My colleagues have mentioned it as well. The idea of sensitisation of the beneficiaries is very important. I had an experience last year. With the support of UNICEF, we were able to distribute nets in my constituency and many constituencies in Karamoja. By just the use of simple words, we told people, “When you go into your grass-thatched house, tie your net to the roof then you will lower it down around where you are sleeping.” People actually climbed their grass-thatched houses and tied the roofs and so the next day when we went round we saw villages covered in white with nets. (Laughter) We had to go back and say, “Not outside the roof of the hut. You go inside the hut, find where to tie the net and then lower it down and peg it around your sleeping area.”

So, it is very important to sensitise people on how to make good use of these nets. It looks simple, but it is very important to sensitise them so that we get value for money.

That is the clarification I wanted to seek, as well as to emphasise the idea of sensitising the beneficiaries to properly receive and use these nets. Thank you.

4.08
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Previously, the ministry used to put some nets at the health centres and this was a motivation for pregnant women. It would make them go for the antenatal clinics. Now that we have NGOs who are going home to home giving out these mosquito nets, are we sure that these pregnant mothers will continue to go to the health centres for the antenatal clinics?

Another thing is that the districts I have seen are all from the central region. I wanted to know from the minister when the districts from West Nile, specifically Yumbe, will be brought on board. Does it mean that it is the Central which is much more affected by the Malaria vector than other districts? What criteria did we use to specifically select districts within the central region other than other regions? Thank you very much.

4.11
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, thank you. I wish to thank the Minister of Health for the statement read to us with regard to long-lasting insecticide treated nets. On the onset, I would like to find out from the minister, what is long-lasting? Is it the insecticide that is used for treating the mosquito nets or is it the nets that are treated using an insecticide or both? I am asking this question because I know that previously, most perforated mosquito nets have been supplied to communities and unfortunately, in most communities, especially rural communities, these perforated mosquito nets do not last. The reason is that they tear so easily and in some communities our people still use papyrus mats for a bed and mattress. And so when they tuck in these mosquito nets below the papyrus mats, they are prone to rapid tear. 

So, I do not know if the cost is not prohibitive, that in future when we engage in such a programme, especially when we are targeting women and children, a small one-inch mattress accompanies the mosquito net. That way - Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- it sounds ridiculous to Members, but I think I would like to make my point this way - the cost of replacement of a mosquito net could be cheaper than the cost of a one-inch mattress. 

I would like to call the attention of the House to page 4 and 5 where the minister outlines the distribution activities of the mosquito nets. I would like to observe that some of the activities are non-core activities and they are, in my opinion, just going towards spending money unnecessarily. I want to draw the attention of the minister towards this training, orientation and all these non-core activities that he has chosen to conduct in the process of distribution of nets. 

Honourable members, you will agree with me that distribution of nets is not about to be a new activity in this country. And so basing on what my colleague from Pian County raised on matters of costs, these are areas where costs could be avoided. I do not see why you should carry out an orientation of central supervisors yet you already have people in the system who understand what to do. 

I even do not know why it is necessary to train distributing teams, because down in the local governments, through the health services of districts, it is possible to utilize the already existing distributors. We already have distributors who distribute drugs and I do not know why the ministry is choosing this approach of reinventing the wheel to get new people who need to be trained in a fairly simple activity like distribution of mosquito nets.  

I would like in conclusion to observe that you are definitely as a ministry going to hit a snug when it comes to storage of these treated nets. Some of the Gombololas as you will agree, have got limited storage capacity. I would like to suggest that in order to minimize loss - because you will sometimes not guarantee that these mosquito nets are secure - it is done in such away that the moment the nets are delivered, the recipients of the nets come to the Gombolola headquarters and are given their mosquito nets there and then. I think that you are going to cut on the costs; you are also going to cut on possible losses given our experience with the Global Fund. 

You have rightly said that the Global Fund run into problems; I know this is a matter of investigation. But I think that it will be total negligence on our part as a country to run into the same problems that we run into a few years ago. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.18
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank the minister for this statement. I would like to request the minister to include the elderly, especially those above 65 years on page 5, because they are also very vulnerable. On page 5, they are saying there is another round, but I would request that they are also added on that list.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to request that as they distribute these mosquito nets, we also encourage spraying. Hon. Minister, you recall that when you came to Fort Portal recently, in the west division, we had some peculiar type of mosquitoes which actually bite during the day and cause some sort of skin rash like that of Coccidiosis. We would like to strongly request the ministry to help us. If they cannot spray, at least they can help us with some mosquito repellants.

I would also like to request the ministry that as we emphasise the primary protection of Malaria, we should also emphasize the secondary and tertiary prevention. For instance, we don’t have screening gadgets in our health centre IIs and IIIs. If we could have some microscopes to carry out the blood smear, so that we can be sure that there are Malaria parasites in the blood when they are treating for Malaria. We would, therefore, like to request the Ministry of Health to supply and reinforce the secondary prevention of Malaria by providing microscopes which can be used in its screening.

Finally, I would really like to thank the ministry as far as tertiary prevention, which involves the actual treatment of Malaria is concerned. I think the ministry is doing very well so far, because I am happy to report that we are now getting a continuous flow of anti-Malarial drugs in our health units. I thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Honestly we have now taken 50 minutes. Normally the rules should have allowed 30 minutes. But there is another statement, so those who have not contributed on this one will be given the first priority. (Ms Kamya rose_)

You are a Kampala representative and hon. Mabikke represented you. You are the Kampala Member of Parliament.

4.21
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the minister’s efforts to combat Malaria by the supply of mosquito nets, but there are two things I wish to know from him. 

On page 2, he seems to be telling us with a lot of excitement that, “Colleagues, I am pleased to inform you that the Global Fund grants have resumed flowing normally. The Government of Uganda has successfully applied for funding from the Global Fund to procure and distribute 17,000 nets.”

I would wish to know from him - assuming the Global Fund had not resumed flowing normally - what did you have in place as a government to combat Malaria in Uganda? I have been prompted to ask this question because as a small child, I used to see urban authorities attacking Malaria larvae from the breeding centers, but today, I don’t see it happening at all. Maybe you will have to tell us what you had in place assuming this was not done.

Secondly, I don’t know whether it is below the sub-county or country that the distribution will be conducted through the national structures. Which are these national structures? Are you talking about the LC structures? If so, I would advise you to look for another alternative, because some of these LCs themselves do not have nets or they may take beyond 10 nets each, and you will be running the risk of not giving people enough mosquito nets. Those are the things I want to know from you. Thank you.

4.23
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for his statement. I do believe that it will offer temporary relief to the poor people of Uganda. I would have been happier if this information or plan was backed by some statistical data on Malaria spread in this country. Are we to assume that all the areas of Uganda, like my colleague from Yumbe was saying, are equally affected with Malaria, so that there is a blanket distribution or plan of this product throughout the country?

I have heard that because of cold temperatures in Kigezi, there is very little Malaria. I have also heard that because of the high temperatures in Karamoja and West Nile as my colleague here was telling me, there is very little Malaria. So, what is the criterion for distributing these products throughout the country?

I think there is a problem of blanket planning for everybody as if all the regions of Uganda have the same issues. We have heard on the Floor of this Parliament that there is a serious case of epilepsy in Masindi. Maybe the people of Masindi prefer to deal with epilepsy than Malaria.

We have also heard on the Floor of this House that there is a serious problem of trachoma in Busoga. We see in the news that there is a serious problem of jiggers in Busoga. Maybe these people would prefer the ministry to deal with these regional issues rather than blanket planning.

I think - 

THE SPEAKER: I think jiggers need safety pins.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, may I be protected? We could be receiving these grants with a lot of enthusiasm, but they could be a channel for dumping unwanted products in Uganda. We are the ones who should be telling the people who are giving us grants our needs based on the actual needs of the people of Uganda.

I would like to know from the minister, did the Government of Uganda ask for nets worth US$ 40 million or did the donors offer us a grant? In which case, who does the prioritisation in this country?

That is why every time I stand here, I want to remind the people of Uganda that we need regional planning, serious planning and priorities done by regions.

I am sure that if you asked Members of parliament from Karamoja, they would have other priorities for this amount of money, and Uganda is going to go down on its knees and be very grateful for US$ 40 million, yet actually, maybe we don’t even need all of that.

So, I would really like to caution Government while they are planning and this House in particular, that we need to pay attention to strong regional governments. Those are the ones who must prioritise for the regions. Another word for this big thing is called the federal system of governance. That is what will solve the problems of over centralisation of plans and resources. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to respond by starting with hon. Lukwago who said, why should we include members of parliament and the leaders? I think it is very important that political leaders within particular areas are there because as you know, we play an oversight function and this will be part of our responsibility. 

I gave an example here that when polio was rampant in this country, we included political leaders, especially women MPs, and the third round gave a positive result, which showed us that once we all go together as we play an oversight function and participate with the community, we will do effective work.

That is why we included all the structures of LC I, the sub-county chairpersons and MPs. We think that when we do it together, we can achieve more, than leaving it to civil society and non-governmental organisations. This will help us iron out the challenges and we think that we can do it together.

On why the targeted group is women and children below five years; the infant mortality rate in this country is high and when we look at the figures and the minutes we have -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I thought hon. Nampijja gave a public stance on this, and explained concerning pregnant women and children below five years. I think she did this.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, the infant mortality rate of children below five years is quite high and they are being affected by Malaria. Also, pregnant women in reproductive health show a high figure that once they are affected with Malaria, we face abortions and the percentage is going higher. So, if we target this group in an attempt to reduce the infant mortality rate and morbidity rate, even the figures for reproductive health could go down within the morbidity rate.

Why change the period of 2013 to 2010? I want to inform Members that diseases don’t wait. We cannot afford - according to the figures we have, we lose 344 people per month; so there is no way we can continue waiting as Government. When we get an opportunity, we must reduce the prevalence of Malaria and the death of the people we are continuing to lose. This also affects the production of the country and it has also got a very big economic multiplier effect that we are facing if we lose 344 people. The best way is to prevent Malaria now.

In my ministry, we find that almost 25 percent of the total cost is spent just on Malaria diseases. So, if we get this opportunity of Malaria control, I think it is the best strategy to use and we should not wait for 2013.

Hon. Angufiru, mosquito nets will not eradicate Malaria. I would like to inform the Parliament that as much as we are trying preventative measures in this budget framework, we think we are going to use other measures such as treatment, internal residual spraying and vector control. If we use these methods, I think we shall achieve what we want. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I understand that the minister has got copies of the statements. I suggest that the Minister of Finance lays the papers on Table because there is no debate, and then we end with the statement of the minister.

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much indeed for this opportunity. According to the National Development Plan, one of the most binding constraints limiting the socio-economic transformation of this country is inadequate infrastructure. Consequently, Government will leave no stone unturned to respond to this challenge. 

I, therefore, in accordance with the constitutional requirements, lay on Table a proposal to borrow Japanese Yen 3,395,000,000 equivalent to US$ 34 million from Japan International Corporation Agency, for financing the upgrading of Gulu-Nimule Road under the Transport Sector Development Project.  The proposal contains the terms and conditions of the loan. 

Secondly, I wish to lay on Table a proposal to borrow Japanese Yen 5,406,000,000 equivalent to US$ 55 million from Japan International Cooperation Agency to co-finance the interconnection of electric grids of the five Nile equatorial lake countries; that is the connection of electrical grids to Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo. These are laid before the Table for the eventual approval and authorisation by Parliament. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the relevant committee study the papers and then make a report to the House. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PUBLIC SERVICE) (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker, the necessary copies have been produced and are being distributed. I need your guidance on whether to start from where I left off or to read the statement afresh. 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MRS SEZI:  Mr Speaker and honourable members, during the sitting of Parliament on the 24 February 2010, hon. Reagan Okumu, MP Aswa County, Gulu District, raised the matter of senior appointments to Government departments, UPDF, Police, Prisons, statutory bodies and agencies. He expressed dissatisfaction with the job distribution in the public service. 

In the hon. Member’s view, the job distribution was badly tilted. Parliament requested Government to provide information regarding these appointments taking into account regional distribution. The objective of this statement is to inform Parliament about how appointments are made in the public service. 

Historical perspective

Mr Speaker, it should be noted that the distribution of public officers in Uganda is not by design. To a greater extent, it has its roots from the historical perspective ushered in by the colonial administration, whereby certain sections of Ugandans were made dominant in particular engagements. For example, the West Nile and Kigezi became labour reservoirs for plantations while the North in general and Teso –(Interruptions)– became the main resources of recruitment for the armed forces. 

Furthermore, the civil strife and wars in the Northern part of the country has affected the development in these areas in general and the education system in particular. Consequently, this has impacted on the competitiveness for Public Service jobs. When a new state of Uganda, therefore, came into existence, it had unequal development where some regions were advantaged compared to others. 

Deliberate efforts of the NRM to reduce the imbalance over the last 24 years 

The NRM Government has made deliberate efforts to objectively deal with marginalisation inherited from the colonial administration, by undertaking cross-cutting socio-economic transformation, and putting in place affirmative action programmes in democratic governance, education and health. 

In addition, Government has made specific interventions in the North and other disadvantaged areas aimed at mitigating and/or reversing the effects of the conflict that plagued the regions for over two decades. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the following is a clear demonstration of Government’s deliberate efforts to reduce the imbalance: 

Table 1 gives the example of the Uganda contribution to special interventions in Northern Uganda since 1994 to 2008. The table is indicating the financial contribution. 

The donor contribution with support of the Government of Uganda has also made contributions to special interventions in Northern Uganda and is indicated below in table 2; covering the same period as seen in the table provided. 

Appointments in the Public Service

It is important to note how appointments are made in the Public Service in order to determine whether the job distribution in the Public Service is badly tilted. All appointments in Government are based on the principles of merit and transparency. There is no head hunting and, therefore, there is no job distribution. Jobs are competed for at all levels. The Constitution has provided institutions that undertake recruitment. 

Recruitment within the Public Service is done through open competition; advertisement in the media and the most meritorious person gets selected. All persons with the requirements for a post have a right to apply and are free to compete. 

Public Service jobs have job descriptions and job specifications set, and individual applicants fit into the jobs already described and specified. 

When applying for a job in the Public Service, candidates fill the Public Service Application Form 3 as revised in 2008. In selecting the most suitable candidates, the Public Service Commission applies a principle of merit, fairness, non-discrimination, impartiality and neutrality, which are stipulated in the Uganda Government Standing Orders and the Service Commission Regulations.

Considerations for promotions are based on existence of a vacancy; the qualifications and experience which must not be less than three years and an officer’s performance as reflected in the performance appraisal form. 

Responsible officers when preparing submissions to the service commissions are not required to specify the nationality, place of birth or home district for the eligible officers, as the citizenship and nationality of a public officer are established as a point of entry in the Public Service.

Under Article 172(1)(a) of the Constitution, the power to appoint heads of department and above, is vested in the President, but acting on the advise of the relevant service commissions. These are: the Education Service Commission, the Health Service Commission, the Judicial Service Commission and Public Service Commission. 

It should be noted that the Public Service Commission in making recommendations to the President, observes the policy of Government relating to appointments, including promotions in the Public Service.


Senior Public Service posts from Head of Department and above are appointed through a rigorous competitive examination process, which involves four papers of a written examination; a basket presentation; and oral interview. The written examinations are set by experts who are also responsible for marking them.

Originally, the post of permanent secretary was filled from the administrative cadre; but to increase on the competitiveness, they are now open to the public. 

The Public Service has now developed competence-based recruitment and selection tools, for example, psychometric and aptitude tests, which have improved the selection process.

The resident district commissioners and their deputies are the only ones directly appointed by the President without being formally advertised or required to submit to any other body for approval. The analysis indicates that the persons who have been to these offices originate from various regions of Uganda.

Political appointments which broadly cover his Excellency the vice President, the Prime Minister and his or her deputies, ministers and ministers of state, members of various statutory commissions, Uganda’s envoys abroad and judges are all subject to approval by Parliament. This means that in any appointment which is deemed to be irregular, it would be blocked by this Parliament.

Appointments in statutory bodies and agencies are prescribed by specific regulations on how the chief executive will be appointed. The minister responsible for the overall coordination of the statutory body or agency is required to adhere to the procedures laid down in the law. 
Some laws provide for an appointments board, while others provide for representative sectors to constitute the recruitment panel.

Nominated and recommended persons are vetted and scrutinised by Cabinet. In cases where the legislation empowers the minister to appoint the chief executive and top management, the current policy is for the minister to invite his or her colleague to nominate and recommend suitable candidates to fill the posts.  The CVs are reviewed, shortlisted and the suitable candidates are recommended for appointment to those posts which are approved by Cabinet.

Appeal mechanism 

According to the Uganda Public Service Regulations, any appointment made outside the provisions of the Constitution and any other relevant law is null and void.

The Public Service Act further provides for an appeal mechanism where individuals who are aggrieved are free to appeal against any decision taken by any service commission which is not consistent with the law and policies governing the Uganda Public Service. This is further supported by the provision of Article 42 of the Constitution.

The current job distribution in the Public Service- my ministry has carried out an analysis based on the current staffs in posts at head of department level and above. These are in ministry departments, local governments and service commissions. A summary of the findings indicating the region of origin is provided in table 3.

In conclusion, I would like to state that on the 24 February 2010, hon. Reagan Okumu, MP Aswa County, made a statement in Parliament expressing dissatisfaction with the job distribution in the Public Service. The recruitment and selection of candidates in the Public Service is open and competitive; there is no head hunting and, therefore, there is no job distribution. Jobs are competed for at all levels. 

Appointments to positions in the Public Service are purely on the principle of merit, fairness and non-discrimination. Government has made deliberate efforts to reduce the imbalances caused by historical factors and civil wars. I have provided a table indicating the appointments in the Public Service from head of department and above.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Minister.

4.51
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): I just want to raise a few issues on the statement, but before that let me say that I did not know that there are some people in this country who are so bold and courageous, but at the same time very greedy. They look at themselves and they do not look at the whole nation. I think this is very unfortunate. This country belongs to all of us and it does not, therefore, mean that if matters are tilted and favouring one area, then it should be responded to in such a manner.

When I raised this issue, I never talked about the North only. I tabled on the Floor of Parliament a list of officers holding Government jobs. The only people who I managed to attach the region were those from the Army. For the rest, I never even indicated the region. I said that the tilting is very unfavourable for Northern and Eastern Uganda. I was even shocked to see my hon. Colleague from Busoga very happy with this statement.

GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Hon. Speaker, is hon. Okumu in order to start labelling people who he does not know what they are made of? He knows that he is sitting on the land of my grandfather which I have not claimed, and is talking while pointing at me. Is he in order to start dividing the people of Uganda along tribal lines? The people of Uganda are intermarried across all the tribes. Is he in order to start dragging this House to discuss the tribes at this time?

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to help me? Which tribe was he singling out? 

MR GAGAWALA: He was speaking about Basoga and pointing at me directly. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Did you single out hon. Gagawala and if so, why? 

MR OKUMU: I do not know whether the word ‘Busoga’ is equal to ‘Basoga’ because I never used the word ‘Basoga’. I said ‘Busoga’. I said, “My colleague from Busoga.” So, I think – and secondly, when I talk about Eastern Uganda, Busoga is inclusive, unless one is trying to deny that Busoga is not part of Eastern Uganda. Because I had just said that the reason why I raised theses issues was not singularly about Northern Uganda. I made mention here about Northern and Eastern Uganda where my honourable colleague is representing the people as well, and he should actually be grateful that we are collectively raising concern on behalf of our people. I know I am sitting on his grandfather’s land – he is welcome back home. (Laughter)

On the introductory note, the minister concluded by saying that Parliament requested Government to improvise information regarding appointments, distribution and taking into account regional distribution. I think the emphasis here that was very clearly put by the Speaker on that day, and it is in the Hansard, was that Government must produce a list of names and jobs and not just quantifying and saying, this is what - it was about a list of jobs –(Applause)- and the reason why the Speaker raised that was to verify with the list which I tabled on the Floor of Parliament, because what I tabled before Parliament was a list of names and appointments. What I was expecting you to come and say was, “Hon. Okumu, I disagree with your list and this is the rightful list” – that is what we were expecting. 

On number three –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Later. Let him finalise.

MR OKUMU: I am not taking that information. On number three, the minister courageously, and I do not know from what source she talks about historical perspective. We all know history and the job distribution right from the 60s. I would, therefore, challenge that since the minister has brought this matter, the Public Service has been there for all these years, can you go back and get us lists for these jobs right from the 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s up to date, so that we can be able to verify and see if you are speaking the truth, because to me, you are lying! This is not true. Go into your records and bring us the list of jobs right from independence and we compare if you account is really true. 

You conclude on page 1 by saying that you know there was civil strife. You remind some of us who represent the people from the North because we know what happened in 1986 when innocent people who were public servants were chased from their houses and jobs in Government. It was done openly here - they were chased from their jobs in Government. (Interjection)  No, they were not soldiers or anybody but members of the public service. I think when issues are raised, you should not open old wounds because these are facts that are recorded and they exist.

On page 2, the minister gives intervention and this intervention –(Interjections)- you can clarify from the minister later because this is her statement. 

On the intervention, if you want us to believe you, you must bring intervention, that this Government has been covering the entire country. You cannot just say, “This is covering Northern Uganda.” What about the rest of the interventions? We have had intervention throughout the country. Do not tell us, because the records are very clear and you even insult us by giving this intervention. 

Capacity Building for refugees: Are people in the Northern region refugees in this country? What capacity Building for refugees did you have to cover the people of Northern Uganda? You even go further to say in No.5, “support refugees”.  Honestly speaking, are you aware that Ugandans are not refugees in their country? Do you want to say that the people from the North are refugees in this country? You even have this courage to come and give programmes focusing on refugees as a programme to uplift Northern Uganda to be at par with the rest of the country? We deserve an apology on this.

The minister goes further on page 3 to give further intervention by donors. Now, what I do not understand and I want the minister to clarify is, “What North is she talking about?” What North are you talking about, because PRDP now covers Bunyoro and Busoga? So, what North are you talking about? –(Laughter)- yes, what North are you talking about? Yes, let us be honest. What North are you talking about? PRDP covers up to Bunyoro and Busoga. It is the same way the Luweero Triangle never actually covered only Luweero; it also covered part of Mbarara. So, please can we know what you are meaning when you talk about programmes for the North and all this? 

On page 6, the minister goes further and talks about the table. Table 3 - but when you look at table 3 – first of all, I never asked for resident district commissioners because on that day, I even made a statement here and said these are political jobs. I am not going for political jobs. But when you critically analyse that, she talks about directors; people who hold positions at director level. Here in Parliament, I think we have five directors – how many Government departments are there for you to come and tell this House that all the directors in Government are 33? I think this is an insult to this House, if Parliament alone has five – now you are telling us that the whole country has 33. 

You also talked about chief administrative officer - how many districts do we have? It is a big shame. You said 54. Are you really in charge of Public Service? (Laughter) No wonder the source of your data is Uganda Computer Services  - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We really expect you, the Ministry of Public Service to be the originators of this information. Now with 54 districts, how do you account for the rest of the districts? 

About town clerks, the list is indicating 11. Even on my list which I gave you, I said it was not exhaustive; there were 16 town clerks. For you the person who is in charge, you are even giving us less than what I had tabled on the Floor of Parliament. How do you expect us to believe you - just to believe your data? (Interjections) No! 

Commissioner/Undersecretary their total is 118. For us we wanted the commissioners separate from undersecretaries, ministry by ministry, and come with the list here. 

You mentioned Assistant Inspector General of Police - but there is nothing about Prisons or Army.  

Mr Speaker, I brought all these issues because it is very real to our country. I tabled this list on the Floor of Parliament detailing permanent secretaries and undersecretaries in Uganda; public universities’ chancellors and vice-chancellors; chief administrative officers all through; all the town clerks; the names and the districts, where they are deployed; Uganda Peoples Defence Forces soldiers from the top rank - all the generals up to brigadiers; Police officers; Prisons officers, the top brass; all  presidential advisers, because they are under Public Service;  they are actually more than what the Minister has just given us here. Mr Speaker, I also mentioned all the chief executives of statutory bodies.

I find the response of the Minister insulting; a laughing matter, and it is hiding something. You are hiding something you do not want the people of Uganda to know and believe. You are not honest in your statement; you are deceiving the people of Uganda. I want this statement to be thrown out and the minister goes back and produces the statement based on the directive given by the Speaker. (Applause)

This is because the Speaker gave a directive. It is not enough to talk about Western Uganda when I, personally know, that my brothers who are our neighbours in Bunyoro are not reflected anywhere in this list. This should be too much of accommodating people. We want - this country is ours and if there is distribution of jobs, there has never been war in Bunyoro, why is it that in Bunyoro there are less people employed than elsewhere if you are talking about wars? In Bunyoro, we have never had wars. Why haven’t you carried out special intervention for Bunyoro? Why is Bunyoro undermined? Why is Tororo undermined? 

So, when we raise some of these issues; it is not just because I am an Acholi from Northern Uganda. I know it is a reality in Bunyoro; they are facing the same problem. I know our brothers from Bundibugyo are facing the same problem; I know our brothers from –(Interjections)- Tooro are facing the same problem because the job enclave is limited. 

So, I beg, Mr Speaker, that the minister goes back and adheres to the directive of the Speaker, which he gave on that day that a detailed list by district –(Interjections)- be provided –(Applause)- I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, in your opening statement, you said the person who requisitioned for this statement is hon. Reagan Okumu. He is saying he is not satisfied with the list. Actually, he is asking you - sometimes back there used to be a publication known as a civil list. What you can do to help him know what had happened before is to go to the archives and get –(Applause)-  You do not have to draw the list because a civil list will show you the names of people who are employed in various categories. They will still bring them here and produce them, but apparently, he is saying you go back and - 


MRS SEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to clarify that the list of public officers is available to Members of Parliament –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we stop the debate here. 

MRS SEZI: Allow me to complete because as a matter of procedure, every policy statement has the names of public officers in that ministry.(Interjections) If you can look at the policy statements, you have all the –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, they are giving you more time.

MRS SEZI: Why don’t you first listen to me? (Interjections)

5.11
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Ali Kirunda Kivejjinja): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this chance –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Listen to each other. I will give you time to say what you want. What do you want to say? 

MR KIVEJINJA: I just want to say that I have been watching the trend of the debate and in 2010, when Parliament is sitting now, we have an obligation to build the nation. Therefore, the debate should not be taken to open up wounds which are historical -(Interjections)- Just hold on. Because the reasons why –(Interjections)- some of us have taken up this role is because there has been a lot of injustice in this country, and it is our duty to continue building the nation. (Interjections)

First of all –(Interjections)- just hold on, give me a chance. I am not a student of law –(Interjection)- but at least the little that I have heard, they say, “He who alleges must prove.” Now, if anybody is aggrieved that there is something wrong, instead of asking the one whom he is accusing, let him bring up the full matter so that –Interjections)- we are able to clear it. Thank you. (Interjections)

5.12
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, this is not the first time we have discussed this matter in this Parliament. We have given this matter serious thought since it was raised. The names were not given because we did not have them; but we have them. As you are saying, all civil servants’ names are recorded; anybody who is interested in finding out who they are and where they come from can do so. But as a responsible Government, we are not going to have this type of debate bringing all the people who are in positions whereby they have not been propelled by their own –(Interjections)- I know it is in Parliament –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU:  Mr Speaker, this matter is not just coming from the blue. It came out when a list was tabled on the Floor of this House and the Speaker directed Government to go and scrutinise that list, agree or disagree with it, but bring to Parliament a comprehensive list. Is the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, therefore, in order to reverse the decision the Speaker has made and come on the Floor of Parliament and say Government cannot engage that - In any case who is Government? Who do you think you people in Government are? You are servants of Government. Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I suggest we proceed this way; if a directive was made that you make a list, use this time to go and draw the list. They wanted to know the positions of those people who are in Civil Service and Public Service. 

As I have advised you, there used to be what we called civil lists. These were books with names, age and so forth. I do not know if you stopped the publication; but you go and look for the latest publication and bring it here, then we shall debate it. 

Next item. 

I understand we have exhausted the items on the Order Paper. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(House rose at 5.15 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 20 April 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 


