Wednesday, 17 April 2002

Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Uganda Land Alliance has organised a one-day workshop for Members of Parliament under the theme “Gender, Land and Development” whose objective is to enable members appreciate women’s land rights and promote gender issues in legislation.  

The workshop will take place on Monday, 22 April starting at 8.30 a.m at the International Conference Centre. I would like to encourage all of you, members of both genders, to attend this important meeting. Thank you very much.

MR AWORI: Essentially, Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on some items on the Order Paper. I do appreciate the effort you have put in this week for us to get the Order Paper by 10.00 a.m. This, however, does not give us enough time to do our homework on any matter coming up in the afternoon. Is it possible to have a tentative one for the week so that we can prepare accordingly, even if we have to adjust? I am seeking your guidance on that matter.  

Secondly, and also addendum to that, I am most impressed with the way you now prepare our committee programme. You give it to us one week in advance and you publish it in the papers, which has been extremely helpful.  I commend your office. But on the Order paper for the day, could you do likewise so that we have a whole week and then we know how to prepare? 

Thirdly, I note with great concern that Uganda Television has deliberately refused to cover the proceedings of this House. Why? We do not get any coverage whatsoever of the proceedings of this House by Uganda Television, except for WBS; I am glad the Minister is here. 

To make matters worse, I also note with great concern that the Office of the President is infringing on the rights and freedom of the press. As an example, no Ugandan photojournalist is allowed to take the picture of the President.  Foreigners are allowed, but Ugandan journalists are not allowed to have a tape recorder, to have a video camera, to have a still picture of President Museveni. Why is this? Why do the foreigners do it but our journalists are not allowed?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, with regard to the question of advanced information on the Order Paper, it has been the practice that we indicate on the Order Papers the next business.  We have been doing that except that occasionally, we indicate business and then we are not able to handle it. Sometimes it is the fault of the committees, because reports are not ready and we have to change. 

Let me just undertake to continue with the improvements. And I am glad you have appreciated the weekly bulletin.  

Concerning Uganda Television and the blackout, I will ask the Minister of Information to answer. But let me add that once we finish the Rules of Procedure, we are going to provide for telecasts. I did inform the House some months ago that the Commission is considering purchasing our own equipment to cover our proceedings. But let me ask the Minister of Information to tell us about the blackout by Uganda Television and the failure to photograph President Museveni. Thank you

THE MINISTER OF STATE (INFORMATION) (Mr Basoga Nsadhu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will first of all handle the matter of coverage of Parliament. It is true that we are constrained by facilities. The availability of cameras is limited; they are very few. Hon. Aggrey Awori, as a member of our committee, is aware of these facts. 

I will now undertake to ask the Acting Commissioner, Broadcasting, to provide us with a temporary camera so that from tomorrow, we shall be given due coverage as we await the arrangements which are being made by Parliament to have a permanent solution to telecasting parliamentary proceedings.

The second item was about infringing on the rights of the press, so that they are not able to effectively take photographs and recording materials during presidential briefings or on functions where the President is involved. 

It is true that for sometime now, after the terrorist attacks which happened in America, our security people did alert us that we were being targeted, and in particular, our President. So, PPU took measures to stop live recordings and photographic cameras being used in places where the President is involved.  This is because we do not have sufficient gadgets to test all these equipment so that we are sure that the security of our President is guaranteed.  

It is not true, as hon. Aggrey Awori would like us to believe, that we gave concessions to foreign journalists. The people who were there were presidential press units of the visiting heads of state who came here. Those are the ones who were there, presidential press units of visiting heads of state. 

We did not lift the ban to give special treatment to any foreign journalist. But we do hope that when the equipment we intend to use in screening some of these electrical gadgets used by pressmen does arrive, this matter will be handled. The ban will be lifted and we shall put in place other safer measures to crosscheck these cameras, and everybody will have access to these conferences with their own gadgets.  

I would like to appeal to the press to bear with us. This is temporary, and it is a matter of national security. When I talk about matters of security, hon. Aggrey Awori as a very well trained operative understands precisely what I am talking about. We regret any inconveniences. It is a temporary measure but we shall clear it –(Interruption).

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my question was very innocent. It did not call for my background, for my previous training, my previous experience. So hon. Minister, when you talk about my background, indeed I was a photojournalist. I ran Uganda Television very successfully for many years. Is the hon. Minister in order to imply that I am raising this question because I am a security operative?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, my understanding is that the Minister has actually noted your preparations for ascending to high office in 2006, increase in security training, and so on. So he is quite in order.

MR WAPAKABULO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to just give a concrete example of what the Minister was talking about - the cameras. Members will recall that just before September 11th, the General leading the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan was assassinated. He was assassinated in a meeting where they allowed people to take photographs. One of the cameras, instead of flashing, it sent a projectile and the General died. So in view of that, we had to take precautions. Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LEADERSHIP CODE BILL, 2001

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, yesterday we had a lengthy debate on this, and I think it is appropriate now for the Minister to wind up and for the chairperson to respond - if he has something to say.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Members very much for supporting this bill. As I listened to the debate yesterday, I did not hear any single person oppose the bill and therefore I must thank you for that. Contributors only expressed concern and made comments on certain areas, which I have summarized as follows:

Declaration of assets by spouses, and declarations in public. 

The other issue of concern was the capacity of the IGG to enforce the bill. 

Another issue of concern was the category of leadership.  Members expressed a wish to have the category expanded. 

Other concerns were about doubts on implementation. 

The other concern was whether we are bringing this law because the donors want it, or the World Bank in particular asked for it. And I should begin with that one. 

First of all, it is not donors who made the Ten Point Programme that originally had one point of fighting corruption. All along, the people of Uganda have been raising concern and outcry on the rising levels of corruption. Even by 1992, when the Leadership Code came into force, it was against this outcry; and this outcry has not stopped at all. Up to now it is there. Therefore, it is both the people of this country together with the Government that are interested in having this law. 

The donors may come in to say, “where is the law,” because they have heard that we have all along wanted to pass it. They may raise questions as to why it is delaying, but they are not the ones who originated the idea that we must get this law in place. Therefore, I think that this should be clear, and hon. members should know that this is our law, brought here as part of the attempts to strengthen our weak legal framework.

On declaration of assets, some hon. members who raised concern on this do not want the declaration to cover spouses. I want to tell you that this provision is very central to this law. Either it is there or the law is useless, and it would then be like the one we are trying to amend. My appeal to you is; please, accept this one, because if you reject it, then I will take it that the law is rejected. 

The IGG is trying to enforce this law but has found out that some leaders, many of them, will religiously submit a form where they own nothing. For instance, hon. Lukyamuzi keeps telling us he owns nothing. Is he here today? He has always told me he owns nothing. The other day I told him what I wanted to tell him. I will not say it here, but we discussed it outside in a debate. But of course many leaders claim to own nothing. This is because they have got what they own written in the names of their spouses, in the names of their infant children, and even the big children. Therefore, they fill in the form and take to the IGG, declaring nothing. 

As the current law stands, if the IGG knows that a house belongs to so and so, because it belongs to one’s child of three years, he has no powers to look into it and he has no right to address it. So he could not enforce the law against such people, and if we retain the law like that, it will be like we are passing no law at all. I therefore appeal to you to accept this provision of extension to the spouse. 

Some members were asking, “who is a spouse?” According to our laws of Uganda, the spouses are known. In fact South Africa has done better than us here. Their Leadership Code has extended the definition of spouse to cover what some hon. members here called a “permanent cohabiter”. In South Africa, they say that even a permanent companion should have his or her property declared. I did not bring this here, because I knew you were already apprehensive about the legal wife. I would love it of course, and if you say so, I will put it there. But it is up to you. For us however, we are talking of a legal -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has gone into areas that are very difficult to determine. When you start defining “cohabiter”, permanent or otherwise, what about a mother of your children who is neither your wife, spouse nor cohabiter? She is a mother of your children; she does not live with you, where does she fall?

MRS MATEMBE: In fact hon. Awori, if you were listening to me, I was responding to a member on the Floor who said, “there are people who co-habit permanently, why are you leaving them out?” I am responding to it. That pre-supposes that I did not include them precisely because of the reason hon. Awori is bringing forward. 

That how far do I go? I was only telling you that South Africa has done better than us because it has gone to the extent of a permanent companion. I do not know whether the father of your children or the mother of your children would be a permanent companion. But anyway, we are saying a spouse, and according to the current laws of Uganda, the spouses are known. They may be more than one, it may be one.  

The other concern was declaring in public. Some people were expressing insecurity in case they declare in public. Hon. Members, when we conducted a survey before we brought this law, some members of public wanted to know how to help the Government in the enforcement of this Leadership Code. They said if the forms are declared to the IGG and nobody else is allowed to look at them, then how will we know that the houses and vehicles which we know belong to a certain leader have been declared, and yet we would like to assist in this matter? So, they asked for public and open declaration.

On the other hand, when the leaders were consulted, they said that in view of insecurity in this country and our insufficient capacity to ensure the security of persons and property, would it not be dangerous if we opened up the forms to everybody to look at? So when we looked at both views, which were very genuine, we decided to come to a middle line. We said that you declare the forms to the IGG but any person who, for genuine reasons, would like to look at these forms should have access to them. The IGG shall certainly scrutinize these applications and ensure that they are genuine. There is, therefore, no need to worry about insecurity. 

In fact, the purpose of saying that you declare to the IGG who will decide whether somebody else can see them or not was to protect the security of your person and property. The IGG will, in consultation with the Minister and the Attorney General, develop criteria for verifying these applications. I appeal to you to accept this provision and allow to extend the declaration to the spouses, and the declaration be made accessible, subject to application to the IGG.

The second issue of concern was about the capacity of the IGG to enforce this law. It is true that the IGG, like all of our institutions, does not have sufficient capacity to do his job in terms of personnel and equipment. Even this Parliament was so stuck until somebody came to aid us a little bit. It is not even sufficient but all the same you continue to do your job and you are doing it well. In fact, against the hardships and constraints, we are still working. The IGG does not have sufficient and full capacity but he has capacity to do something just like this Parliament has capacity to do what it can in its means.

Right now, the IGG has got a full department to enforce the Leadership Code and this department –(Interruption)

CAPT CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for giving way. Maybe the hon. Minister has not included it on the priority list, but our major concern is whether it will be implemented or it will remain on the shelf. Because when you distributed this law to us, you gave us the budget projections and draft estimates. Have the Ministry of Finance officials allowed to give you this money or it is just your draft? They are the technocrats supposed to release the money and declare to you and to the IGG. Have they agreed to give you this money? Because you will have the law and you will put it on the shelf if they do not give you money.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much Madam Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. The specific issue I would seek clarification about was what was mentioned in the Leadership Code of 1992. When you look at the Office of the IGG and at times how certain functions have been conducted, you would construe a lot of subjectivity in the manner in which certain cases were expeditiously handled and others completely ignored. This was very conspicuous during the Sixth Parliament. Hon. Members will remember that whenever the Parliament tried to investigate something, the IGG’s office would expeditiously come in to make an investigation and give a clearance so that so many times Parliament would make findings which were contrary to what the IGG’s office had made. 

In the old Leadership Code, there was a proposal for a leadership committee, which would balance the situation, but this option was never explored. If we had had a leadership committee, the subjectivity of an individual would cease to be an issue. I want to seek clarification from the hon. Minister and to notify the House that I propose, at an appropriate time, to move an amendment that we create a leadership committee to foresee the administration of the Leadership Code rather than subjecting it to an individual with all the subjectivity. There is no way we can move in such a manner. Hon. Minister, have you explored this position, and what is your view about it? I thank you.

MRS MATEMBE: I want to thank hon. Dombo for his question but I want to answer it this way. It is my understanding that the IGG is an institution of Government. I never see the IGG as a single individual doing the work. And indeed, it is true that this is an independent institution of the state created by an Act of Parliament giving the IGG independent powers as the institution, not even controlled by Government at all. When hon. Dombo tells me about one person, I do not understand, because he certainly knows very well that, that is an institution and in the investigation it employs so many staff. It has a deputy; it has a full accounting section, a Permanent Secretary and other staff.  Therefore, it is not an individual. It is an independent institution of the state assigned the responsibility as empowered by the Act, by the way, recently passed by this House.

Secondly, hon. Dombo, I wonder where the leadership committee would draw angels from, because as a person who has been coordinating the fight against corruption, if I say things you may now get annoyed with me, but you are telling me the leadership committee will be constituted by people from Uganda and if they are biased or they are corrupted, it will be the same like any office established here. (Interjections) 

I want to clear hon. Dombo’s mind because he is looking for a committee and has hopes in the committee rather than the IGG.  But I want to say that this committee which was originally by the way proposed from the beginning, which was never constituted by any Parliament, eventually when the Constitution came into place, it said that the Leadership Code can be enforced by the IGG or any body as Parliament may determine.  

I want to tell you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, that just last year around October or so, this Parliament determined by the law called The Inspector General of Government that the Leadership Code be enforced by IGG. Therefore, this House has already implemented that Provision of the Constitution.  Now it is up to the House, if it intends to amend the law and bring a committee rather than the IGG, that is beyond my scope right now.  (Mr Awori rose_)

MR AWORI:  It is very brief, Madam Speaker – just one point.  I am glad my honourable colleague on the front bench has recognized that provision of the Constitution, Article 234, which we cannot afford to ignore.  

I would also like to inform my honourable colleague that not long ago the IGG made a report to the Electoral Commission and it was ignored by the Cabinet.  So, that is why we are looking for an institution, a committee of three or five prominent people who cannot be ignored by the Cabinet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I know what you are saying is important, but I think if you have specific amendments to make, let us make them at the Committee Stage.  For now let us allow the Minister to wind up and the Chairperson to respond.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I wonder what guarantee hon. Awori has that if an independent committee constituted by Parliament, just like the IGG was constituted by Parliament, recommended to Cabinet and Cabinet ignored like it did in that case!    

Actually, as the hon. Speaker is saying, if I could be allowed to proceed properly, for instance, I was coming to your point.  Because I have got the areas where you raised concerns and I am responding accordingly, and if you could permit me to respond, when I fail, then you raise these clarifications.  Otherwise, I am ready to clarify for you everything.

For instance, now I can even read for you this letter:

“Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, P.O Box, Kampala, Uganda” and I have this letter to say:

Implementation of the amended Leadership Code: 
This is to certify that the resources required for the implementation of the Leadership Code shall be provided to ensure its effectiveness.

Chris Kasami.
PERMANENT SECRETARY.”

So, let me proceed now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, please do not intimidate the Minister; let her wind up.

MRS MATEMBE:  I was on capacity and I was saying that there is capacity to enable us do what we can do within the means of that capacity.  There is a department which is there purposely to enforce the Leadership Code.  Recently, 51 employees were recruited and attached to that department, and as you may know we are continuing to establish regional offices.  We have been having seven but we are about to put three more.  You know, step-by-step, we shall be increasing this capacity.

Now, the other point of concern was the category of leaders.  Members wished that we could expand the list of the category.  First of all, this is a law which is addressing leaders – leaders to begin with as people who must be transparent and accountable for promotion of good governance, and it is addressing leaders to show the way to others.  Therefore, we are beginning with this kind of category hoping that when we manage to enforce this kind of discipline in this category, others may follow suit.  

Secondly, hon. Members are asking of capacity to enforce this Leadership Code.  If we put everybody there, then surely capacity will be hindered so much that we may be wasting our time.  Therefore, I want to say that you take this provision as it is; we shall try our best as we can.

One hon. Member was asking as to whether we should not extend the category to Private Sector.  No! We are talking of public leadership and we are covering that leadership which used its position and finances in the name or on behalf of the people.  Private people have their own laws that govern them, and by the way, my office is collaborating with them very well to make them enforce their leadership code.  For instance, the lawyers have their codes; they are beginning to strike off or suspend some of these advocates.

The doctors are also beginning to bite, and the engineers we are linking with them in our own way.  But this one relates to those people who hold public offices to use them for and on behalf of public and hold funds and use them for and on behalf of the public.  Because you are meant to be serving the public, you should not use your position to serve your personal interest at the cost of those whom you are meant to serve; that is why it is like that.

Point No.5 was doubts about implementation; almost everybody who talked doubted the enforcement of this Leadership Code.  First of all, the Leadership Code last time was not effectively enforced because it lacked enforcement mechanisms.  In this one, we are putting the enforcement mechanisms so that if you do not declare, there will be punitive measures against you.  If you under declare, there are punitive measures against you. If you delay to declare, there are punitive measures against you.  

One thing I would like to share with you here is that you will observe that ministers have always declared. Why? It is not that we are good leaders and we promptly declare, but there is some kind of enforcement mechanism. If you do not declare, the IGG writes to the Prime Minister, the Prime Minister, your boss, says, “Please declare”.   

If you do not declare, the information reaches the President. I remember in the Sixth Parliament where the President himself had to write a letter - I got a copy - which was telling some few ministers, “I understand you have not declared”. Within two days, they had already declared.  

I do believe that with these enforcement mechanisms, certainly the Leadership Code will be enforced. All I can do now is to call upon you, hon. Members.  As I know, you are committed to help me fight corruption, please give me yet another instrument so that you can see how best we can move. I thank you very much because I know you are going to support this law and pass it. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like, in the same vein, to thank the hon. Members for their comments and contributions on the report of the committee.  

I also thank you for the support you have given to the report of the Committee. I would like to respond very quickly to the comments that were raised about the report and the questions that were addressed to me.

The first issue was on clause 7 of the bill, namely that leaders’ declaration should not be exposed for scrutiny by the public. The clause says: “The contents of a declaration under this Code shall be treated as public information and shall be accessible to members of the public upon application to the Inspector General in the form prescribed under this Code.”  

The Committee saw no problem with this clause because when one declares his assets and liabilities to the IGG, that information becomes public information. Once it becomes public information, you cannot stop the public from accessing that information.  That is my answer to that question. 

After all, most of the properties which we declare like land, shares in companies, vehicles and so on are already accessible by the public. You only need 20,000 shillings to pay search fees in the land registry to access anybody’s title in this country. The same goes for the motor vehicle registry and the company registry. You can access how many shares someone holds in a company upon paying a fee. 

All this information is available even without this law. But this law makes it clear that you will have to apply to the IGG before accessing this information. Therefore, the IGG will exercise its discretion to determine whether your application is good or it is based upon malice.  

The other concern was raised by hon. Lukyamuzi concerning Article 27(2) of the Constitution, and I would like to read it.  Article 27(2) says, “No person shall be subjected to interference with the privacy of that person’s home, correspondence, communication or other property.”  

Our interpretation of this article is that it is not in conflict with clause 4 which requires you to declare your private property. The declaration per se does not amount to interference with private property. That was our interpretation. 

Two, you have got to read Article 27(2) together with Article 43(1) of the Constitution, which I will read:  “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.”  

Our position is that public interest demands that you declare your assets and liabilities and therefore, 27(2), in the spirit of this bill, is subject to Article 43.

The other concern was that the committee has removed the penal provisions in this law. Yes; because all the offences of corruption are provided for either under the Penal Code Act or the Prevention of Corruption Act. In addition to that, the IGG Act which we passed two months ago gives an elaborate definition of what corruption is.  

We did not find it proper to include offences of corruption in this code. That is why we recommended that all offences or all omissions and commissions in this law should be breaches of the Leadership Code and should attract administrative sanctions such as dismissal, vacation of office and in some lighter breaches, caution and warning. That is why we removed the criminal elements.

Someone also raised the question as to why we did not include religious leaders in the Schedule. I do not think the Constitution envisaged religious leaders.  Leaders in the Constitution and this law do not include religious leaders. The NGO Statute is about to come before this House, and I think that is the right forum in which we should address the code of conduct of leaders of NGOs, including churches.  

Another issue was raised about the fact that civil servants like CAOs are not in the bill. But CAOs are covered under the Second Schedule, No. 28. If you read the schedule closely, you will find that the CAO is covered.  

Someone also complained that the Central Tender Board is not in the bill.  The Central Tender Board is also in the bill in the Second Schedule, No.38.  

Lastly, hon. Okulo Epak raised a question on how the IGG, under this code, will remove the President and Members of Parliament. My own interpretation of the Constitution and this law is, when the IGG finds a case of breach of a code on the part of the President, who is actually the first leader in the Second Schedule, the IGG reports to Parliament and Parliament is supposed to read the report. If Parliament finds that there has been a breach of the code on the part of the President, then Parliament invokes Article 107 which governs the procedure for impeachment of the President.  

Only last week, this Parliament passed the rules of procedure governing the impeachment of the President.  I do not have to belabour to repeat how the procedure is. The procedure is very clear in the Constitution. Parliament has a point of intervention when this report finally appears before it.  

On the question of Members of Parliament, Article 83 of the Constitution is very clear. It shows the grounds upon which a Member of Parliament can vacate office. It cites violation of the Leadership Code of Conduct, and when the Speaker is informed that a Member of Parliament has violated the Leadership Code of Conduct, that member automatically vacates office. That is what I thought I should clarify upon.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the chairman –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was that?

DR OKULO EPAK: Further clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I had already declined the clarification.

DR OKULO EPAK: It arises from the given answer, Madam Speaker, it is nothing different. I beg your indulgence; thank you. 

My question was a little more than just the President. I gave that as an example. I said there are many categories of leaders whose terms and conditions of service are governed by other instruments, like that of Parliament. The Constitution also has other impeachment procedures, and so on. You have rightly said this will be derived from the report of the IGG to Parliament, but what about the other categories of leaders, the civil servants, the LC5s and so on?

My worry is that the way the provision is formulated now does not give the explanation you have given. The procedure of what exactly happens is not quite clear. Here you have satisfied the conditions for President and Members of Parliament, what about the other leaders, the civil servants?  I thank you.

MR MWESIGE: For civil servants if you read clause 33 of the bill, they are what we call “authorized officers”. When a leader commits a breach of the code, the IGG communicates to an authorized officer, who is supposed to be of a rank higher than his. I will give an example, for a Chief Administrative Officer, the IGG would inform the district chairperson to initiate proceedings for his removal; and breach of the code is sufficient ground for removal. We do not have to resort to the public service standing orders and other laws because breach of the code alone warrants dismissal. The IGG writes to the head of that institution to effect the removal, he does not do it directly. 

In case of a Member of Parliament, you would write to the Speaker. In case of a minister, you would write to the President and so on. In case of the President, he reports to Parliament, because it is only Parliament that can remove the President. There is no other institution, under the Constitution, which can remove the President.

Lastly, on the Leadership Committee, as the Minister has already stated, we did confer the functions of enforcing the Leadership Code on the IGG, in the IGG Act. We did that just two months ago, and I think it would not be proper for us to remove those powers now, which we conferred in the IGG Act. Perhaps we can think of amending the IGG Act first, but I think to introduce a new body now, we would require the permission of Cabinet. 

Under the new IGG Act, I think the IGG is an institution which has got two deputies. And we did recommend in the IGG Statute that the IGG shall be a person qualified to be a judge and one of the deputies should also be a person qualified to be a judge. We do hope that those people will possess integrity to enforce the Leadership Code of Conduct. Once again, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the hon. members for supporting the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, we need six more members to be able to take a vote, so let me ask the Sergeant at Arms to ring the bell before we go to the committee stage. Can you ring the bell, please? 

The Bells were rung and Quorum was attained.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LEADERSHIP CODE BILL, 2001

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do form part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3:

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that clause 3(2)(b) be amended to read as follows; “to examine whether or not a leader has corrupt influence or has corruptly entered into a contract with a government or public body or foreign business organization contrary to this code.” 

I further move that in paragraph (d) of sub-clause (2) of clause 3, we add the following words at the end of the paragraph; “in accordance with the definition of the words, ‘high handed’, ‘outrageous’, ‘disgraceful conduct’ and ‘infamous’ provided by the regulations to be made by the minister.” 

In other words, clause 3(2)(d) would now read as follows; “to investigate and report on any allegations of high handed, outrageous, infamous or disgraceful conduct or any other behaviour or conduct on the part of a leader in accordance with the definition of the words ‘high-handed’, ‘outrageous’, ‘disgraceful conduct’ and ‘infamous’ to be provided for by the regulations to be made by the Minister.” The reason for this, Madam Chairperson, is that the definition of those words has not been provided for in the bill and we demand that they be provided for in the regulations to be made by the Minister. I beg to move.

MRS MATEMBE: I have no objection, Madam Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: I am sorry, Madam Chairperson, I forgot that we proposed that sub-clause (4) be deleted. The reason is that the special investigator who is being created in sub-clause (4) is already catered for in sub-clause (3). That sub-clause gives the IGG powers to delegate his powers to any person, and so we propose that sub-clause (4) be deleted. I beg to move.

MRS MATEMBE:  No objection, Madam Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4:

MR ADOLF MWESIGE:  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that we substitute the month of “December” wherever it appears in Clause 4 with the month of “January”. The reason for this is that most leaders balance their books of accounts in December.  It will therefore be convenient to require them to declare their properties in January.  

I also move that sub-clause (7) of Clause 4 be amended to read as follows: “where a declaration is made by a leader in respect of himself or herself under this section, where the leader is found not to have declared certain assets and liabilities or if the declaration is found to be false, the leader shall be taken to have breached this Code.” 

The reason for this is that, in the original sub-clause (7), a leader was being held responsible for the false declaration of assets of other people like spouses, which we think is not fair to the leader. I think the leader should be held responsible for actions of his own, for false declaration of his own assets and liabilities.  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

MRS MATEMBE: I have no objection, Madam Chairperson.

PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had wanted to raise this issue earlier and that is 4(4), on the issue of liabilities.  I would agree for the declaration of incomes and assets.  But for the case of liabilities, how do you ask somebody which loans he has incurred, the debts, the overdrafts, sometimes they are private.  Honestly, I do not think really that is workable.  How would you know one’s loans, which are not visible?  Then the debts, then the overdrafts. If he has ten accounts, how do you go monitoring each and every account? Is that workable, Madam Chairperson?  

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I am seeking clarification on 4(3) from the Minister and the Chairperson of the Committee, where they say a leader shall at expiration of his term or her term of office declare his income or assets under this as it reads. I think say a Member of Parliament whose term has expired after elections and he has lost an election. In 4(3) I do not know the enforceability of this Act. Someone has been here, he has sold some of his assets, he has lost an election, how will you enforce it?  

MR KIDEGA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I have a problem with declaring assets and liabilities one month after the closure of the financial year.  Normally, when the financial year closes, it takes sometime for accounts to be prepared, let alone for these accounts to be audited. So, surely, will those be proper assets and liabilities being declared or some draft position?  So, one month is too short.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, he is objecting to the change from “December” to “January”.  He is saying it is not sufficient time to write the accounts.  Can you propose an amendment?  Do you have an amendment?

MR KIDEGA: I propose an amendment of four months after closure of the financial year, after December.

MRS MATEMBE: I would like to oppose that one because originally we had even wanted December. Then the Chairperson of the Committee said, “You know, usually people close business, they put in their accounts, they balance, and therefore, they are ready by January to start afresh.”  That is good enough for you, honourable member.  

Then hon. Mwaka’s query is very interesting because the reason why we would like you to declare your liabilities is because -(Prof. Mwaka rose_)

PROF. MWAKA:  Liabilities of the spouse and the children!  The loans my husband is incurring, his overdrafts, the overdrafts of my children who are under 18 years whose accounts have been opened by my husband!

MRS MATEMBE:  I want to tell hon. Mwaka that if you declare the spouse’s property, it is better for you to declare his liabilities.  If you are to go free. Because if you declare their assets and then you do not declare their liabilities like you had borrowed money from the bank, and you put up this house and then you say I have a house, but then you do not indicate that you acquired it with this liability in the bank, then you are in trouble! Because we shall say, “Where did you get the money from? You must have stolen it.” Therefore, declaring assets together with the liability is for the benefit of you honourable members.  Then -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, I think the problem of hon. Mwaka is that if her child is in the United Kingdom studying and while there he has some loans, and herself is sitting here in Kampala doing serious business in Parliament, and you are requiring her to declare what that child in London is doing and he is under 18 - I think that is what her problem is, and the spouse and so on and so forth.

MRS MATEMBE:  Madam Chairperson, the provision in this bill is that you declare to the extent of your knowledge. When you are signing this form, you swear that what you have put there is true and correct to your belief and knowledge.  If finally we find that it was not true, then you get problems.  But if you speak the truth, you will have no problems.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, hon. Members, I think let us take Clause 4 portion-by-portion.  There are very many sub-clauses under 4.  Let us take them one by one. I put the question that clause 4(1)(a), (b) do form part of the bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  There was a proposal of four months instead of one.

MRS MATEMBE: I did oppose and justified my opposition.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, there was a motion on the Floor of the House moved by hon. Koluo Charles in respect of 4(b). He justified the motion by saying it will be difficult for leaders to produce accounts, have their accounts audited, and besides December as you are aware is a very busy month.  So, the proposal that has been put across to this House by the Chairperson and strongly backed by the minister is unrealistic. 

In addition to that, I do not see the problem that the Minister has with this, because this is a process. If the accounts were required in April of this year, for example, two years from now April would come.  

I believe that in the interest of having accurate accounts and for members to be able to declare what they have as is being required of the bill, it would be good for us to be given enough time to produce accurate accounts. I am sure that is what hon. Matembe would require. She does not want accounts that would be disputed, those that would not be accepted by the Inspector General.  I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, in fact I did not propose January at all because I want declaration every two years. I was counting the years; January 1 and then by December declare, but then the chairman said, “hon. Matembe, do not stick to your December because by December people are putting their things in order for the end of the year, can you please let them declare in January.”  Now I come here and you again say March! No. I oppose that, and I call upon you to really understand why I am proposing December. 

We are saying, every two years you declare. And we are saying, you begin with January and you declare, then in December you finish a whole year - January to December. We are saying that you declare in January. Surely, hon. Members, are you arguing on this matter! I think you can see my logic; it is very straightforward and I appeal to you to support it.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Chairperson, is the Minister aware that even within Government, the beginning of the financial year is July 1st and it closes on June 30th? That is still a financial year. So, the month of January or December is not magical. 

She might wish to know that even in Government, books are actually closed three months after the end of the financial year. If Government, with all its capacity, takes that long to prepare its accounts, what about a private member who may need the assistance of accountants in order to have the books written, audited and certified as correct accounts?  

If the Minister finds April too long, she might wish to accept another amendment to be consistent with normal practice of three months after the closure of the financial year. In this case, after that information, can I move an amendment that accounts be produced by the leaders every March –(Interjections)- Declaration includes accounts.  

Can I propose an amendment to read, “thereafter every two years, during the month of March.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, do you still want to follow up your amendment of January in view of the position of March?

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, I concede to the amendment for March.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 4(1)(b) be amended as proposed by the hon. Member.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR MAO:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 4(2) be amended by the deletion of all those words after “assets and liabilities”. It should, therefore, read: “A person shall…submit to the Inspector-General a written declaration of the leader’s income, assets and liabilities.”  

I move that the subsequent words be deleted from the sub-clause, Madam Chairperson. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  What is the justification?

MR MAO: I stand on very firm constitutional grounds in making this amendment. Article 27(2) reads as follows: “No person shall be subjected to interference with the privacy of that person’s home, correspondence, communication or other property.”  

I do know that some people are going to argue that there are provisions that allow derogation from that general provision. But may I submit that Article 43(2)(c) also limits the extent of that derogation only to what is acceptable and the most probably justifiable in a free and democratic society, or what is provided in this Constitution. 

I have looked at this Constitution, it has been my workbook, I have consulted those who are in other democratic societies, and I have perused lengthy documents from the Internet. I am convinced that while the leaders may not take cover from declaring their assets and liabilities and opening that declaration to public search and viewing, I do think our Constitution protects our people.  

I, therefore, move that this amendment be passed, because it is in line with the Constitution, and also because it is fair that only those who pick nomination forms, campaign, and get elected should be directly subjected to these provisions.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mao, could you also assist us and move a consequential amendment with regard to December.

MR MAO: Madam Chairperson, the consequential amendment will come to clause 2(b), it will move to clause 4(4). I believe that the drafts people will take care of that, Madam Chairperson.  I beg to move.

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, I wish in the strongest words to oppose this amendment, because I have stood here and told you hon. Members that this is the crux of the matter in as far as this Leadership Code is concerned.  I have told you hon. Members that practically one of the reasons why the Leadership Code could not be enforced was precisely because of leaders taking all these assets and everything to their children and spouses and declaring nothing.  

Therefore, if you accept this amendment, to me and to the Government, it is tantamount to rejecting the Leadership Code –(Interjection)- yes, because it is central, Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, that if you remove it, I pick my books and go away because I will go back to the original situation we have been in, and I do not believe that the hon. Members who are committed to fighting corruption can really allow this. 

Hon. Members, I have said that the key word these days or they call it catchword is good governance, accountability and transparency, especially on the part of leaders.  What more public interest prevails over protecting the interests of the public which we serve? Of course this provision as it is, is precisely bringing the essence of the public interest that actually this very provision which hon. Mao quoted in the Constitution is telling us to do.  

By the way, I want to say that when we pass this law, it does not in any way infringe Article 27, because Article 27 cannot be infringed if the law has been made by this Parliament and has allowed that thing to happen. Therefore, this whole talk of violating the Constitution is a myth; it is not the practical reality.  You have heard the Chairman of the Committee explaining this matter to you, and I think he can also add on in opposing this amendment.  Incidentally, Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, hon. Mao is a member of that committee, has he brought here a minority report which we can consider?  Anyway, I strongly oppose that, and I can assure you if you accept that amendment, we stop the law and we go home and we know it has been rejected.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make a few comments on the matter before the House at this point, first of all, by seeking clarification from my colleague, honourable Mao.  Hon. Mao, we sat together here in the 6th parliament and we went through a very painful exercise of having to put in place two select committees all of which were looking into financial impropriety of some sort.  When we were carrying out investigations, we also went to great length to find information which had been camouflaged in that property which is registered in the seven-year-old son’s names or a spouse or something like that.  If we are trying to be accountable to the population, if we are debating for transparency and accountability, how do we then reconcile the two?   

Two, do you remember of a case of somebody who owned a jet – I do not know whether it is called a jet or a helicopter or something like that - which was registered in the names of an infant; where did this infant get the money from?  Did that plane belong to the father or to the son?  If it belonged to the father and the father does not declare that item as part of his property, are we being sincere with ourselves; are we making a just law?  Much as those provisions are there in the Constitution, what is the gist of the matter in this law; it is transparency and accountability and public finance management.

One of the times I remember when we were debating during the censures in the 6th parliament, hon. Mao, there is a word I learnt from you.  I don’t know whether it is a legal term, but it is  “lifting the veil,” I was hearing it for the first time.  But then I went further to learn what lifting veil means and I thought it meant exactly this. Madam Chairperson, I would like to support the views of the hon. Minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mao, are you still pursuing the matter?

MR MAO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Actually, I think the issue is being mis-defined. I submit that the only issue for the House to determine is the constitutionality of the whole matter.  I really do not object to the Minister making any law she wants.  It is important that those of us, who took the oath to abide by the Constitution, determine whether this right is not being violated; that is my case, Madam Chairperson; it is simple as that.  

I am one of those who is very, very much in support of leaders making public their declarations; the hon. Minister knows that.  The hon. Minister also knows and since she is a lawyer, she knows that there are company laws and there are court processes through which you can inspect any property or any account.  There are court processes through which all those who are hidden in companies can always be unveiled.  We also have very many investigative organs whose job is track down criminals who have stolen money and are trying to hide it.  I do not want us to presume that everybody is a thief until proved otherwise because that is how now I am beginning   to read some of the submissions.  

I am not a thief, I have never stolen anything, I have never registered anything in my infant son’s name and when I hear statements on the floor talking about registration of planes, I would like people to name them.  I think that was Air Alexander named after Gen Saleh’ s son; a company belonging to Jovia Saleh also known as Mrs Salim Saleh.  Now we are in the Parliament of Uganda, I think it would be very informative if we look at a dossier of cases of those who have hidden. As a lawyer, I know that some wealthy people, whether they are thieves or not, want to hide their wealth in what lawyers call blind trust and – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have moved away from the Constitution.  

MR MAO:  Madam Chairperson, I conclude by insisting that the issue is about constitutionality.  I also insist that the issue is about leaders and not those who are adjunct to their adventures in leadership. I also want to insist that if this is the crux of the matter, then its constitutionality must be tested. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OGOLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern about this bill is not whether I am affected personally or not, because I feel I am not bothered at all about it. I am above that; I am clean. But there is an old saying that “The innocent normally suffer for the guilty”. That is what I am worried about. 

The ultimate effect of this law is that it will become a cobweb law. A cobweb law catches small flies and the big birds go through. If the hon. Minister can assure me that she will have the courage to catch the big birds, I am not worried; we can help her to go along. But does she have that power, even the guts to get hold of those big birds, which have been breaking through? 

If she had courage, by now may be the report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Kanungu massacres would already be out. It is not there. Is it an ethical matter for a country to lose 1000 people without inquiry? So, this is all I am asking. Will this become effective? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, are you making a general debate, or are you addressing Clause (2)?  

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The provision of Clause 4(2) is actually the core of this proposed law. If you look at the object of the bill, it provides for a minimum standard of behaviour and conduct of leaders, and to require leaders to declare their incomes, assets and liabilities and to put in place effective enforcement mechanism for ensuring compliance.  That, obviously, is because we want to make sure that the gospel we preach about leaders being accountable to the people they lead is actually practised. And if it is not practised voluntarily, it is practised through enforcing the law.

The question as to whether a leader declaring his or her assets and liabilities under this proposed law is likely to be in contravention of Article 27(2) of the Constitution raised by the hon. Member for Gulu Municipality is genuine.  But looking at Article 27(2) of the Constitution read together with Article 43, I am not persuaded that this particular law will be in breach of the Constitution.  

I agree that when applying Article 43, which specifically deals with the question of how you enjoy your right, the manner in which you enjoy your constitutional right should not interfere with the enjoyment of other people’s constitutional rights. It should not also be contrary to the public interest.

I also agree that in terms of 43(1)(c), there is an extent to which public interest can be protected. But I think in this particular case, this proposed law is going to protect this particular public interest, and not to persecute nor to cause problems to leaders. Thank you very much. 

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER / MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr James Wapakabulo): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have nothing useful to add except one or two little things on what the Attorney General and the Chairperson of the Committee said. My mind has been drawn to the provisions of 27(2) of the Constitution namely, “No person should be subjected to interference with privacy of that person’s home, correspondence, communication or other property”.  

But the Chairperson and the Attorney General have drawn our attention to Article 43, which says: “In the enjoyment of the rights prescribed in this chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest”.

The Attorney General said that public interest is more dominant. That when you are looking at 43(2), it is more directly towards persecution, and that any limitation of the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms should not be restricted beyond what is acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society, or what is provided in this Constitution.

My emphasis will be on what is provided in this Constitution with regard to this particular law. If you look at Article 233 of the Constitution Clause (2)(e) with 43(1)(c), you will see that an attempt was made to give Parliament sufficient authority to make an effective Leadership Code. Article 43(2)(c) is saying there should be reasonable limitation taking into account democracy and human rights and what is acceptable in any given society.

This Constitution however says that you can go beyond what is actually justifiable and available in a democratic society. That is okay and that is where Article 233(2)(e) says, “Parliament may make any other provision as may be necessary for ensuring the promotion and maintenance of honesty, probity, impartiality and integrity in public affairs and the protection of public funds and other public property.” 

The proposal before the Parliament is that, to give the code real teeth in order that you protect impartiality, honesty and probity, we have decided to go beyond the leaders to include their wives, their dependants, and their children. In order that you may actually implement Article 233(e), they should be included in the list of those whose assets and liabilities must be declared. Once you accept that you have not offended Article 43(2)(c), because you are making a law that is provided for in this Constitution under Article 233(c), you are actually acting within the Constitution, not against it. I thank you.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have heard from the Minister that this is the most important provision in the proposed law before us. My worry however is that in Uganda here, corruption has become so sophisticated that it is not easy to fight.

Secondly there is no political will to fight corruption. For any person to believe that including the declaration of assets and liabilities of the leader’s spouses and children is going to provide an answer to fighting corruption, I think that it is too early for us to begin celebrating. All these people who are involved in heavy corruption in this country, I do not think they are just there seated and not thinking about the proposal that has come in this bill. Because of that, what is the Minister of State for Ethics and Integrity going to do about leaders in this country who trust their spouses?

There are many leaders who trust their spouses more than their relatives, and there are also leaders who trust their relatives more than their spouses, these also exist. How is the Minister, or Government, going to catch up with leaders who are going to transfer what they have earned through corruption, or what they intend to earn through corruption in this country, –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Onzima, the Minister has for the last so many days, and in particular early this afternoon, been labouring over the matters you are asking about. She explained that she wants the minimum ammunition for her to start on the job. That is what she is asking for. She is not saying she is going to be perfect. So let me put the question. I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed by hon. Mao.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 4(3):

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam. I am a member of the Committee but because of my other responsibilities I was not able to attend the discussions of the Committee in full. I have a problem with 4(3) and either the chairperson or the Minister can explain this to me. 

This bill deals with leaders and the interpretation of leaders is provided. Is a person whose term has expired still considered a leader? A person whose term has expired, like me, Ben Wacha, after my five years here have elapsed, on the first day of my freedom, am I, for purposes of this code, still a leader?  

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, actually this provision was looking at expiration of leadership. We have so many leaders here, others are on contract, and others are on different types of leadership. What this law is requiring you to do is to declare every two years. You may have declared six months before your term, but you had already declared because two years were over. 

We are saying that at the end of your contract or whatever, when you are leaving, you declare your assets because within the six months you may have accumulated too much. So we are saying that as you retire to go home, you just declare what you have before you go. I think it is okay. The hon. members are satisfied, Madam.

MR WAPAKABULO: Hon. Ben Wacha has raised a very important point, although I can see he is not pursuing it. Unless we amend the definition of a leader to say, “a leader means a person scheduled here and for purposes of such and such, a person referred to in this section…” then it is not relevant. Unless one is still clothed with some leadership status, if one has finished one’s term then they are free. Here I would have used the term “past leader”, but Ugandans have given it a new technical meaning so I cannot use it.
  
Perhaps the Chairman and the Minister can look at the possibility of doing something on the definition of a leader so that we draw in past and present. Otherwise a leader will be restricted to what is referred to in clause 4(3). Maybe the hon. Chairmen of the other Committees can clarify.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I will not take long.  My problem again is, it might not be possible to amend the definition of leader and make it tally with what is provided for under chapter 14. The Leadership Code is supposed to deal with persons who are holding specified offices. Article 236 of the Constitution says, “In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, ‘specified officer’ means the holder of an office”.  Otherwise, if you cease to hold an office, you are not bound by the Leadership Code.

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, this provision says at the expiration. And if we look at the honourable members here, we know when our term expires and we are going home. By the way, many of us go to contest to come back, so we are saying at the expiry as you go if you declared two years – it is six months after you declared, please declare and you go because you may need us later.  I can see honourable members saying “but if you have already gone”. You have not gone yet it is at the expiry! It does not say after expiry, it says at that time as you complete your leadership even within the last hours, you complete your leadership, just put your forms and go so that they do not follow you.

MR WACHA: Let me help you out. A leader shall before the expiration of his or her term –(Mr Wapakabulo rose_)

MR WAPAKABULO: In fact, that was the line I was now thinking of; before the expiry of the term.  Let us say that a leader who is due to expire –(Laughter)- in office. Yes, before the term is about to expire, six months before the term of the person expires. Six months before you should provide a declaration, so that it is not tied to these other every two years. The intention is that you should not go home having known that I am going to retire, you enter into dubious deals just before you go. What we want is to catch the person who maybe retiring in June and we are saying –(Mr Mao rose_)

MR MAO: Madam Chairperson, I seek clarification from the speaker holding the Floor on the question of those who are normally dismissed without notice. This applies more specifically to those leaders who are ex-officio Members of this House.  They do not have any constituencies to give them the benefit of the Constitution limit. Therefore, if they hear their names over the radio or television having been reshuffled out of the leadership loop, I do not think they can have this provision enforced to their detriment.

MR WAPAKABULO: Because those ones hold offices at risk anyway, so –(Laughter)- and my premise was that we should stop those who will conspire with themselves knowing their retirement date, to do certain things quickly before that date.  Those of us who sit on these front benches as he said, we are taken by surprise; so we could not conspire in good time to say in case I stop being an ex-officio Member of the House or an RDC, the announcement only comes. But we are targeting a Permanent Secretary, a Commissioner, a Director, a Managing Director of a Government company whose term is ending and obviously is not going to be re-appointed either because of the law or for other factors. 

We are saying that person should not go having had office a whole year and a half without declaration. As to how my suggestion can be worded, I do not know. That that person should before he proceeds on retirement, or before the expiry of his contract, be called upon to file a special return. We can even call it a special return.  I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister now there are two proposals. The one by hon. Wacha - I now put the question that Clause 4(3) be amended as proposed by hon. Wacha.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4(4), agreed to.

Clause 4(5), agreed to.

Clause 4(6), agreed to.

Clause 4(7), agreed to.

Clause 4(8):

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Chairperson, I have a proposal and I would like to make an addition after 7, and it would go as follows: “ A leader who through malicious reasons is summoned by the Inspector General of Government and goes through investigations and if found innocent, that leader can claim compensation from Government”. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member is proposing that if for some reasons a leader finds himself maliciously before the IGG, goes through that trauma, is investigated and cleared, he should be entitled to a compensation. That is what he is proposing.

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, in this country we have different laws that govern things, and I am sure there is a law of malicious prosecution somewhere the Chairman here knows more, the practicing lawyers know more. If the individual concerned thinks that he was maliciously treated, he can go to courts of law. 

Madam chairperson, the IGG has powers to investigate any complaint that is brought before the office. And once this complaint is brought, the IGG investigates, and either in the end clears you because of the evidence available, or finds you wrong or guilty according to the evidence available.  So, if he does find you free and discharges you, how can he pay when this very House gave him powers to investigate any complaint that comes before him?  He is not the one who goes maliciously looking for claims to investigate; people lodge complaints before the office, the office investigates and clears you, in which case you go.  By the way, in the IGG’s statute we put a provision to punish those people who maliciously or wrongfully bring information against others.  There is a provision in the IGG’s Statute. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you look at clause 30, hon. Alintuma, does that not satisfy you?  

MR WAPAKABULO: Clause 30 reads: “The Inspectorate may award costs against a person who makes allegations under this Code if the Inspectorate finds the allegation to be malicious or frivolous or vexatious or made in bad faith”.  So actually what he is envisaging is already covered.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it is provided for. Hon. Katirima, there was something you wanted?

LT COL KATIRIMA:  Madam Chairperson, I just wanted to seek for a clarification between clause 4(6) and 4(8).  One talks about a person who declares late and commits a breach of the Code and then another person who fails to declare, and it also says commits a breach of the Code; I thought the two could be treated differently.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Member, we have already passed clause 4(6), so we cannot go back there.

MR ALINTUMA:  Madam chairperson, I wish to withdraw for now and wait for that moment when we come to clause 30, so that we can strengthen it.  Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I now put the question that clause 4(8) do form part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 4 as amended  agreed to.)

Clause 5:

MR MWESIGE:  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that Clause 5(2) be amended to read as follows: “A leader who, without a reasonable cause, fails to comply with the IGG’s request for clarification within 30 days after receipt of the notice, commits a breach of this Code and he is liable to:- 

(a) a warning or caution; 
(b) dismissal, or 
(c) vacation of office.” 
 
Madam Chairperson, the reason for this amendment is that the original 5(2) did not provide for the defence of reasonable cause, and we are introducing that defence in that sub-clause and we are deleting (c), and we are now creating a new (a) among the penalties which include caution and warning, dismissal and vacation of office.  We think that a leader who with reasonable cause fails to comply with the IGG’s request for clarification should be given the benefit of the doubt.  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed by the Committee.

(Question  put and agreed to.)

(Clause 5 as amended  agreed to.)

Clause 6:

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that clause 6 be amended to read as follows, and I will read it in full: “A leader who knowingly or recklessly submits a declaration or gives an account of any matter which is false, misleading or insufficient in any material particular commits a breach of this Code.”  

The reason for this amendment is to remove the offence which is created in the last three lines, the punishment of imprisonment of three years and a fine of 150 currency points, and replace it with a breach of the Code and the penalty for this breach will be provided later under clause 37.  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

MRS MATEMBE:  No objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed by the Committee.

(Question  and agreed to.)

(Clause 6 as amended agreed to.)

Clause 7.

MRS SENINDE:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I beg to move an amendment to clause 7 to read as follows: “The contents of a declaration under this Code shall be treated as confidential and shall only be accessible to specified officers under circumstances as on fraud charges and on false declaration.” I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  The justification.

MRS SENINDE:  The justification is that the information may fall in the hands of wrong doers or those who have no justifiable cause to access the information, and this will be an abuse of information provided.  I beg to move.

MRS MATEMBE:  I oppose this amendment, Madam Chairperson, because we have clearly catered for this situation very well.  We have said you give the forms to the IGG an institution of the State, and if any individual wants to access the forms they make applications to the IGG. 

 I have also said that in accordance with clause 27, the Minister, the Attorney General and the IGG will put together the criteria and the genuineness of the case which the IGG will consider in giving this information to the one who is seeking it; because if you say specified officer, as I told you from the beginning, the members of the public wanted to help us in enforcing this Code, and as you know the general public are not specific officers and they would like to participate in the enforcement of this Code. But what matters is the IGG strictly scrutinising the genuineness of the reasons and allowing access to this information.  Therefore I appeal to you to trust us and get satisfied with what we have provided.  I thank you.

MR MULENGANI: Whereas we are fighting corruption, I believe the hon. Minister has already accepted that the IGG is a human being too.  I would request that we seek clarification in as far as confidentiality of information is concerned within this Leadership Code.  

I will therefore propose that either the Committee or whichever responsible body looks into a provision within the clause that binds the IGG in as far as security or confidentiality of information is concerned.  Because various times as we see corrupt people, they have ways of going around on information. They may eventually access information that is not actually due to them.  I therefore propose that the Minister clarifies to the House. In the event that information goes to wrong hands, what befalls the office that handles this information? I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, in fact the IGG swears an oath of confidentiality. Therefore, the office of the IGG is duty bound to keep secrecy. In fact, in the IGG’s Act, there are provisions which punish –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are actually referring to the institution.

MRS MATEMBE: I do understand, but where in your questions you were saying this is a human being, and then in the other breath - I have to remind you it is an institution.  I am glad you have conceded that it is an institution and I am saying that this institution is governed by a whole Act, which you passed here last time. I have the law here, but I cannot go into the details of these provisions. But the law of the IGG provides sanctions against those people who misuse their office to reveal this information. Besides, there is also a law, which provides for abuse of office. All these laws exist in different statutes, which cater for these situations. We cannot get every provision and put it in this very law.  Therefore, I urge you to accept this provision the way it is, and all these other laws will work together to ensure that those who misbehave will be dealt with.  

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. A lot of the concerns that were raised - the Minister probably has not seen them. They are related to the protection of the informers and witnesses, if you look at the proposals under Clause 26. And if you go to clause 36, you are protecting officers of the Inspectorate, yet the bulk of the problem is that, that information is in no way protected other than by the assumption that those in the office of the IGG are honest people who are going to use the information the way they are supposed to. I think the concern of the people is that, within this law, there should be a provision to ensure that the information given is not false. That is not provided; I have looked through this –(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, if you look at Article 38(c) of this Code, it says any person who divulges without lawful justification any information he or she has obtained in the course of any duty conferred by this Code, will be punished.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Seninde, are you still pursuing the amendment?

MRS SENINDE: But, Madam Chairperson, this very clause is talking about false information, but I am talking about the confidentiality of the correct information, and I am very clear. I do not see the problem why we do not make it very clear in the law such that in future it does not count on us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Member, 38(1)(c) says “Any person who divulges without justification any information which he or she has obtained in the course of any duty conferred by this Code.” Any information - are you okay?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I do not have any problem with this clause. However, I think the explanation given by the Minister is not correct.  Once you say that the information shall be treated as public information, then it is accessible. The IGG has no reason to withhold any public information. It is automatic. Anybody who goes there and applies for that information will get it. It is public information.

MR WAPAKABULO: I would, to some degree, go with hon. Katuntu’s view on clause (7). I think what we are looking for is that the public should, through a process of shifting, access information. We do not have to say it shall be treated as public information. We just need to say, “The contents of a declaration under this Code shall be accessible to members of the public upon application to the Inspector General in a form prescribed under this Code” and we leave out the reference, “treated as public information”. Since I cannot move an amendment when I am also a Member of Cabinet, I would like the Minister in charge to decide.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I wish to amend Clause (7) by deleting the words “shall be treated as public information and“ so that it reads, “The contents of a declaration under this Code shall be accessible to members of the public upon application to the Inspector General in the form prescribed under this Code.”

MR MAO: Madam Chairperson, Article 41 of the Constitution says, “Every citizen has a right of access to information in the possession of the State or any other organ or agency of the State except where the release of the information is likely to prejudice the security or sovereignty of the State or interfere with the right to the privacy of any other person.” 

I think we may move backwards if we pursue this, because the IGG has got no powers to withhold this information as I understand it. This prescribed form is mainly to know who you are and to whose file you want to peruse. I do not know whether it will state for what reason. 

Assuming I am a journalist who wants to write for “Have you heard?” what has the Deputy Speaker got to do with the gossip column of the newspaper? Can the IGG say; since you want it for gossip, it is illegal? What if they test it in the Constitutional Court? So, I think the hon. Minister’s amendment is superfluous. I actually propose that the provision stays the way it is and we go on as public information. Let us go the whole hog. Madam Minister, I think we need transparency and we need it fully, so why are you now retreating? Let us keep it the way it is. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the gist of the amendment by hon. Seninde as improved by the Third Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister accepting, is to the effect that if it remains as it is, as public information, it means that the IGG is obliged to publish this information. (Interjection). No! That was not the intention, hon. Wapakabulo.

MR WAPAKABULO:  Actually, Madam Chairperson, there is no conflict here.  If you pass the honourable Minister’s amendment, you are neither declaring the information public nor withholding it. You are saying it is information in the hands of a public officer called the Inspector General of Government.  Then you go on to implement Article 41(2) of the Constitution.  What we are doing in this Clause 7, we are actually implementing (2), setting out the procedures how members of the public may access that information.  It reads: “Parliament shall make laws prescribing the classes of information referred to in clause (1) of this Article and the procedure for obtaining access to that information”. 

We are saying if you want access, you apply to the IGG! Then in his discretion, he may see whether by allowing or not he is not himself about to breach Article 27, which says that you are protected, but you must take into account other people’s concerns and the public interest. But the restriction or interference must be reasonable. We are saying once the IGG can exercise discretion, we have set up a procedure for access, and the position of the IGG is to assist in ensuring that it is reasonable and justifiable.  I thank you.

MR MAO: Madam Chairperson, in my practice of the law, if I want to peruse anybody’s land title, I go, fill a form, pay a fee and I have access.  The Commissioner of Lands has no discretion.  Therefore, this introduction of discretion I do not see where it comes from. I would like the honourable Minister to keep the proposed law the way it is, and the IGG should have no discretion because we do not want the disclosure to be selective. Certain categories of people, their information can be disclosed, while others are hidden under piles and conditions imposed.  

The access to this information should be an open right to every citizen, and the only thing we can legislate on is the procedure, but not to determine whether or not the IGG should release the information. I object to the conferment of any discretion to the IGG, and if that is the intention of the honourable Minister, then I have to question her motives in arguing so strongly in favor of this law.  

I urge the honourable Minister to keep this amendment in this law, as it is proposed.  In fact, I challenge her, if she waters it down, then I think she will have broken the essence of this law.  The essence of this law is transparency!  Now, if you give the IGG powers to determine to put for some people a wall and for others a glass, then what transparency are you talking about?  I propose that the clause stays as it is.

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Chairperson, I had told the honourable members the reason why we had come in the middle. The public wanted to see the forms.  The leaders expressed concerns like hon. Seninde here.  So I married the two, I came here before you. If you want to open wholesale, you go ahead and open wholesale!  I have no problem! (Laughter)

MR WAPAKABULO: Madam Chairperson, hon. Mao was referring to me as the person holding the Floor, and was relying in his case on the fact that he goes to a public register and gets to know who owns which piece of land.  That is correct.  It is a public register. But here, we are construing the Constitution to lift privacy of communication, privacy of documents. 

In fact, if he was to pursue that line of argument, then one could say that even the provisions that allow reckless access on a payment of a small fee, could itself be looked into whether it is constitutional or not.  But otherwise here, we are following Article 41 as well, which says that citizens shall have access – there is no word open access in 41! Therefore, I do not think we should really depart from that Article. I would support strongly the amendment by the Minister so that we proceed.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 7 be amended as proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(30 Members stood to challenge the ruling)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How many are you? (Interjection).  Yes, they are 30 of you who have stood.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, is it in order for this House to continue considering such an important bill without quorum?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can the clerk take a count?

MR RUZINDANA: Does quorum apply in the case of committee stage? I thought we did make an amendment sometime back where the quorum is not required at committee stage.  I am not sure.  I am seeking the guidance of the Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney General, please advise us.

MR FRANCIS AYUME: It is at the committee stage that we are actually taking decisions.  So, the quorum applies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can somebody move that the House do resume so that we make a report?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee reports thereto.  I thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding) 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the bill entitled “The Leadership Code Bill, 2001”, clauses 1 up to 6, and has passed them with some amendments. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Matembe): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had hoped to go a long way with this bill today, as tomorrow I am aware that many of you are going to attend very important ceremonies of chairpersons swearing in. I adjourn the House to Tuesday, next week, for further consideration of this bill. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.01 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 April 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


