Thursday, 10 April 2008

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am happy to welcome you to this sitting, and in the gallery this afternoon, we have students from Uganda Martyrs University Nkozi. They are here to follow the proceedings. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Also, we have the leadership of Kimenyedde sub-county in Mukono District, led by the chairperson. They are also here to make sure that we are carrying out our mandate properly. (Applause) They come from hon. Mugambe’s constituency. You are welcome.

Honourable members, as you may appreciate, the budgeting process for the next financial year begun; it begun when the Minister of Finance tabled the documents relevant to the subject. The committees are supposed to scrutinise the document and hold interviews with the respective sectors and technocrats from the various sectors; and under the law, they are supposed to submit their committee’ reports to the Budget Committee by 25th of this month so that the Budget Committee can consider and see the kind of recommendations and alterations that they would recommend to the President or the Minister of Finance.  

This would require them to concentrate on this work for some time to be able to meet the date; and then it is the result of the recommendation of the Budget Committee that have to send Parliamentary recommendations to the President so that finally, the Minister of Finance can work on the Budget which he has to present by at least 15th June.  

Because of this the Committee on Budget thought I should give them sometime - morning and day time - to be able to finish this work. But at the same time, we have a lot of work on our Table in form of Bills as you can see from today’s Order Paper. We have the Education Bill which has been with us for quite sometime; we have the Audit Bill which is also with us for sometime and we have the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, a Bill which is intended to give some taxes to the local government to enable them to function.  

The view of the committee was that I should immediately give them a full day - that is in the morning and afternoon- but having taken into account the kind of business we have, I am inclined that may be this should start sometime next week and not immediately, so that next week we can clear some work which I have stated: the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, and The Audit Bill. The Education Bill is a big one, but I think we shall be able to finish it before Parliament is prorogued. It is our intention, with consultation with the President, to prorogue Parliament by 15th May. So, we should finish by 25th and they make their recommendation, so that in 20 days we are able to clear the work which we have.

Today on the Order Paper, we had listed the Audit Bill coming to replace the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, but this Bill was actually there yesterday and they want money because these two days, I have met a number of local governments. Yesterday, I had Kamuli District and today I have Kimenyedde; they are all talking about funds. So, the sooner we raise funds for them the better. So, today we will complete the Bill, which we handled then we start on the Local Government (Amendment) Bill and the Audit Bill will come afterwards. So, may be on Wednesday is when I will be in position to release you so that you concentrate on the budget process. Thank you.

2.43
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. My concern is in regard to the RDCs and the Presidential advisors we have in this country. 

The sole purpose of a Presidential advisor is to be somebody who is very technical in a field to advise the President on what he does not know. If he is a Presidential advisor on military affairs, it must be somebody who has unrivaled experience in military affairs. If it is on education, it must be somebody who is highly qualified to advise the President on what he does not know.  

Mr Speaker, in this country, if somebody contests for an elective post say, Member of Parliament and he loses, the next morning you will find him or her an RDC. You find that somebody has lost an election somewhere and he is appointed Presidential advisor to console himself or to nurse political injuries. 

Mr Speaker, I want to ask the minister in charge of Presidency to table in this Parliament the list of all the RDCs in this country and the Presidential advisors, plus a belief of what they have been doing before they got appointed to those various posts. Precisely what I am saying is, they should table this list with the qualifications of both RDCs and the Presidential advisors because you find somebody is advising the President on Islamic affairs but can recite the Quran off head. (Laughter) So, much as our brothers and sisters in the neighbouring countries are getting serious advisors, we need to do the same to move forward.

THE SPEAKER: So, what you need is information, I think the point is made, okay?

MR AKBAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.45
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Permit me to say something on a matter of public concern in my constituency, which is Lubaga South.  Mr Speaker, in Busega in a zone called Kabale, a new breed of Balaalo has invaded my people -(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, the invaders are more than 20. These people speak with authority. They claim to be veterans and some of them say that they have been sent to the venue by State House. Some of these people are armed and they have even started allocating land plots to new settlers [HON.MEMBERS: “New settlers?”] what I am saying is true. 

Our Deputy RDC has intervened in this matter without success. The land I am referring to has a title on block 21, plot 41 in Busega, in the names of Dr Kiggundu. I demand that the government removes those people – the so-called Balaalo from that land. If they fail to vacate –(Laughter)- we shall have no alternative but to encourage the landowners to defend themselves from those intruders [HON. MEMBERS: “How?”] they know how to do it. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, this is not the first time that people have defended themselves. It happened in Eastern Uganda and I think the people of Busega can also defend themselves if the government does not intervene. Thank you. (Mr Ssekikubo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, guidance.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member for Lubaga South has raised a serious matter to the effect that there is a certain group of people who are armed and have forcefully occupied a certain piece of land titled with the owners’ names, and it is on record of this Parliament that she has threatened – I can’t say “threatened” – but she has mentioned the use of force or otherwise to ensure that the invaders are evicted. 

Owing to the fact that some of the groups involved are armed, this sounds a serious matter which may erupt into a very difficult situation that may indeed turn out to be ugly. Wouldn’t we seek the intervention of the minister in charge of security of this country, to say something so that we can ensure that life is protected?

THE SPEAKER: The purpose of hon. Nampijja raising this matter is to alert the authorities to carry out investigations and provide a solution. 

BILLS
FIRST READING 

THE REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION 
OF COMMUNICATION BILL, 2007

2.49
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 112 of our Rules of Procedure, to move a motion that the Bill entitled, “The Regulation of Interception of Communications Bill, 2007;” be read for the first time together with the certificate of financial implication. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Bill stand committed to the relevant committee of Parliament to consider and subsequently report to Parliament. 

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS
2.51
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I wish to make a statement of Government business for the week starting from 14 April 2008 and ending on 17 April 2008: 

1.	Motion for the Second Reading of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2007 by the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 
2.	In case we do not finish the Education Bill, 2007, it will be on the Order Paper. So, it will be motion for the Education Bill 2007, by the Minister of Education and Sports.   
3.	Motion for the Second Reading of the Audit Bill, 2007 by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the Leader of Government Business. On the Order Paper, it says the Audit Bill. Which Audit Bill does he mean for next week? 

THE SPEAKER: The point is – you came late as it appears – the Audit Bill is on the Order Paper but yesterday there was the Local Government (Amendment) Bill and Government thinks that the item which was on the Order Paper comes first before the Audit Bill. So, we can either deal with the Audit Bill today if we finish the other one, but if we cant then it will be considered next week.   

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, from the Prime Minister’s Statement of Business, the Local Government Act (Amendment) Bill is not next week and is most likely not going to be handled this week. Has it been now pushed off?

THE SPEAKER: That business was mentioned last week and you do not have to repeat it, but we are going to handle the Local Government (Amendment) Bill now, after we finish the Education Bill. Again, I think you came late. (Laughter)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BUSINESS, TECHNICAL, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING BILL, 2008

Clause 1

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the committee would like to move an amendment on clause 1. In clause 1 on the objectives of the Act, we are proposing that we insert a new paragraph (f) after paragraph (e) to read as follows:-”to provide for the establishment of examination boards to conduct and publish passed examination papers in the following specialised training institutions.” We named the institutions as Nurses and midwives, Allied health professions and other examination boards. The justification is to handle examinations of specialised training institutions. Mr Chairman, I beg to amend.

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, we discussed this item with the chairman and we thought that this was not the right place for it. Our view is that they should substitute it by saying, “To provide for mechanisms for harmonising existing regulations over assessment and awards of certificates and diplomas in the BTVET.” So that what he is suggesting comes later on. At this stage, we would like to provide for this one. I do not know whether –

THE CHAIRMAN: Now what is the amendment? Is it yours or it is that of a committee?

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, the amendment has been suggested by the chairman of the committee but as a ministry, we would like to advise that either we reject or –

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So you object to the placement of this amendment at this stage?

MR OPIO: Yes, at this stage.

THE CHAIRMAN: At this stage, but otherwise you are suggesting another amendment?

MR OPIO: Yes, I was just suggesting an amendment after we have agreed that we move this amendment to a later stage. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairman of the committee, have you agreed that the home of this amendment is somewhere else?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, what was agreed was that- his view was on past paper examinations. But because this is something that we agreed on as a way of – We wanted to put (f) to provide for the establishment of examination boards and to conduct and publish examination papers in the following specialised institutions. So, we had agreed on removing past paper examinations. 

THE CHAIRMAN: My question concerns the home of this amendment. The minister thinks that it belongs somewhere else.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Okay. Mr Chairman, maybe the minister can clarify where it would be better suited but that is what we had agreed on.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that while you are thinking as to where you can place this, we should proceed with the committee. I will assume that clause 1 is not amended and so I propose that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment on clause 2 on interpretation. The definition of BTVET institution is replaced to read as follows: “BTVET institution means a school or technical institute, college or centre offering approved BTVET courses leading to the award of certificates or diplomas”. The justification, Mr Chairman, is to be all embracing and include accredited centres that may be conducting BTVET courses. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Agreed, honourable minister?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment on clause 3 of BTVET that (1) substitutes paragraph (a) to read as follows, “To provide relevant knowledge, values and skills for purposes of academic progression and employment in the labour market”. The justification is that training imparts knowledge for both the labour market and academic progress. In paragraph (d), we propose to delete the expression, “by reducing costs” appearing at the end of the paragraph (g). The justification is that costs differ at different periods. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister?

MR OPIO: I accept the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR KUBEKETERYA: On clause 4, the committee proposes an amendment by redrafting paragraph (a) as follows, “(a) (1) to promote an integrated, demand driven and competence based modular BTVET system where learners enter the system at the various points suited to their skills and needs with their qualifications certified and recognised at different levels”. The justification is for better flow of the paragraph and to ensure recognition of the qualifications. 

In paragraph 2(1), we propose to add at the end of the paragraph the following expression: “And advocate for sensitisation and social mobilisation”. The justification is that counselling goes hand in hand with sensitisation and mobilisation. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, honourable minister.

MR OPIO: I accept the amendment. I also wanted to add, “To promote training with production concepts”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Part III

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, on clause 3, the committee would like to amend as follows, because part III is talking about providers of BTVET and we would like it to read as, “Public and private providers of BTVET”. The justification is for us to be more specific, Mr Chairman. I beg to move.

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, I agree with the amendment, except that (l) to (m) is misplaced. They should be transferred to clause 9. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I was only looking at part of that heading that reads, “Providers of BTVET”. For the rest, I will move the amendment in line with the minister’s suggestion. That was just for the heading of part III.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you mean you are concerned with the heading?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Yes, we are first concerned with the heading and then we will proceed to move to the other amendments, which are in clause 7.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Part III, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the committee would like to make an amendment on clause 7. The word “institutes” appearing at the end of the head note is substituted with the word “schools”. The justification is that institutes are of a higher level while vocational centres and schools cover farm schools and other technical schools. The justification is to be specific on some of the-

THE CHAIRMAN: I hear about the medical school at Makerere.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, we had a lot of arguments as regards this because we have specialised schools of training like the farm schools; the ones in Bukalasa and so forth. The argument was that the moment we leave them as institutes, it may not be very clear; so these schools wanted to be on board.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear, honourable members? He is differentiating between institutes and schools and he says that institutes should be of higher learning and schools-

MR SEBULIBA: Maybe we can be assisted further because like you put it, within institutions of higher learning we find schools. Where is the clear line if we talk about institutes and schools? What could be the differentiating factor between the two?

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us hear further submissions on this.

MR ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. When we talk about these schools, we are differentiating from tertiary institutions. Tertiary institutions may also have institutes and they may have schools but those are clear cut. What this Bill is dealing with is pre-tertiary institutions.

MR SEBULIBA: Then let us give a definition.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just wanted to share my experience with colleagues in the House. In the past, institutions that were joined by pupils from primary were called schools and those that were joined by students from senior four were called institutes. These schools were just providing simple skills and the others were providing some more knowledge. So, we had training institutes and training schools. The word however should be “training institutes” and not “institutions”. Therefore, we should add the words “training institutes” instead of calling them “institutions”. That is my contribution, Mr Chairman.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think that the name “school” or “institute” cannot be differentiated by the standard or the level of education, because we have the London School of Economics, which trains people at masters’ level. If it was a school we could say maybe from ‘A’ level only. I think that if we wanted we could say vocational training centres and institutes and then define what “institutes” stand for. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the amendment is being withheld; he is withdrawing it.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to concede to the word “institutes” remaining. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the committee would like to amend clause 9 (1) to read as follows: “Technical colleges and specialised training institutions shall offer specialised training in specific fields including (a) Nursing and midwifery, (b) Allied health professional courses, (c) agricultural, forestry and fisheries offered separately, (d) engineering and electronics, offered separately, (e) – I would like to delete (e), Mr Chairman and (f) now becomes (e) and reads, meteorology, carpentry, artisanry and art and design, music, dance and drama, business and entrepreneurship, hairdressing and beautifying, mining, catering, tourism and hospitality, professional sports and any other field that may require specialised training”. 

Mr Chairman, the justification is to give a wide enumeration of fields of specialisation. I would like to add here that since this Bill would like to bring on board the informal sector, the committee felt it should be very specific because people say those with hairdressing salons, have felt that they are not on board and the same applies to those in the fields of catering and sports. So, members felt that they should enumerate these because other people have been thinking that the informal sector is not on board whereas one of the objectives of the Bill is to bring the informal sector on board. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: But do you think you can be exhaustive?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, technical means technical knowledge in something. Each of us has some technical knowledge in a different field. So, if we try to enumerate them all- I could have technical knowledge in capturing air so what will you put here? I suggest that the committee concedes that we categorise these in sectors say engineering and this can mean engineering in hair, cars; you could be doing engineering in mechanics or environment.  Otherwise, if you want to mention them, we will have many of them on board.  

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the committee was trying to be specific because when we interfaced with the witnesses, there was a complaint from the informal sector that the Bill was leaving them out, yet it was talking about vocational training.  So, we felt that by enumerating them, somebody who has a saloon would be on board.  That is why we tried to name the ones that we felt are basic.  If we left them out, the informal sector would think we are just trying to be formalized; that it is only people who have gone to school supposed to get on board.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the committee would like to propose an amendment to clause 10, on non-public providers, to read as follows: “Non-government organisations, religious organisations, associations and private companies may provide BTVET to individuals for gainful employment and self reliance, in accordance with BTVET principles and concepts, and established vocational qualifications framework.”  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, even religious organisations are non-government organisations.  I just want to seek clarification from the chairman.  He is talking about non-public providers, which means, people who are providing a service for a profit.  The moment a company starts to provide services for a profit, it ceases to be a non-governmental organisation.  Are you saying that these private providers will not do this at a profit?  Are you saying the private ones are going to provide this service for no profit?  I am asking this because if it is at a profit, then they will cease to be non-governmental organisations.  

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the reason the committee proposed this amendment was that, when you look at the original Bill, it just says, “private providers.”  However, we found out that there are other BTVET institutions that were started by either religious groups or NGOs; others are profit-making, others are not.  So, we wanted to be specific and bring everybody on board.  The moment you talk of private, it means that the NGO institutions will not be on board, yet the basis of this Bill is to ensure that there is benefit for the public as far as the service providers are concerned.  If you insist on that, then you would lock out NGOs that would want to give services, sometimes, freely.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if the issue is about bringing those that exist on board, then it is time we add those that will be there with a more profit motive.  So, I want to move an amendment to that clause to include the phrase: “even those private enterprises that are doing it as a business” to cater for those who are doing it for charity and business.

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, I had wanted to accept the amendment, but I suggest that we delete the word, “vocational” –(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: Which amendment?

MR GABRIEL OPIO: The one that has been moved by the chairman of the committee.  I accept it, except I would like to propose that we delete the word “vocational” so as to read as, “established qualifications framework” other than only “vocational.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think that is agreeable to the minister and the chairman.  We are talking about private providers.  What moves a private person to offer a service is a profit motive.  If the case is that we cater for those without a profit motive in the first group, then we should put the second one, which provides for those with a profit motive.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean in the present formulation they cannot operate unless we take that proposal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am proposing that we include both the non-public service providers, as listed by the chairman and those that provide vocational training with a profit motive.  

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, the category has non-government organisations, religious organisations, associations and private companies.  

MR EPETAIT: I think hon. Nandala’s concerns are really catered for in the amendment because it talks about a private company; it could be an individual; it could be an association.  However, Mr Chairman, I differ with the proposed amendment by the minister to delete the word “vocational.”  I am saying this because really the Bill has established a Uganda Vocational Qualifications Framework; we are talking about vocational qualifications framework.  I do not see any harm, for purposes of clarity, if we maintained the word “vocational” here.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think my brother has made it clear to say that my interests are catered for.  However, one thing is that we cannot do is to use the word, “companies.” We must use, “private persons.”  This is because it caters for an individual, a partnership and company.  So, we should insert the word “private persons” for companies – (Interjections) – yes, because an individual is not a company.  An individual or a partnership can decide to do a business.  So, what I am saying is that let us add the phrase, “and private persons” because persons is defined as an individual, a partnership or a company –(Interjections)– yes, we want to make good laws for you. 

THE CHAIRMAN: If you want to say particularly, then you can say private companies and individuals. If you want that you can do that. Okay? So, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12

MR CHAIRMAN: I put the question

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the committee would like to propose an amendment on clause 13 (2) to read as follows: “The directorate shall be the secretariat of the industrial training council and shall, in its operations, be under the supervision of the council.”  The justification is to be specific that the directorate is the secretariat to the council. I beg to amend, Mr Chairman.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, the Bill did not provide for a secretariat and neither did it envisage one. So, if we are including this, it means the secretariat has to be defined: who is going to head it and how is it going to function? 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the reason the committee came up with this amendment is that previously, the Industrial Training Council was under the Ministry of Labour and Social Development and by us doing this, it is implied that we wanted to be specific and ensure that the directorate shall be under the supervision of the council. The emphasis here is to ensure that it will be the secretariat or the administrative body of the institutional framework of this. So, in a way it has no harm; it is just implying because we had a council previously and we are saying that for this one, the directorate should be the administrative body of this framework.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the directorate will be under the supervision of the Industrial Training Council. That means that the Industrial Training Council will establish itself and have a secretariat to deal with the matters of the secretariat. Therefore, I do not see anything wrong with what the Government is proposing in this Bill unless we want to create specifically a secretariat to be different from the Industrial Training Council. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, we are trying to solve a problem here. We wanted to emphasise that this directorate should be the administrative body. We are not creating anything else because previously you may find that the council will usurp the powers of the directorate. But we wanted to be specific that the governing council is there and the directorate is the administrative body.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then why don’t you create a separate provision that the directorate shall be the secretariat rather than clamping it within? You are free. You can create another part of the Bill.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yeah, but it is yours; you are the one to do it. 

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, I do not think the committee chairman is correct to say that the law should imply. The law is supposed to define.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we are moving from there and we are saying that he can create a separate provision so that it is clear that the directorate shall be the secretariat for this.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I am conceding that we leave that as it is and then we emphasise that- 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. But what is the formulation?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I think the legal drafting can assist us in this because the principle is-

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. The directorate shall be the secretariat of blah blah blah. Now, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14 

MR CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, there is an amendment from the committee on clause 15 on the Industrial Training Council. Sub-clause 2 is amended to read as follows: “The Industrial Training Council shall be the policymaking organ of the directorate.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, they are saying that “…the Industrial Training Council existing immediately…” and this law is creating an industrial training council. I think there is no need for an industrial council existing to remain because it looks a new council is going to be put in place. I think the Act is now recognising the Industrial Training Council. So, my proposition here is that this issue of saying “…the national council existing immediately before coming in force shall continue…” should be deleted because the council is going to be set. There is no need for transition and whatever else; that will be a temporary thing. Maybe the Ministry of Education will deal with the matters and now we need an Industrial Training Council. You cannot carry the garbage. Are you telling us the council which is there has the same composition that you are going to name?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think there has been a vacuum. There has been something. So, they are taking along with them what has been existing. We are not starting from scratch. I mean that this is their intention.  I put the  question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

THE CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, an amendment from the committee on the composition of the council. Sub-clause 1 is amended such that, one, in paragraph (d) of our Bill we substitute the word “one” appearing at the beginning of the paragraph with the word, “three”; two, that paragraph (e) read as follows: “that three members, one of whom shall be a person with a disability nominated from workers’ bodies, which are most representative.” Three- (Interruptions) - this is the view of the committee and is subject to debate- (Laughter)- Then three, in paragraph (f) by deleting-

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think they are asking you that when you say, “most representative” what does it mean? Who is determining this because if you are giving that slot to that body leave it really to them to choose?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, if the words “most representative” are the ones causing problems, the principle is the disability because there was an argument that disabled people are marginalised. So, I will have no quarrel with the words “most representative”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if the chairman is insisting that he wants the disabled to be represented, then let him create a slot for the disabled but not to be a worker and a disabled; that would be very complicated   because workers are under the workers’ body. Already the workers’ body is taken care of. So, the workers’ body may decide not to take a disabled person. So, let us maybe create a slot for people with disabilities.  

In addition to that Mr Chairman, the moment we talk of Uganda National Farmers Federation that means you are now going into specifics. The moment you start naming specifics, then every unit which has people being trained will ask - like the engineers, nursing et cetera. I think this matter of naming is becoming dangerous; others could be okay but I think Uganda National Farmers Federation - then we shall say the engineering institute, then we shall need the health institute. So, I think we remove that so that we put the other one of the disabled because it is for the interest of the committee.

MRS SSENTONGO: I just want to give the explanation regarding what is meant by “most representative” if it is to do with workers. Here we have two different national centres. We have the Central Organisation of Trade Unions and we have the National Organisation of Trade Unions. What it means is the number of organisations of workers that affiliate to that particular federation so that whoever has more is considered to be representing that particular body and this is the standard measure used even at the International Labour Organisation. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Who is going to determine this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think what you have asked is very important. If we put a body, it should be them to sit down and make a decision as to whom to send but not to tell us to tell them which person to send.

MR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just wanted to clarify. From the workers’ community that provision of “most representative” was proposed to be deleted. When we were debating the labour laws here, you remember that we removed that word because it was a word that was going to bring confusion and we just referred to it as “workers organisations” because the Ministry of Labour has a way they do it. When we passed the Labour Law last year, the words “most representative” were removed and we preferred to leave it to say “workers organisations”. If you say “most representative”, we have never determined the most representative organisation in this country and it will bring a lot of confusion. It can be a problem where workers will not be represented for a long time on this body because of these problems. So, Mr Chairman, I second the amendment of the committee of the three workers’ members but I also move a motion that we delete the words “most representative” and instead provide that “three members nominated by workers’ organisations”.  

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, I thought that the hon. Member was solving our problems in the ministry because our worry is the numbers. If you have three, you are adding to those who are there - the council becomes very big. I thought you would be assisting us to say, “One member is elected by the workers’ organisations,” so that we have one, that is, because of the big numbers that we are going to have.

MR LYOMOKI: I think you are getting me wrong; I am supporting the three. The only problem I am raising is about the definition of “most representative”.

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem with this amendment was the use of “most representative”. I think that is all. Otherwise, the other one is clause 16(1) because they say “one of whom.” So, do you agree that we delete? Okay. This amendment has been adjusted, that is clause 16 (1), to delete “most representative”.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Before the committee chairperson comes in, I still have a problem with the combination of persons with disability and the workers’ bodies. Persons with disability even when they appear in the workers’ forum are always discriminated against. I will prefer a situation where the representatives of persons with disability are on their own right so that they should not be merged up. The moment they are merged up, believe you me, persons with disability will just fizzle out. If it were possible, chairman of the committee, I will appeal to you that yes, we can agree on the representatives of the three but one of whom should be a person with disability elected or nominated by the disability movement. In that case you can then be able to rely on organisations like NUDIPU and the rest to have a representative to send there.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that is better.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I concede to that removal of the words “most representative”. And according to what we had agreed on; Chief Whip, we agreed in a meeting of Social Services - and the issue of the disabled who have a lot of innovations - they said they were left out. So, the issue of “most representative” can be deleted but the issue of persons with disabilities has to be put there because even yesterday, hon. Baba Diri was alluding to it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you put it there but what they are saying is why do you tie them with the workers? They should be sent by their organisations.

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, as the ministry saw that as a problem we suggest that persons with disabilities will be nominated and appointed by the minister under section 1 of this Act. [HON. Members: “No”]

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, these disabled people have organisations and since they have organisations, it is up to them to decide whom to send to represent them. If the minister is given powers, he might go to the village and pick his villagemate. Let the disabled organisations send their person.

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, that is agreeable “nominated and appointed by the minister.”

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, we are on (e), I would like to suggest if it is agreeable to the committee chairperson that we amend (e) by saying, “one member from the workers’…” you remove the “most representative” then we create a new (f) to say “one member from persons with disabilities nominated by the disability movement.” So that there is one worker and there is one person with disability from the disability movement. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is better that we pronounced ourselves on this. It has taken a lot of our time. 

MR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just wanted to amend the proposal by the honourable Chief Whip that for workers, it should be two. The amendment was three, meaning that two were to be workers and one of the three was supposed to a person with disability. So, I would suggest that the amendment should be “two members from the workers’ organisations” and then we create one for one member representing persons with disabilities. 

The reason is, in the old council, we used to have four workers. Actually workers were shocked to see that this council had reduced them to one. When they debated with the committee, the committee agreed to give them three slots, and of course one had to be a person with disability. Now we have removed that one to go to the person with disability, not necessarily a worker. So, I would think really, Mr Chairman, that we would allow the numbers to remain two and not one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek clarification from my colleague. All these people, like a member nominated by private vocational training schools, a member from- are they not workers? So, if they are workers, why do you want to create organisations that are sending in more workers and creating a council which is big?

MR LYOMOKI: In the old law, we had those representatives but we still had specifically four workers. Normally these representatives are not workers; they represent management. And that was the concept in the old law. So, I would really suggest that we still have to provide for workers specifically just like in the old law that provided for workers. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let me start by putting a question on hon. Lyomoki’s amendment. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Then let me put a question on the amendment by – No, no, no, on this one. I know it is part of the package but let us dispose off this one. Those in favour of the amendments as improved on.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I was continuing with the composition of the council and we had just finished part II. Then part III in paragraph (f) by deleting the expression “or his or her representative”. Then part IV, we are on –(Interjection)- they are asking me, “where”, just look at your Bill and the report. Look at Clause 15 and 16: Composition of the council. So, we are enumerating how the council should be composed. We are saying in paragraph (f) by deleting the expression “his or her” that the Permanent Secretary of the ministry responsible for education or his or her representative. We are avoiding the word “his or her”. We are trying to say that in that council, the PS is represented but the moment we say, “His or her representative,” it was a bit ambiguous that is why we put that. 

Mr Chairman, the next one is sub clause 4, by inserting, after paragraph (h), the following new paragraphs: Paragraph “(i) a representative from the Ministry responsible for Finance; (j) A representative from the Uganda Investment Authority”- (Interjection)- It is in the original Bill, hon. Members. Why don’t you refer to the Bill because these are not my own words? (k) A representative from the Chamber of Commerce;(l) A representative from BTVET institutions; 
(m) A representative from the informal sector.

And then, Mr Chairman, we are proposing that clause 15, we re-number the existing paragraph 1 to be (n) and to read as follows: (n) “Two other persons at least one of whom shall be a woman representing other interests related to the Business Technical Vocational Education Training.” Justification: to bring more stakeholders on board and to promote affirmative action.

Clause 15(3), Mr Chairman, is amended by substituting the word “remuneration” appearing at the beginning of the second line with the word “allowances”. Mr Chairman, I beg to amend. 

MR OTEKAT: Mr Chairman, I did not understand the rationale for removing the word “responsible for education or his or her representative…” To be more direct, if you put there “it should be the permanent secretary only” and somebody else goes, then it can be questioned. But if you leave the words “his or her representative” then the permanent secretary can delegate to the commissioner responsible. He or she does not need to be there all the time. 

Secondly, I am equally asking, why did that not apply for the PS in the Ministry responsible for labour and for the PS in the Ministry responsible for finance? I thought we could leave the word, “representative” for a person representing the PS in all the ministries. In case the PS does not attend then the PS can delegate to the commissioner responsible for BTVET. He or she does not need to appear there all the time. I thought we could leave that word there. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, where you said, “his or her representative” and even in these committees of Parliament, you have heard where a PS comes and the Members say, “we want the minister of that sector.” So, here it would mean that you are legalising that this PS can nominate a representative and there are two people. We wanted to be very specific because we know that when the PS is not there someone will say, “I am representing the PS,” and at that particular time he will be the PS. But the moment you say “his or her representative,” you are likely to have two people instead of having one person in the same meeting. That was the argument. 

MR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The original Bill had envisaged a 10-member council and we are aware that when a Bill is presented to Parliament, it is accompanied with a Certificate of Financial Implication. As we speak now, I have taken note of –

THE CHAIRMAN: Excuse me, I did not see them before but there are councillors from Mayuge District who are here. You are welcome. (Applause)  

MR EPETAIT: So, Mr Chairman, if we are to incorporate the proposed amendments, we shall have a 16-member council. I heard the minister almost complaining about the numbers. So, I wanted to find out from the minister whether this is tenable. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In addition to that Mr Chairman, we are seeing the word BTVET. Now, I am looking here, BTVET means Business Technical Vocational Education Training. Already the minister has been empowered to appoint from the same place and now you are saying a representative from that. Now, we are really getting concerned. What is the purpose of a huge council?

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, the ministry’s position was disagreeing with the enlargement of the number. (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, yes, she says that we have given a few slots to women but what I wanted to mention about the council –(Interjection)– yes, she has not said anything. But what I wanted to mention about the council, Mr Chairman, is that the council is not going to be full time. And we had a battle with the people who interfaced with us. In coming to that one; like the workers; you have heard them – the disabled and the women, and we know very well that this council is not going to be full time. So, for purposes of saying that it is too big and it is going to cost a lot – because I know Mr Nandala-Mafabi deals a lot with figures and finance, it is not full time. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, currently good governance demands for a maximum of five people, to the worst seven people who sit down to make policies, plans and think for the organisation. The moment you bring in a huge number, then you are bringing them to sleep. So, I would suggest and I would plead with the chairman of the council that performing council matters does not need a huge council. Let us have a small council; when need arises at that particular time we can expand. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, I have a suggestion. (b) The Chairperson of the committee suggested that we amend it to read: “three members nominated by the formal industrial sector.” I would like to suggest that we reduce this to two and leave the other slot for the informal sector, which he is suggesting. 

Secondly, a representative from the National Planning Authority; The National Planning Authority is under the Ministry of Finance and Uganda Investment Authority is also under the Ministry of Finance; and also the suggestion of a representative of the Ministry of Finance. Those are amendments from the chairperson. So, we could leave out the representative for finance and the Uganda Investment Authority and Uganda Chamber of Commerce, if it is agreeable, Mr Chairman. 

But if we conclude this, I have an amendment to make because if you count the number on this council, it is 18 and in “I”, that is where the chairperson remembers affirmative action and to include at least one woman. What is not stated is that the practice has been that women are normally left out.   Rather than saying only one woman, I would suggest two and say, “The minister while appointing this council should take gender into consideration,” so that it is not only a token of one person but one third should be women.

THE SPEAKER: No, but is there any reason to say that a representative of the Uganda Chamber of Commerce cannot be a woman? Is there any reason to say a representative of BTVET institutions cannot be a woman? Is there any reason to say a representative from the informal sector cannot be a woman? Why do you say it is only one woman?

MS KABAKUMBA:  Mr Chairman that is why I am suggesting that all these names should eventually land on the desk of the minister before he finally appoints them.  While he is in the process of appointing, he should look through the names and take into consideration that a third of them should be women. I beg to move.

MR WADRI:  Mr Chairman, I would like to go on the first proposal, which had been moved by the Government Chief Whip. And I still feel that we could reduce the number of membership of this council further. When we talk about representatives from BTVET institutions, my own feeling is that the permanent secretary of the Ministry of Education and Sports who serves on that council serves in his capacity to guide the council on policy matters and matters of professional attachment in which case, therefore, the permanent secretary will be expected in the course of executing his duties to get technical advice and input from his commissioner.  In which case, therefore, the commissioner as the one having the overall mandate of the professional arm of that particular sector will have got all information from the BTVET institutions throughout the country.  

I look at it as very superfluous to have a big BTVET representation on this body.  It is very superfluous; it cannot serve anything, it cannot cure anything because the permanent secretary is already well informed of what happens in these BTVET institutions throughout the country. Why should we have another slot for a representative? So, Mr Chairman, I beg to move that even the representative from BTVET institutions be deleted from this council otherwise it will be a duplication of the efforts of the permanent secretary through his commissioner. I beg to move.

MR KYANJO:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I want to pick it from where hon. Wadri has left and my concern is of the representation by the informal sector, which this Bill is making an attempt to formalise. And when we talk about the informal sector, what sort of representation are we talking about because in a sense this is something that is not clearly known, the informal sector, it is not clearly known. If we are looking at people who are doing useful business in an informal sense there is already a possibility of them coming through the Chamber of Commerce because they feature quite prominently.   Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE SPEAKER: I think from the contributions we are receiving, it seems this provision is raising a lot of problems; it requires re-casting and overhauling even what we have already agreed on in view of the principle that you think that it should be a small council. I think it requires overhauling and what I suggest is that we stand it over for sometime as you are thinking of what to do and then we proceed with others. By the time we finish, I think a solution would have been found.

Clause 17

MR SEBAGGALA:  Mr Chairman, clause 17; tenure of office of members of council. I am seeking clarification, Mr Chairman because when you read No.1: “A member of the council, other than the members of the council representing Government ministries shall hold office for a term of three years from the date of appointment and is eligible for re-appointment.” 

Mr Chairman, my clarification here in Clause 17(2) is not clear whether we are giving them two terms of three years each or we are giving them open terms in that there is no term limit. So, it must be clear here whether they are serving two terms of three years each.

THE SPEAKER: Well, there are some provisions which end by saying, “For one more term,” but when you sell your appointment well, I think you are open ended. There is a provision even in the Constitution where they say, “Only one more term.”

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Chairman, it is not yet clear because if we talk about appointment and is eligible for re-appointment, it means that that person can be eligible for re-appointment even after serving three more terms. 

THE SPEAKER:  What do you want? (Laughter)

MR SEBAGGALA: I suggest that we have term limits; they should serve two terms of three years each. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, in the ministry we wanted to serve one term and you can have a second one. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) So, that one is what we have in our ministry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is case I want to move some amendments here. Mr Chairman, if you say Government ministries, National Planning Authority, if at all is approved cannot be a Government ministry. So, we must be careful and say, “Government ministries or departments,” if we are meaning to cater for those which are not under ministries.

Two, I think if he is eligible for re-appointment for one more term. The purpose here is to promote good governance and competition so that people who come are competent and we can only appoint you when you are competent. And two, we are very many in the field who can serve on this council. 

THE SPEAKER:  So, what is your amendment, of one more term?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, “eligible for one more term.”

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR KUBEKETERYA: I would like to move an amendment on the functions of the council that in (1), paragraph (a) is amended to read as follows:- “To develop and recommend policies in respect of the directorate and its functions to the minister.”

In paragraph (c), insert the word “budget” after the word “approval” or “approve”. The justification is for clarity of the functions of the council.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 19 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR KUBEKETERYA: There is an amendment the committee would like to make on clause 20 about the establishment of the Uganda Vocational Qualifications Framework as follows: Clause 20(1)s, by adding paragraph (d) to read as follows: d) “To provide guidelines for modular training.”

Two, by replacing sub-clause 2 with the following: “The purpose of UVQF is to define: 

a) 	Occupational standards in the world of work.
b) 	Assessment of standards.
c) 	Vocational qualifications of learners who meet the set standards of the different studies.” The justification is to clarify on what UVQF has to do, which is to set uniform qualifications and standards to enable recognition of certificates issued to learners in all accredited schools and institutes, regardless of whether they are public or private BTVET providers. I beg to move.

MR OPIO: Agreed, except this is under clause 2 and not sub-clause 1; just re-arranging the sub-clauses.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR KUBEKETERYA: I would like to move an amendment on recognition of certificates. The clause is substituted to read as follows: “Award and recognition of certificates under UVQF” under this, “the Directorate and other examination bodies established under this Act shall award certificates for the business, technical or vocational education or training conducted under the Uganda Vocational Qualifications Framework.”

2.	“The certificate to be awarded in relation to the different studies and training shall be in the form prescribed by the minister on recommendation by the council.
3.	“The certificates awarded under sub-section 1 shall be recognised in the Uganda academic standards and by the labour market.” The justification is to ensure that persons who take the studies and training under the Act are awarded certificates and also to ensure that those certificates are recognised both academically and by the labour market. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to


Clause 22

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Talking about financing but under sub-clause (4), it says, “A person commits an offence and is liable for these fines.” Is there no appeal process? There should be a process to appeal if there is a problem and they never remitted the levy. I suggest that we create an appeal for somebody who has not remitted a levy before the penalty.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the Judiciary provides for an appeal. If somebody is sentenced, he will appeal. We do not need to provide for it in this law because there is a general provision allowing somebody to appeal against a conviction. I put the question that clause 22 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 23 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Clause 24 sub-clause (b) up to the end are all irrelevant because all monies are appropriated by Parliament; both loans and grants. So we could only maintain monies appropriated by Parliament for purposes of the fund. The remaining sub-clauses are redundant and if you make it like this, we shall have off-balance sheet financing. 

THE CHAIRMAN: There is (e). 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Money received by the fund by way of voluntary contribution must be recognised. Short of that we can get Al-queda money in the system.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you have any objections to that? Is it redundant?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Those are grants or donations and in Parliament we appropriate all the monies.

THE CHAIRMAN: I am saying Ssekandi is donating.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, from the legal advice, (e) can remain.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, what do you say about hon. Nandala’s remarks? 

MR OPIO: Our PAC chairman is saying that (b), c), and d) do not have to be mentioned. But when you say all assets received by the fund in the performance of its functions under this Act, is that not something special?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala, the purpose of giving these details, which you think would have been covered in one sentence, is to help a person who may not easily appreciate. There is no harm.

MR OPIO: Even people who are not experts can follow that when you sell an asset, it becomes money for an organisation. 

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: If we say assets received by the fund in performance of its function under this Act. We are saying that in Parliament, for example, if we give the university what we call fees that should also be approved in Parliament. But that will be the source to collect and spend them. But then, there will also be grants from the central government.  

Likewise, this levy they are going to make will be one of the revenues and when they are coming for a difference, which Parliament will appropriate, it will appropriate both the revenue they have got and the top-up from the central government.  

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, honourable member, you are a technical person and you might impress us in this field.  But a lay person like me may want these details. For instance, they say, “Any revenue delivered from the sale of any property, movable or immovable on behalf of the fund -” you may say, all this is government money, which should have been on the Consolidated Fund and so forth. But this is to help people; that is why they have these details. But there is no harm having the details rather than making a prissy. 

MR NSUBUGA: But, Mr Chairman, I wanted to say, if you are to take the explanation you have just given, they cannot remain as bullets; you can just only say, “search as”, because they fall under “a”. But when you leave them as bullets, they stand independent.

THE CHAIRMAN: We want to help people to understand, that is why we give these details. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 25, agreed to.)

Clause 26

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the committee would like to make an amendment in Clause 26. I would first of all propose that the original Clause 26 be deleted because it has been merged with 21, and then we insert a new Clause 26 to read as follows, in as far as the establishment of the examination boards is concerned:

“1. There shall be established by the minister, by different statutory instrument, examination boards for different specialised training courses of study including: 
(a)	Nursing and Midwifery.
(b)	Allied Health Professional courses.
(c)	Other courses as the minister may determine.

2. 	A board established under sub-section (1) shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal and may sue or be sued in its corporate name and may purchase, hold, manage and dispose of any property and enter into such contracts or other transactions as may be necessary or expedient for the discharge of its functions.
3. 	The minister may in a statutory instrument made under sub-section (1) provide for the composition, functions and powers of the board.  

4.	A board established under sub-section (1) shall award certificates under Section 21.

5.	An instrument made under this section shall be laid before Parliament within 30 days from the publication of the instrument in the gazette.” Mr Chairman, I beg to amend.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are dealing with 26?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, what happened is that the original 26 was merged with 21 and now we are creating a new 26 to talk about establishment of examination boards.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have I heard you saying, “gazette”?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I said that (5), “An instrument made under this Act shall be laid before Parliament within 30 days from the -” (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not in your report apparently, that is why I was surprised.  Is it a new idea that has come up?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, it is not totally new, but it is being specific - like we have said –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: What I am saying is that, the report I have here on 26 does not contain that provision.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, it was an error.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you agree that it is not there and you are just inserting it?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Yes, I am inserting it.  Thank you.

MR GABRIEL OPIO: Mr Chairman, I agree, except I would like to add, “Diplomas” because he is referring only to certificates. Wherever there is a word, “Certificate”, we should add there “Diploma”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, can I be clarified on this. Are we creating a parallel board to UNEB? Does this fall under UNEB or we are creating another examination board?

THE CHAIRMAN: It is different. So, I put the question, honourable members, to the amendments proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, reports show the performance of an institution and performance of an institution must have an independent view. So, I want to suggest an amendment on the reports to be provided. These should be audited reports and performance reports. I am bringing that in because there is no show of audit of these institutes in the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not necessary because it is covered under the general law. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the issue of auditing is in the original Bill. So we only wanted to adjust from 30 July to 30 September for purposes of the financial year ending.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question that Clause 27 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, my concern is on the last bit of 28, regarding the penalties. We have in the past seen the costs of forged certificates, going as far as costing Members of Parliament their seats in this august House. Yet, the accompanying price of re-electing a Member to come and sit in this House is far much greater than this mild penalty that is being proposed.

I would move an amendment that instead of only 12 currency points, we put 50 currency points; extremely prohibitive and we say instead of six months in prison, it should be two years that is equivalent to a course. So, if some one thinks of going to prison, he should simply be going to school. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment on Clause 29, amended in sub section (1) by substituting paragraph (e) and (f) to read as follows:
“(e) Prescribing the community polytechnics, vocational training centres, schools and institutions, technical centres and schools, farm schools, technical institutes and colleges and specialised training institutions which shall provide BTVET.

(f) Prescribing the qualifications and requirements for establishing non-public, non-formal and formal enterprises to provide BTVET.”

Two, in paragraph (m) by inserting the word “examination” before the word “assessment.” The Justification is that in case of paragraph (e) to include farm schools and other schools. And in case of paragraph (f) to provide for the type of bodies that can apply to provide BTVET since it will be difficult for the minister to identify the bodies to prescribe. With qualifications and requirements in place, the screening can be done when they apply for registration and accreditation. 

In paragraph (m) for clarity. It is not clear what assessment mechanism and procedures the minister has to deal with hence the insertion of “examination” to be certain. I beg to amend, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30 agreed to.

Clause 31 agreed to.

Clause 32

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, in our report we said that there are certain parts of the examination bodies or Acts that are supposed to be repealed. I would want to be specific in Clause 32 in the repeals, and savings, and in (ii) I wanted to make an amendment that the following sections of other Acts are repealed: 
“a)	Section 4 (c)(d)(e) of the Nurses Act, 1996. 
b)	Section 5 (c)(d)(e) of the Allied Workers Act, 1996. 
c)	Section 17 of UNEB Act, 1983. 
d)	 Section 8 (ii) partly amend UNEB Act of 1983 by deleting the word ‘technical and business’.”

Mr Chairman, I would also like to suggest that we repeal 9 (iv) of the UNEB Act, 1983. I beg to amend.

MR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I am in agreement with the proposed amendments, maybe to get Members aboard. The proposed sections to be repealed are all dealing with examinations and we see that since we have created a Uganda vocational qualifications framework, those various professional bodies now will have their examination boards under the BTVET law. Additionally, I propose that Section 9 (v) of the UNEB Act which is talking about the examination committee for technical schools also be repealed, because it is now coming up in that law.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 1 agreed to.

Schedule 2 agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is Clause 16, do you want some time to think about it or you have already finished?

MR OPIO: We are in agreement. The proposed compositions are as follows: One representative of private vocational training institutions, a representative of formal industrial sector, a representative of federation of Ugandan Employers, one representative of workers’ body, one representative of person with disability, PS Ministry of Education and Sports, Permanent Secretary Ministry of Labour, one representative of UIA, one representative of informal sector and two persons nominated by the minister.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I think again we have not made any difference. That is why we are amending the old council. So, there is no way you will choose somebody from the informal sector because informal means it has no gazetted way of being known; so that one should from day one be deleted.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, when we were considering this Bill, there is a group that came and said - that was Uganda Chamber of Commerce - that there are private investors who have hotels and they do training of these waitresses and waiters. This Bill was leaving them out. So we feel that we should harness the potentials of – we are looking at the informal sector in that way.

The moment we leave the informal sector out, that one means even the objectives of the Bill are null and void. So I would implore hon. Nandala and honourable members that the informal sector should be left in, for us to move systematically because this Bill is not basically for academics but it is basically for skills. Even people who are illiterate who have skills in mechanics, using the modular systems can really serve and get employment. So I would implore hon. Nandala to abandon that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, chairman of the committee. Yes, now you have made a case that these informal sectors are not known. In short, if you are referring to Uganda hotels, let it come clear as Uganda hotels. The moment it has no organisation, it is null and void. You cannot provide for something which does not exist, in structure. So what we have to do, Mr Chairperson, I would suggest that do not worry, the day the informal sectors will become formal, they will be recognised because already there is a provision for formal sector. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I gave an example of the hair dressers or the saloons. They are not formal. I know that they are businesses but in a way, that is the informal sector we are talking about; they are not registered anywhere, that is why we are calling them informal –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, the argument of excluding the informal sector is not against the representation of the groups that are not formalized yet. I earlier mentioned that people who are in the informal sector, in that narrow sense, have broader prominence in other areas. When you go to the Chamber of Commerce, there are prominent ones; when you go to the manufacturers’ association, they are there. Now we are mingling them as if it is a different class. This is going to technically bog you down when it comes to getting the others in the informal sector. I am saying this because people like the traditional doctors will say they are the informal sector; the founders will come and say they are the informal sector. I think let us leave them where they belong; they will come naturally through that area.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, when you look at the latest amendment from the minister, you realise that he has left out the Uganda Chamber of Commerce. So, my proposal is that we include, “Uganda Chamber of Commerce” and delete “informal sector.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I agree with that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, including Uganda Chamber of Commerce is very good, but why include the Uganda Investment Authority (UIA)? I am asking this because if it is about investment and planning, we have got somebody from the National Planning Authority who represents the Ministry of Finance and the Uganda Investment Authority for purposes of planning. So, the moment you include Uganda Chamber of Commerce, we do not need anybody from UIA because they are represented by the National Planning Authority.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not know why the chairman of the committee is conceding on the issue of informal sector. This informal sector is a clearly known international phenomenon. In most organisations there is an ILO requirement of representation of the informal sector. So, I see no reason why the chairman of the committee should say that he is not aware of the informal sector.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, from the list read by the minister there is a slot of two other people to be appointed. So, he can appoint under that category; that can solve your problem.

DR LYOMOKI: Okay, we can move on.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, it is agreed that we drop that on the basis of the umbrella of the two. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 16 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

The Title 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.
)
The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)


REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training Bill, 2008” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)


BILLS
THIRD READING

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training Bill, 2008” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, 
THE BUSINESS, TECHNICAL, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING ACT, 2008

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, the Bill is passed. (Applause) I understand you do not have copies of the report on Local Governments (Amendment) Bill. [Members: “No.”] Okay, in that case what do we do? I see that we have a report on National Economy on the state of the economy. Do you have a brief or summary before you read it? [Mr Kaddunabbi: “Yes.”] Okay, we can receive the report of the Committee on National Economy, but what do we do with the other two Bills on audit and local governments? Shall we be able to finish this work on Tuesday? [Members: “No.”] We may be forced to utilise Wednesday because I understand that the Bill on local governments is very urgent. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY FOR THE 1ST HALF OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/2008 

4.39
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the state of the economy for the first half of the financial year 2007/08.

Mr Speaker and honourable members –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I do not see any minister from the Finance Ministry here. 

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, due to the CHOGM preparations, the committee was not able to present the report for the first quarter because the House was on recess -(Interjection)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, this report is very important. It talks about the economy of this country and the economic management is under the Ministry of Finance. Recommendations will be made and the people who are supposed to implement them are from the Ministry of Finance. Is it procedurally right to proceed, Mr Speaker, without the people who will be responsible for the implementation of these recommendations of Parliament? Or are we just doing it?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I would have loved to see Dr Suruma, but the honourable minister here is now Leader of Government Business. (Laughter) 

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, the overview of the performance of the economy. During the budget speech, the economy was projected to grow at 6.5 percent per annum and inflation to be contained within five percent. Poverty eradication and hence welfare improvement was at the centre of growth. Thus, any development that contradicts this risks making the economy fail in its poverty reduction objective.

During the period under review, there was a rise in food prices and this had serious negative effects on the food security and hence welfare of the poor. This is because the poor spend 42.1 percent of their total income on food and any rise in food prices inevitably strains the welfare of the poor. 

The welfare situation of the poor was further strained by the increases in electricity tariffs. There is evidence that the poor spend three percent of their income on electricity while the rich spend two percent. In addition to this, a 10 percent increase in the costs arising from electricity tariffs will increase food prices by 20 percent on average. This, therefore, means that further increase in power tariffs will inevitably affect the country’s food security and welfare, of not only the poor, but also the rich. 

However, the increase in private sector credit and other loan extension to the private sector during the reporting period was a welcome development because it is out of these loans that investments are created. The outstanding limitation in this sub-sector is the level of intermediation which is still inadequate and there are still some areas without access to financial infrastructures. 

The performance of the external sector remained moderate but continued to be largely consumption-driven with large increases in the imports while growth in investments and export remained limited.

During the reporting period, 192 projects were licensed and these were worth planned investment of $1, 060 and planned employment of 17,171 people. The challenge being faced by investment in the country is the translation ratio whereby less than 50 percent of the planned investments are realised. Uganda Investment Authority should therefore work towards actualising most of the planned investment through greater monitoring and evaluation of the proposed investments. 

We looked at the performance of the key sectors where we have the financial sector policy. 3.11 was inflation. I will read the message we have on inflation. The key macroeconomic objective was to maintain stable movement in the prices for goods and services by maintaining inflation within the target of five percent per annum. Over the review period, prices rose within the programmed limits compared to the same period a year ago. The annual headline inflation rate for the year ending 31 December 2007 was recorded at 5.1 percent and the underlying inflation was at 6.6 percent. Members are invited to look at table 1 on page 4.

We also looked at the money supply and it has a table on page 5. 

On page 6, we have the interest rates and over the reporting period, the rediscount rate which is the rate at which Bank of Uganda buys Treasury Bills back before their maturity and bank rate, the rate at which Bank of Uganda is prepared to lend money to the domestic banking system showed a gradual fall -(Interjection)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you ruled that the Leader of Government Business will listen. Is it procedurally right that the Leader of Government Business runs away? (Laughter)

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would interest members to look at figure 1 which shows the rediscount rate and the bank rate.

On page 7, we looked at the yield curve -(Interjections)- but at the same time I was requested to summarise. 

THE SPEAKER: Summarise, please. 

MR KADDUNABBI: The yield curve normally compares the difference between short and long-term interest rates. So, honourable members, look at figure 2 and look at that yield curve analysis for the secondary securities markets for the month ended December 2007.

On page 8, honourable members, we have the foreign exchange development and I will also interest you to look at figure 3 which shows the trend of the foreign exchange developments. 

On page 9, we have the capital market developments and table 3 shows those developments. 

The external sector is on page 10. During the reporting period, the performance of the external sector remained moderate but continued to be largely consumption-driven with large increases in imports while growth in investments and exports remained limited. 

As shown in the table below, the current account deficit worsened by over 100 percentage point from $105.79 million in the first half of 2006/07 to 362.3 million in the first half of 2007/08. Table 4 clearly shows that development. 

We also looked at the real sector. The electricity consumption during the reporting period experienced a decrease in the amount of electricity consumed from 94.23GWH in July 2007 to 90.8 GWH in September 2007. The result has been frequent power cuts which has caused not only losses to businesses but also household property. In other words, power fluctuation has increased the cost of doing business in the country. 

We look at figure 4 which has commercial lights, domestic and street lighting. The electricity tariffs were increased from the last fiscal year across consumers of all categories. As shown in the table below, there is a suggestion by UMEME to further increase power tariffs. But, honourable members, as indicated in the table, the domestic categories of household consumers shoulder the bulk of the power tariffs. Power tariffs have become unbearable for consumers and it is in this light that this sub-sector be seriously studied in terms of tariff setting and hence the underlying cost components. The poor spend about three percent of their income on electricity while the rich spend two percent of their income.  A 10 percent increase in the costs arising from electricity tariffs will increase food prices by 20 percent on average. 

From the above analysis, it is clear that the further increase in power tariffs will inevitably affect the country’s food security and welfare, of not only the poor but also the rich. Look at table 5.

Regarding the investments in the country, 192 projects were licensed and we expect to have employment of 17,171 people. We also show on page 13, the sectoral distribution of planned investment for the first quarter. 

Observations

My committee observed that the movement in the prices shown in table 1 has a number of implications. First, the 10 percent increase in the cost of road transport arising from the rise in price of road transport would lead to a rise in the prices of foods by 30 percent to 60 percent. However, a similar rise in the cost of railway transport would only lead to a 10 percent increase in prices of almost all commodities. The rising food prices will particularly have serious negative effect on the food security and hence welfare of the poor because the poor spend 42.1 percent of their total income on food and the rich spend 26.7 percent of their income on food.

The underlying inflation, excluding food crop prices, averaged at around six percent above the programmed limits. The increase in prices cut across all the consumer items except food. Particular to note was the increase in prices of rent, fuel, utilities, transport, telecommunication, household, personal good, clothing and footwear.

The fall in net domestic credit extension to government which shown a decline in government activity in the financial year was less than required to offset the increase in money supply.

The increase in private sector credit by 29.3 percent and other loans to private sector was a welcome development because it is out of these loans that investments are created. However, the level of intermediation is still inadequate and there are still some areas without access to financial infrastructures and the banks and other financial service providers need to further increase access to other services in all parts of the country. The committee further observed that this is another area where public-private sector partnership is still required.

The recent developments in Kenya are likely to create pessimism in the third quarter. In order to maintain the same confidence in the minds of the investors, there is need for government to invest in confidence building by using market fundamentals.

The third quarter is likely to witness a depreciation of the shilling against the US dollar mainly due to the ongoing political instability in Kenya, which has negatively impacted on the Uganda exports and import sub-sector in various ways. 

The persistent high growth in imports compared to exports continued to widen the country’s trade deficit as measured by the gap between imports and exports. This trend underscores the concern of whether the country can sustain its current account both in the medium and long run. Unless the country prioritises the use of her scarce foreign exchange for importation of goods for capital formations rather than consumption, this trend may continue to worsen. We are also aware that import support has played an important role in the direction but this is not sustainable looking at the country’s external balance.

In spite of the reduction in consumption, electricity purchases from UETCL by UMEME increased by four percent in October 2007 from the two percent increase in September 2007. 

Recommendations
 
There is urgent need for government, first to improve the road infrastructure because part of the problem is structural. 

Government further needs to fully develop the railway network within and outside its boundary as a lasting solution with regard to reduction in the transport costs and hence cost push inflation. 

The tariff rates for electricity should be reviewed with a view to revising them downwards because everybody knows it is electricity tariffs which have contributed to high production costs. 

Government should make a study on the fundamentals leading to high interest rates despite the low and stable inflation rates over the years.

There is need to popularise the stock market within the general population as we prepare for the East African Community common stock exchange.

The Uganda Investment Authority Statute should be reviewed to strengthen the authority to be able to take on the role of monitoring and evaluation of enterprises licensed.

And lastly, there is need to support production and increase in value addition for exports as a prerequisite for sustainability through investment of borrowed funds in export orientation and high value exports. 

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I beg to report and request honourable members to adopt this report of the Committee on National Economy. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are we going to debate this report? No, I do not think so. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do agree that we go ahead and debate this report. The government has noted the recommendations but we also want to hear the input of other Members before we make a substantive response.

THE SPEAKER: Now, my fear is there might be questions, clarifications, these and the other. I think the Minister of Finance himself should be here. (Applause) I quite appreciate you are really serious about this but do you think really –(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like first of all to thank the committee for this very important report that they have submitted. We in the opposition seriously take note of the contents of this report and we really regard it as a mini budget. And because of the importance that we attach to this report, Mr Speaker, I would like to formally request that we Members of the opposition through our shadow minister for finance, planning and economic development, make a formal response, which therefore will be able to provide us with insights and resourceful information to make a meaningful debate to the two papers that will have been tabled to this House. Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence on this suggestion that I am making on behalf of the opposition. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think you will have to help this House because this is a committee report and on this committee, the opposition is represented. So, we believe that the ideas and concerns of the opposition were integrated in this report. 

I do not know how we shall handle that statement but if there is a strong view that we could listen from the opposition, then we will not proceed to debate this report today. Otherwise, I was ready to respond to all the questions. (Laughter and Applause) But we shall follow your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I must thank the Minister and Leader of Government Business currently, for the diligence, commitment and duty but I think and in all fairness because there was other information which may be seized by those who are not here and they want well sourced answers. I see in fairness that let us postpone the debate on this report. But I thank the minister because she has stood the - [Hon. Members: “She is promoted to Prime Minister”] (Laughter) 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 April 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)



