Tuesday, 19 April 2011

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I hope you had a peaceful weekend and I wish you a happy Holy Week. 

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg for your indulgence to make adjustment to the Order Paper to enable the Minister of Finance to lay on Table the treasury memoranda indicating government status on action taken on PAC recommendations for eight years.

THE SPEAKER: Adjusted. Proceed.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I want to lay on Table treasury memorandum on the report of Public Accounts Committee for the financial year which ended 30 June 2005. I beg to lay on Table treasury memorandum on the report of Public Accounts Committee for the financial year which ended 30 June 2003. I beg to lay on Table treasury memorandum on the report of Public Accounts Committee for the financial year which ended 30 June 2002. 

I have treasury memoranda for local government for four years which I would like to lay on Table as well. I take this opportunity to lay on Table treasury memorandum on the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee for the financial year which ended 30 June 2005. I lay on Table treasury memorandum on the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee for the financial year which ended 30 June 2004. I also lay on Table treasury memorandum on the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee for the financial year which ended 30 June 2003. I lay on Table treasury memorandum on the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee for the financial year which ended 30 June 2002. And finally, I lay on Table treasury memorandum on the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee for the financial year which ended 30 June 2001. I beg to lay on Table.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for laying those documents on Table. But what happened to the rest of the years? For PAC, she has laid treasury memoranda for 2002, 2003 and 2005. What does our law say concerning the rest of the years? The same applies to the Local Government Accounts Committee.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance deals with the reports that have been referred to her. The year which was skipped - I think it is 2003/2004 – the PAC decided to skip it and handled the audit report for the following financial year. So once a report is referred to the Minister of Finance, she prepares for it. As far as I know, the other reports by PAC are not yet ready.

THE SPEAKER: Let the two relevant committees undertake study of documents tabled namely; the Local Government Accounts and Public Accounts committees respectively.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, this portrays Parliament in bad light because now the minister is defending herself as a result of international pressure. But the Local Government Accounts Committee, for example, finished reports of 1999 to 2005 but we do not see them. When I was chairperson, we did 10 years and the House adopted all those reports. So, the Minister of Finance – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying there is backlog?

MR EKANYA: Yes, and she should not paint Parliament negatively when – 

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Minister, look into this backlog and do the needful.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

    (I) ON BWINDI IMPENETRABLE FOREST 

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TOURISM) (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Speaker, this is a ministerial statement on gorilla permits and the Eco Lodge in Nkuringo, Bwindi Impenetrable National Park. 

Parliament on Thursday, 31 March 2011, asked the Minister for Tourism, Trade and Industry to give a statement on the outcome of investigations that had been conducted by a probe committee set up by the Minister for Tourism, Trade and Industry regarding gorilla permits and the hotel in Nkuringo in Bwindi Impenetrable National Park. [Hon. Members: “This is a wrong report.”] There are two reports: The first one is on Bwindi and the second one is on import of goods to Uganda. I gave out both reports at the same time.

In a bid to increase benefits to the local communities surrounding Bwindi Impenetrable National Park, Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) in partnership with International Gorilla Conservation Programme (IGCP), a non-governmental organisation based in Rwanda, encouraged the communities of Nkuringo to form Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation (NCDF), a company limited by guarantee then composed of 23 members in order to participate in tourism business to generate community revenue over and above the 20 percent park entrance fees and $5 per gorilla permit, which goes back to the communities surrounding Bwindi Impenetrable National Park.

Upon the formation of the company, IGCP secured $250,000 from USAID on behalf of the communities to start an eco lodge on condition that:

    a) A private company with experience in hotel management would be sourced to co-invest, learn the eco logde and share profits with the communities.
    b) That the Uganda Wildlife Authority would guarantee exclusive first rights to all the then six gorilla permits to track the Nkuringo gorilla group. This was to give a marketing competitive advantage to the community lodge. The community, after securing the grant and first right to six gorilla permits, then sourced, through a competitive bidding process, the Uganda Safari Company (TUSC) to be the co-investor and manager of the eco lodge, which would be built using the secured $250,000 for the community and an additional sum that would be provided by TUSC, in line with approved budget and plans.
    c) The community company was to receive $30 as bed night fees from the $150 paid by a tourist who sleeps in the eco lodge per night, with the exception of complementary offers given to non-commercial visitors of TUSC. The private company was in turn given the exclusive rights to the six gorilla permits. 

Another right was to have a garden to grow vegetables for use in the lodge and the right to take away movable assets in case of termination of the contract to run the lodge. 

Following the granting of the first right, six gorilla permits to the Uganda Safari Company by the Uganda Wild Life Authority, a section of two operators protested the idea calling it monopolisation of gorilla permits by one tour company being aided by the Uganda Wildlife Authority. Consequently, a complaint reference Comp. No. 12/9/08 TS 115/2008, was made to the IGG, alleging discrimination, illegality and irregularities arising from planning for management and issuance of gorilla permits by the Uganda Wild Life Authority. At that time, the number of gorilla families that were being visited around Bwindi was four.

The IGG investigated the matter and issued a report in April 2001. The IGG recommended the following actions:

    i) That the agreement between Wildlife Authority and Nkuringo Conservation Development Foundation and that between Nkuringo Conservation and the Development Foundation, with the Uganda Safari Company Limited, be revoked.
    ii) That the Uganda Wildlife Authority should comply with the Uganda Wildlife Act and all the other relevant laws.

    iii) That a framework for harnessing tourism opportunities by the entire community neighbouring Bwindi Impenetrable National Park be developed by the Uganda Wildlife Authority, as opposed to doing it for particular communities

    iv) Lastly, that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should strengthen its supervisory role on the Uganda Wildlife Authority and that Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation be wound up.

Upon the issuance of the report, Uganda Wildlife Authority and Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation, objected to the findings while some of the communities and other tourism operators in the area applauded it.

Because of this acrimony, the line minister, in the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by Section 4 (3) of the Uganda Wildlife Authority Act, Cap. 200, set up an independent inquiry into the matter. The inquiry was conducted by a team composed of:

    a) Col. Stephen Kwiringira from UPDF, as the chairperson;
    b) Denis Beregye, from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, as the secretary;
    c) Mr Wasswa Masokoi Swalik, a member of the UWA Board;
    d) Mr Amos Wekesa, the President of the Uganda Tourism Association, as a member; and 
    e) Mr John Bosco Ninzeyi of Makerere University Wildlife Department, as a member.

Findings of the probe team

The agreement, “Nkuringo Conservation Development Foundation and the Uganda Safari Company,” although good, was unfavourable and exploitative of the Nkuringo community. The Uganda Wildlife Authority, working with the IGCP and the contested 23 NCDF members, ignored the wider community interests and witnessed the signing of a contract, which largely favoured the Uganda Safari Company. The following clauses were found to be unfavourable to the local community:

The contract provided for the grant of $250,000 sourced from Prime West, a USAID project, as part of the Nkuringo community contribution, but was silent on how much, the co-investor, which is the Uganda Safari Company, would contribute towards the construction of the eco lodge. Surprisingly, however, the Uganda Safari Company claims to have injected $2 million, which was not approved by the community’s NCDF as a co-investor, acquired by the agreement.

The bills of quantities and the building plans for the eco lodge were not provided by TUSC, who undertook its construction, making it difficult to establish the justification for the $2 million, they were purporting to have injected into the project.

The $30, which is the bed night fees, as stipulated in the contract, but its increase did not have percentage criteria on which it was based, making it unfair to the community; it was also left at the discretion of Uganda Safari Company. The recent increase from $30 to $45 does not correspond to the room fees by the Uganda Safari Company of $150 to $450. There was no basis for the increase in terms of the community benefits yet the cost per room had been increased from $150 to $450. The increment was rather a response to public pressure.

The contract is silent on the number of complementary guests the Uganda Safari Company can bring in, making it hard for the community to monitor and ascertain the income due to them. 

The contract gave exclusive rights to the Uganda Safari Company to create and manage a crop garden thus depriving the community from benefits, if they supplied farm produce to the lodge.

The contract vests all movable assets into TUSC upon termination of the contract. This means the community would be left with no capacity to operate the lodge should Uganda Safari Company pull out. 

The Uganda Safari Company is not using all the six gorilla permits assigned to Nkuringo community hence causing a financial loss to Uganda Wildlife Authority.

The Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation that was initially started with limited membership of 23 members has since opened up membership and now includes all resident community members above the age of 18.

There was possible conflict of interest since Jonathan Wright of the Uganda Safari Company, which runs the Clouds Eco Lodge, was a board member of Uganda Wildlife Authority a few months prior to the company winning the investment partnership. 

The working relationship between Uganda Wildlife Authority and the community surrounding Bwindi Mgahinga conservation area was not good. The local community was not conversant with the way the eco-lodge project works and how they benefit from it. They say that the money given out to them as revenue sharing, that is, the 25 percent of gate collections and the $5 levy per gorilla permit, was too low compared to the cost of conservation they have to bear. The local government too does not perceive this as direct revenue from the park to the district. 

The law governing wildlife conservation is not adequate and does not enable a smooth coordination between the ministry and Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

Recommendations

They recommended a review of the Uganda Wildlife Act and Tourism Act to provide for effective supervision of the sector by the minister responsible for tourism and wildlife. 

They recommended upholding the agreement between Uganda Safari Company and Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation but review the clauses unfair to the community and replicate the concept to other communities around the park.

The Chief Government Valuer should conduct evaluation of the Clouds Eco Lodge to ascertain the actual cost of this project and the money invested by Uganda Safari Company.

Reduce the gorilla permits allocated to Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation since they have failed to exhaust their allocation quota.

What the ministry has done so far.
The ministry, through Uganda Wildlife Authority, continues to release to the local communities revenue sharing funds: A total of Shs 487,037,700 had been disbursed as 20 percent of entrance fees to Bwindi Impenetrable National Park as at 31 December 2009. A total of Shs 287,577,850 was released to the districts of Kanungu; Shs 171,870,375, Kabale; Shs73,312,150 and Kisoro; Shs 42,375,325 as part of the $5 per permit sold under the gorilla levy programme to fund community development projects in frontline villages around Bwindi Impenetrable National Park.

The wildlife policy of 1999, the Uganda Wildlife Act of 1996 and the Tourism Act of 2008 are under review to take into consideration all emerging issues in the sector including enhancing community benefits. 

Two additional gorilla groups were habituated and opened for tourism in Kisoro, one in Ruhija in Kabale District and two in Kanungu District. 

To create more gorilla permits, a total of seven gorilla groups, and in each group eight people visit, so that is a total of 56 permits. These are now available for tourism. Two more groups will be opened for tourism soon. Two groups are under habituation. 

Uganda Wildlife Authority is undertaking computerisation of a gorilla booking system to make it much more user-friendly.

The ministry has engaged Nkuringo community and Uganda Safari Company to review the agreement on the Eco lodge and the review is now ongoing.

The ministry has further directed the Uganda Wildlife Authority and engaged the Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation to review the agreement on first right to permits. This review is currently ongoing.

Lastly, the ministry is strengthening the private sector by legally establishing the Uganda Tourism Association as the apex body and building its capacity to effectively represent the interests of all the business players in the tourism sector. 

I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member for the statement.

3.22 
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable for the report. I find the communities in Kisoro, Kabale and Kanungu at a loss with such a report that the minister has presented. 

My observation is that Government is not coordinated – the Executive is not coordinated. The IGG does investigation, gives his recommendations and says, “This was a bad contract, revoke it.” The recommendations are very clear as outlined on page 2. In one of them, the IGG recommends for the whole contract to be revoked. 

After the IGG has given his recommendation, including a recommendation to the minister of tourism, in sub section 4, and some other recommendations, the ministry goes ahead to undermine the IGG’s office. What does he do? He sets his own independent probe committee. What does the committee come up with? It negates almost everything that the IGG has done! 

The IGG’s recommendations were in the interest of the community. As you may see, on page 2, it says the communities applauded the report, which report has not even been laid on Table - so that it may be made public because it was one of the demands. 

We need to be guided, Mr Speaker. If the IGG makes recommendations and you come up with a counter probe to undo what the IGG has done, isn’t this undermining the institution of the IGG? So, which one should we go with? Should we look forward to the IGG’s office in this case of unfair contracts, mingled with corruption and bad methods of work? What should the community do?

I also find it very contradictory when the minister says “…the agreement including Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation and Uganda Safari Company although good was unfavourable and exploitative of the Nkuringo community.” So how can this be really good when such a contract is and unfavourable especially to the communities we represent? That means that one may ask a question, where was the Attorney-General in all these contracts and Memorandum of Understanding because this was binding the Government and ministry? Where is the IGG and the Attorney-General in this whole game?

Maybe Parliament needs to interest or address itself on all the Memoranda of Understanding and agreements made outside the IGG’s office because often, some officials who may even be junior, bind the government into contracts that are not tenable and this is one of them.

When you look at this, there is a lot of evidence to say that the people of Kigezi, Kisoro, Kabale and Kanungu are not benefiting in all this despite the fact that they are hosting these gorillas. There is also this Bwindi Impenetrable “something” Trust, whose board has expired, is ineffective and which problem has also not been addressed.

Mr Speaker, you remember the Mapesa saga between the minister and Mapesa. The whole thing hasn’t been addressed and it is affecting the community. At the end of the day, such projects would have benefited the communities but now all that you see within the communities are bad roads. This is money that would have gone to the communities, like this contribution you have mentioned on page five of almost Shs 487 million. This is half a billion. If this money is given to communities within our region around Bwindi Impenetrable Forest and it is well managed, community roads wouldn’t be a problem.

Probably it would even be injected into these SACCOs and community development would be visible. But when all this mess is in this sector and specifically in this industry, there will be nothing to show that Ugandans are benefiting out of these natural resources that are within.

This is a pointer. If we are failing to manage such a simple project like Bwindi Impenetrable Forest with the very few gorillas and royalties, how are we going to manage royalties from oil, which are going to come in trillions yet we are failing to manage these few millions here?

It shows how unprepared we are as Parliament because we do not have a legal framework and we have not made the relevant laws - we have not done most of the things. So my call is that the minister should heed the call of the IGG and Parliament should interest itself in these natural resources so that these kinds of royalties and the revenues that are coming out of this are beneficial to the people that we serve.

Mr Speaker, I thank you.

3.29
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I also get quite surprised at the recommendations that the ministry has come up with. When you compare them with the observations, they are at variance.

First of all, on page 3, the minister stated the persons who constituted a team of an inquiry that was sanctioned by the Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry and chaired by Col. Kwiringira Stephen from UPDF. I thought maybe there was a security matter there. It would have also been interesting to know the professional touch that that colonel would have with the management of the gorillas. It would also be good to have the terms of reference of that team.

But like my colleague has already pointed out, the findings of that probe team were really very interesting; that the agreement was unfavourable and exploitative to the Nkuringo communities.

They also cited that the Uganda Safari Company surprisingly made a claim of $2 million as having been injected for the construction of the eco lodge, something that has not been verified. As if that is not enough, they say on page 4, recommendation 2.3 that the Uganda Safari Company is not using all the six gorilla permits assigned to Nkuringo community hence causing a financial loss to Uganda Wildlife Authority. The Safari Company is causing a financial loss but at the end of it on page 5, the ministry is recommending that you uphold the agreement of the Safari Company with Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation. Is it in a bid to cause more financial loss?

That the company is not using all the six gorilla permits - why must it enjoy all the six gorilla permits when it is causing such financial loss? Is it the only player in the field?

The same company went ahead to increase the bed night fee by 150 percent from $150 to $450. Out of community pressure and shame, they accepted to increase bed night fees for the community only by 50 percent from $30 to $45. And here the ministry appears to be praising and massaging the Uganda Safari Company. I think there is something that has fallen short. 

We may also need to interest ourselves as to whether there are no conflicts of interest within the ministry because I am surprised that they have not given any reason why they have totally negated the findings of the IGG. I concur with hon. Banyenzaki that we need that report here because the local community applauded the report of the IGG. They have been exploited by the Safari Company and by those contracts but really, how can a minister now come here to say we should recommend upholding that agreement?

Finally, on page six, 4.3, the minister says they have two additional gorilla groups, which were habituated and opened for tourism in Kisoro; one in Ruhija, Kabale District and two in Kanungu. One plus two equals three. Now you say there are two additional gorilla groups in Kisoro, one in Kabale and one in Kanungu. I don’t know whether you are picking it. Maybe it was a typographic error but I think we need to get updated. 

We need the IGG report on that probe so that we also get ourselves well informed of what really caused the ministry to again constitute a parallel probe team and throw away all the findings of the IGG. There is something sinister in this.

3.34
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had thought the Minister of Tourism who made this presentation is from Kabale and would be very interested in the revenues of these gorilla permits.

On the onset, you will see a problem; 23 members sitting and making a foundation with the intention to collect money. If you wanted districts to benefit, there are district structures which should have been the ones to sit down and agree with Uganda Wildlife Authority. From the onset there is a problem.

You are also saying $5 per permit. How did you compute this? These are the issues, which the IGG saw and found necessary to be addressed. There is a problem in this contract.   

US dollars 250,000 is not little money.  It can build a big hotel –(Interjections)- what are you talking about? Yes, $250,000 can build a hotel. That is why you see this company now wants to benefit from us. If we have got $250,000, which is on behalf of Uganda, there should have been bills of quantities and there should also have been government valuers plus the Ministry of Works involved. But for a person to come and say, “I put in $2 million” without any verification and you agree is ridiculous.  

Recently I was listening to one minister in the Uganda Government – we have a problem with these ministers – she was saying, “This income tax on oil has no implication on revenue collection in oil.” I laughed and said, “We have a problem; I think we are finished.” Having people without competence is the reason we have problems.  

We should have serious ministers. How do you refute the IGG’s report which is recommending that this is a wrong company which should be dissolved? 

The IGG is saying that Uganda Safari Company’s contract should be revoked. Why? I think it is because it had not been done in a transparent manner. If you had done it in a transparent manner, we would have got more money than going for one company. Is there evidence that there was open bidding? Is there evidence that we got the best price? Why the IGG decided to do this is that he saw that the minister is the one who decided on what to do.  What was the interest of the minister? That means that he was trying to protect his interests. He must be having shares in this NCDF. They are using this one Mugisu to blind us but the true story is that this thing belongs to the minister. There was no reason why he should not have revoked this agreement. 

If you looked further, the probe team says, “The contract is good but unfavourable.” What do you mean then? When something is unfavourable, it cannot be good! You can see that we have a problem. And the minister speaking is from Kabale - do you know how much Kabale got in the share? I will give you the figures: Kabale got Shs 73 million. Did you tax your part for Kabale people and took it so that you are happy with this? You would be the one who would have been angrier that we need more money for these communities in Kabale and Kanungu districts.   

I have done some computations and if it is true that we invested $250,000, which I am sure we did, and that company should have brought in maybe $50,000 or $100,000, I can assure you that the share of hotels alone would be getting not less than $50 per room. But we are being paid $30. I think that when there was a small complaint, that is when they raised to $45 but the true story should be more than that.  

Then when you come to the permits, I don’t know how much we are getting. So, in totality, you will discover that we, Ugandans, are the losers. I don’t mind whether it is Kabale but they are part of us. But if these people were getting more money, we would have strengthened and developed that area. So, why don’t those local governments make themselves into a company or if you want to be the one in charge of collection of this money? 

Such contracts are very dangerous. You know the Constitution of Uganda says that all government contracts must be cleared by the Attorney-General. We want to put the Minister of Trade to task, was this contract cleared by the Attorney-General? Having cleared it, who were the chief negotiators of this contract in the ministry? Who are these 23 members of NCDF? Why don’t you name them? 

Finally, how did you compute the $5 per gorilla levy and how do you track the money? I have people who are booking for gorilla viewing and they say that to book to see the animals, you need three months. That means that it is full each other day. And when it is full, it means that even our rooms are full; we are full up to 100 percent capacity. So, if you compute according to the number of rooms, how much do we collect and how much do our people get? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.41
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing us this document, which I am going to react to with a lot of reservations. The minister’s statement right from page 1 shows that we have investors coming to this country without investing any money.  We at times even go ahead and give these so-called investors money to start investing in our country. And this is what I have noted in this case where this investor is using the money which is supposed to help the community and claiming that he has invested $2 million, which cannot be traced. That is a loophole.

I am also seeing on page 2 where we do not have clear guidance on how contracts are awarded. My colleagues have already alluded to the possible basis of calculating the $5. You know, it is like a jungle of things going on in this case, which is not acceptable.  

On page 3, I see the minister’s constitution of a committee - even the basis of selecting the committee members is a subject of query. You put a whole colonel to head the committee! I do not know whether it was for the security of the animals and the tourists. You find that there are members of the board of UWA who are already accused of incompetence - all these are loopholes in this report. 

But my query is on page 2 that, “In the report of the IGG, the community sent a query alleging discrimination, illegality and irregularities arising from planning for management and insurance of gorilla permits by UWA.” This was the complaint sent to the IGG. It is now quite surprising for me to accept this report that the same body which the community accused of discrimination and incompetence under the minister, sets themselves into a committee to cater for interests not of the expectations of a community as a whole. 

We must set a precedent in this House; the office of the IGG is a government body which is mandated to iron out all complaints. We cannot be party to those undermining the powers of this office. The actions of the minister are irregular because they ignored the recommendations of the IGG and set up a parallel committee so that we come here and rubber stamp it.

I want to move a motion that the statement of the minister be disregarded and we uphold the report of the IGG. 

THE SPEAKER: What are the recommendations of the IGG? You can find them on page 2 paragraphs 1.6 and they go as follows:

1. 	It says that the agreement between Uganda and Nkuringo Safaris should be revoked.
2. 	It also adds that Uganda Wildlife Authority should comply with Uganda Wild Life Act and all other relevant laws.
3. 	That the national park should be developed by Uganda Wild Life Authority as opposed to doing it for a particular community.
4. 	The ministry should strengthen its supervisory role on Uganda Wildlife Authority. 
5. 	It adds that it should be closed. 

Those are the recommendations. They did not give the mode of implementation. 

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TOURISM) (Mr Serapio Rukundo): I appreciate the concerns raised by the Members. We also raised similar concerns and we are addressing them. The agreement was good because you cannot have conservation without benefits coming to communities around the parks. In principle, for all the parks, 20 percent of the gate collections go to these communities. Originally, this was going to roads, dispensaries and other social services. We are now saying that this money should not be used for social services but go for economic development projects of the communities surrounding the parks. 

The gorillas are extremely endangered animals. The surrounding communities have the 20 percent and $5 per permit. To earn more income for the communities around the parks, IGCP agreed to give $250,000 for an eco lodge to be built so that more income would go to the communities around Nkuringo -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: There is an agreement between Nkuringo Conservation Development Foundation and the Uganda Safari Company, a company being run by two people: a Germany and a Ugandan. The good agreement is between Wild Life Authority so which one are you saying is favourable? 

MR BANYENZAKI: I think the minister should put it clear - Parliament is moving that we uphold the recommendations of the IGG. You mean to say that you do not have faith in the IGG. The IGG found that the agreement is exploitative and institutions have been undermined but all you do is to bring in a UPDF officer, an official from Ministry of Justice, an interested party from Uganda Tourism Association to undermine the institution of the IGG! Let us uphold the IGGs recommendations.

MR RUKUNDO: I am going to answer their concerns.

THE SPEAKER: What they are asking you is whether you considered the IGG’s recommendations. 

MR RUKUNDO: We did.

THE SPEAKER: How? Elaborate.

MR RUKUNDO: The first one said that we revoke the agreement. We consulted the Attorney-General and he said that the agreement was entered into legally and we could not revoke it.

The second recommendation said that UWA should comply with Uganda Wildlife Act and other relevant laws, which goes with number four that the ministry of tourism should increase its supervisory role. The committee on tourism is aware and we put it down. We are reviewing the Uganda Wildlife Act and the Uganda Tourism Act. We are reviewing all these Acts again and do exactly what the IGG recommended. Right now, once the minister appoints the board, that is the end. You do have an impasse over the board over the same thing but once the board is appointed, the board runs Uganda Wildlife Authority. So, we are implementing exactly what the IGG recommended. Two and four are the same.

Three, that the framework for harnessing tourism opportunities for entire communities neighbouring Bwindi Impenetrable National Park should be developed by UWA as opposed to doing it for particular communities.

I said that the number of communities benefitting from this scheme is no longer 23 but all the members above 18 are now benefiting from this scheme. So, again, we have implemented it. Members have alluded that I come from Kabale and I do but I do sympathise with the communities surrounding this park. I would like the communities to benefit and I am trying to ensure that all communities around the park do benefit. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: There is No. 5 which says that Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation be wound up.

MR RUKUNDO: You see, the original Nkuringo Conservation and Development Foundation had 23 members and so we can say that that is wound up. Now they have incorporated all those persons above 18 who are around the park. We put it in. So, that one has also effectively been taken care of.

THE SPEAKER: So, do you think we should send this matter to the sector committee of Parliament?

MR BANYENZAKI: This matter has already been handled by the committee responsible and it finds the same findings and problems. 

The minister actually did not answer our question as to whether he does not have faith in the institution of the IGG.

When he says that the members of the community above 18 are all benefiting, I am one of those, Mr Speaker, and I am not benefitting. (Laughter) I represent Rubanda County West which harbours part of the village –

THE SPEAKER: The honourable is telling you that your benefit is there. (Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: I can assure you, Mr Speaker, that even the people of Kisoro, in this Nkuringo, are not benefitting and that is why they petitioned the IGG. If the people in Kisoro around Nkuringo were benefitting, they would not have petitioned the IGG.

The Leader of Government Business has sat quietly there, meaning he is with us that we adopt the recommendation of the IGG - (Laughter) - because he has faith in the IGG. That is why he even recommended that the IGG takes over the CHOGM findings because he has faith in him. So, the Leader of Government Business should put more faith in him and we adopt these recommendations of the IGG. The IGG professionally conducted his business and inquiry and since there is a motion, then maybe he will tell us whether he is for us.

4.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, under Article 119 of the Constitution, the Attorney-General is the principal advisor of Government. So, when Government has a problem, Government refers the matter to the Attorney-General. When he does so, it is in order for us to accept his advice unless his advice is overturned by a court of law. That is my position. 

MR BANYENZAKI: What the Leader of Government Business and also our Prime Minister has said is factual and I cannot contest it. He has however eluded himself on this report on the Floor of the House. He has not said anything on this report. So, Mr Speaker, I request you to put the question on hon. Betty Anywar’s motion and then we see how it moves on.

THE SPEAKER: Which motion? 

MR BANYENZAKI: That Parliament recommends that the recommendations by the IGG mentioned in this report be upheld.

THE SPEAKER: I have read to you the recommended summary. He did not say do this or the other but he said, “Increase the supervision.” He said “revoke” but he did not say, “When you revoke, do this.” This was left to the ministry to handle. That is why I honestly and personally think that you should refer this matter to the sector committee dealing with tourism and trade.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, we thank you for your guidance. When I moved the motion, and having listened to the hon. Minister, clearly the minister has not taken on the recommendation of the IGG in totality because he could not even answer to what was recommended in (5). He just alluded and explained that it is assumed that when all those who are above 18 became members, it means that they would have wound up the two companies.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are a lawyer. Point No.5 says that Nkuringo Conservative and Development Foundation be wound up. If they had wound it up, would the minister reject recommendation No. 1? The agreement was between that conservative and development foundation and Uganda Safari Company, now the moment it does not exist then (1) would have been solved. I do not know, but as you are a lawyer I seek your guidance.  

THE SPEAKER: When you read his statement, on page 5 you find what the ministry has so far done. “So far done” means following the report of the IGG. Now, should you think that what it has done is not enough, that is where I think your committee dealing with this sector undertakes the study of the IGG report and other reports and makes a directive to the ministry on what to do. Otherwise, when you say, “Let the ministry”, the ministry will say, “Yes, we have done it” and yet you are saying, “No, you have not done it properly”. Why then don’t you send it to your sector committee to study this matter to make further investigations and come out with a recommendation?

MS ANYWAR: As the mover of the motion, I accept the amendments and that this case be sent to the committee where we still strongly want to see that the recommendations of the IGG are instituted in totality and not selectively. That will rest our case. Otherwise, as things stand, we feel that some recommendations were not included and therefore I accept the —(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Much as the honourable member agrees to the guidance of the Speaker, the committee had already investigated this matter and we-

THE SPEAKER: We do not know. If it has, then when this thing goes to them, they will say, “This is a matter we have handled, let us submit the report”. So, I put the question on the motion by hon. Anywar.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

(II) ON PRE-SHIPMENT INSPECTION OF GOODS

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TOURISM)(Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Speaker, this is a statement on the safety of imported goods.

Background

On 11 March 2011, an earthquake that triggered off a tsunami hit Japan. It did not only killed over 10,000 people but also crippled the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant leading to the release of radioactive materials and waste into the environment that have contaminated the air, tap water, vegetables and sea water.

On Monday, 11 April 2011, Japan raised the severity level of the crisis at its crippled nuclear plant to rank at par with the 1986 Chernobyl disaster in the former Soviet Union. The rating was raised from five to seven. According to the International Atomic Energy Agency, this ranking signifies a major accident that includes widespread effects on the environment and health. It could be remembered that the effects of the Chernobyl still exist. Around 1996/1997, 10 years later, several products originating from Eastern Europe were found by Uganda National Bureau of Standards to contain radioactive materials associated with this disaster.

Global Intervention

Following this disaster, countries globally have come up with measures requiring products originating from Japan and other relatively affected countries to be certified to be free from radioactive contamination or derived contamination as a way of protecting their population against products that may be contaminated with radioactive material. Among the countries are the European Union countries, the United States, United Arab Emirates, China, Korea, the Philippines, Australia, etc

In respect to the aforementioned safety concerns, the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, has taken measures to protect the public against products that may be potentially contaminated with radioactive materials. Uganda has therefore taken measures to ensure that all products originating from Japan and are prone to radioactive contamination, including used vehicles, second hand spare parts, food products to mention but a few, be accompanied by a Certificate of Conformity(CoC). These measures are going to be implemented within the framework of the Pre-Export Verification of Conformity that was introduced in 2010.

We are mindful of the current inflationary trend that the nation, the region and indeed the whole world is experiencing. The Pre-Export Verification of Conformity mechanism, which we shall be enforcing to ensure the safety of Ugandans, shall be conducted without any additional charges to the importers.

All in all, it is the safety and the lives of Ugandans that is of paramount importance and it is our cardinal duty to ensure that all Ugandans are safe. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before we proceed - I think it came from him - when you talk about Pre-Export Verification, do you have the timeframe? When will it be effective because there are importations that must have been on the way before this happened? Do you have a date in mind?

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Speaker, on the 12 April 2011, the minister wrote to the Executive Director of Uganda National Bureau of Standards and talked about safety of imported goods. So, this actual verification has already started.

THE SPEAKER: You see, when you say “pre-export”, that is pre-export from Japan. Don’t you think it would take effect on a date because the date when this earthquake and tsunami took place is known? Do you also inspect the exports that came before that date? That is the date I am asking you about.

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Speaker, before the tsunami we had already tasked some companies to inspect goods before they come into the country to protect our economy and the Ugandan importers. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean even goods from Brazil?

MR RUKUNDO: No.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so there is a date which you should tell us.

MR RUKUNDO: The letter of the minister is dated 12 April 2011.

THE SPEAKER: The 12th of April, you mean a week ago! (Laughter)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, on top of what you have just asked, this is not the first nuclear disaster to befall the globe. On page 1, the minister rightly states that some time back in 1996, there was a nuclear disaster in Chernobyl in the Ukraine and testing has been going on. He states that in 1996/1997, some radioactive elements were detected in imports from Eastern Europe to this country. I just wanted to find out whether these tests have continued ever since. It would seem from the statement that UNBS stopped testing imports from Ukraine after 1997 and they have just been woken up by the red flag raised by the Japanese following the Fukushima nuclear disaster.

4.14
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to say that the minister is being very conservative with information. We know very well that the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry signed agreements with a company to conduct pre-shipment inspection. During the Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance came to the Floor and said the government had suspended pre-shipment inspection and now here I am surprised the minister is saying they wrote a letter on 12th April saying UNBS directs pre-export verification to continue.

If you read the statement of the minister, I do not know if I am the one who has a problem with English, he is saying on page 2, “These measures are going to be implemented”. So, they are doing nothing despite UNBS being aware that as a result of the Chernobyl disaster the radioactive material continued to affect the world. 

In the same paragraph, the minister goes on to say, “We shall be enforcing” which means that up to this day you have done nothing –

THE SPEAKER: Is it pre-export or import because we are importing; we are not exporting, we are importing.

MR RUKUNDO: From their country of origin they are exporting. So we want the inspection to be done there before they export to us.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, my question is: why is the minister not telling the country the truth? Is the pre-export verification being carried out as we speak today or not? Tell us, please. The Minister of Finance came to the Floor and suspended - can you say it on oath and we take you on?

MR RUKUNDO: I have a letter from Ministry of Finance –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we believe you.

MR EKANYA: Okay, but can we have that letter tomorrow to confirm that pre-export verification is going on so that I can rest my case? We shall then need a report after one month to confirm that the goods coming from Japan are not contaminated with radioactive material. I do not want my grandchildren to produce dwarfed children and I do not want to suffer cancer which we can prevent. Ten years after the Chernobyl disaster, women are having miscarriages, people are suffering from serious disease which doctors have failed to verify or find a cure for. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, have we got a mechanism of verifying the pre-export or rather pre-import here in the country?

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Speaker, that is why, knowing our limited capacity in the country, we opted to contract more competent organisations abroad so that we can have pre-export inspection.

MR BBADA: Mr Speaker, according to this statement here, the minister indicates that in 1996 and 1995, Uganda, through UNBS, had facilities to detect radioactivity in goods imported; can’t we expand the capacity of the National Bureau of Standards to do the same today since it was able to do it in 1996?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a very simple clarification. I understand that the minister has tasked a company to do pre-export verification. Just for the record of this House, can the minister tell this House the names of the companies that do this pre-export verification for this country?

Secondly, because this matter is very important to all of us, is it possible to obtain a report? Elsewhere, following news after the disaster in Japan, companies like Toyota withheld exports - some cars were not shipped when they were supposed to be shipped. So, is there something that the minister can report to this House to the effect that some work was being done and maybe they found or stopped the possibility of sending us something that was not good? It is healthy for this country to know what is happening and I need to know the companies.

4.20
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One, I would like to give advice to the minister and the Executive at large that when such things happen, you do not need to wait for us to raise questions before you act. You have just told us it was on 12th; it means that you responded after we raised this matter. This is a month after the incident had happened in Japan. There are goods that should have come between 11th March and 12th April when you wrote the letter. Action must have been taken some days after 12th when you wrote the letter to UNBS. Can you in future try to be faster? This is about our health - yours and mine; we are affected by this terrible thing.

Secondly, our committee was supposed to have gone to Japan to check on some of these companies because the importers here had petitioned the committee. There were issues to be handled with UNBS and had it not been this, possibly we would be there now. There was a problem with the nature of procuring companies to do pre-export verification in Japan. Now, when this matter comes up, given what the exporters and importers had told us, it leaves a lot to be desired. 

We also found out that UNBS does not have capacity to check each and everything that enters this country. That is why we find problems. When imports come from Japan, we need to check each and everything, but UNBS does not have that capacity. The human capacity, the financial capital and the equipment are inadequate and this leaves us worried. We have asked the Ministry of Finance to provide enough resources to enable UNBS to acquire all the necessary equipment they need and employ all the necessary human resource they need but they have failed for all those years since the inception of UNBS. 

I was surprised when we were looking at the budget framework to find out that UNBS still has financial constraints. This is something that affects our health. Is Ministry of Finance going to provide all the necessary resources to strengthen UNBS to save us from this radiation? As you have stated here, the Ukraine instance was detected after 10 years – (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. In 2003, I went to Pakistan with some colleagues and toured a number of factories. Some of them were leather factories and textile factories. I was amazed to find in one of them shoes which were made and labeled “Made in Italy”. We asked them which destination those shoes were headed to and we found out that it was an order for Tunisia. Some mattress covers were labeled “Made in Uganda” because they had got an order from Uganda. 

I am wondering whether we may not have such a situation where a radioactive contaminated material is manufactured somewhere and labeled, “Made in Italy”; especially since we lack the equipment to technically determine the amount of radiation in the – I think we need to be very mindful of the fact that the market out there is very complex.

MR OKUPA: I want to thank Dr Epetait. I think that even makes me to amend the recommendation I was earlier making about all products which come from Japan; it is not only those which come from Japan. 

I have been reminded that during the manufacturing of some products, some countries specialise in parts. The Chinese or the British could be making a vehicle but some parts come from Japan in order to have a complete product which can be imported here. You need to check each and everything that enters this country, but my concern is about the capacity of UNBS. Thank you.

4.26
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for having brought this statement. It is true some unscrupulous traders from either side can send us contaminated goods but the minister has been a bit economical with many facts. He has not told us, for example, how other countries are doing it. He told us about the global intervention but how are they doing it? Is it also by pre-shipment, pre-export verification? Who is going to incur the cost? He is telling us that the traders are not going to incur the cost and yet they are worried about that. Who is going to incur the cost and how much is it?

To export an item from Uganda to Rwanda, the exporter needs a certificate from UNBS but you know the cost to the other trader; it is this exporter who does it. Can we apply the same method to exporters in Japan to make sure that their exports have certificates of no contamination, for example, so that we do not have to incur any costs?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mugambe, assuming we do what you are suggesting, don’t you think that the exporter in Japan will pass the cost to you? He has to, naturally. Those you are talking about that will need one, like Rwanda, don’t you think the cost, if there is any, is also borne by the people who are going to consume? 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the speaker that radiation is blown by air, so the neighbouring countries are all affected. When there was the Chernobyl disaster in Ukraine, many European countries were affected as far as Sweden, Norway and Finland, and this country is busy importing items from South Korea, from North Korea. It was blown by wind. I do not know whether Uganda National Bureau of Standards has the capacity and if this country has the economic power like the Western countries to keep monitoring all the imports. We do not have that capacity and we are busy importing all this junk.

I raised this issue on this Floor last time. I said that this country has been importing junk computer spare parts - old ones, which are not usable in their countries. We have a big problem in Mulago Hospital Cancer Institute because of the junk that is imported into this country. We are told by Finance that they are collecting taxes at the expense of the lives of Ugandans! 

The vehicles we import from Japan are not usable there. I remember telling this House about vehicles that use that red super petrol we use. The European countries, Western countries, Japan use catalysed fuel where there are no fumes but we are busy importing these vehicles that are affecting our people. 

If you get vegetables along the roadsides, they are contaminated by the smoke from these old vehicles and many people are eating these vegetables and we are getting cancer. That is why we have got a very big problem. It needs a lot of money and the money that could be put in for the examination and cross-checking of these items that come to this country is being stolen. I thank you, Mr Speaker.   

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you for the information. I have seen the Speaker’s fear that the other traders will transfer the cost to the Ugandan importer. However, we should also realise that these competent authorities cannot verify all the items coming from Japan. It is impossible, however competent we may be. The onus should be on the people sending us the goods to ensure that their goods are safe whether there is a cost. After all, it seems someone is incurring the cost so that cost could be used that way. Otherwise, employing one company to verify two or three is a bit impossible. 

What gadgets are we talking about because every country has a standards bureau? There must be a standards body in Japan. These bodies have to go to that body also. They do not have the capacity. They do not have the gadgets to do it on their own. I am sure it is the standards body in Japan that should do it. We should use this money carefully and effectively. 

Everyone is saying UNBS needs strengthening. Instead of strengthening other companies like those which the minister will tell us about, we should also make sure we strengthen UNBS because this is not the last problem. We had the Bhopal disaster in India, the Chernobyl and now Japan. Who knows where the next one will come? 

I do not know what costs are involved here – the cost implication of this statement and whether that is the best way of using that money. My main worry is how efficiently it can be done by those bodies otherwise, it is good Government has taken a quick decision. Thank you. 

4.33
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF & DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The concern with pollution is a real one and a global one. The honourable member from Mbale pointed to the real issue that we always overlook - who is tasting the air we breathe? What happened in Japan is not only in materials of industries but is in the air, it is in the water. 

How much are we getting as fallout from the bombing that we are getting in Somali, Libya - [Ms Alaso: “And the tear gas.”] - the tear gas and those who are walking, exciting the tear gas to be fired? The air we are breathing in Kampala, for example, is polluted by our inductions, including hon. Alaso inducing the inductions. Let us all be clear that we may be participating in destroying our lungs. I submit, Mr Speaker.

MS ALASO: You cannot run away. Here, you do not run away. Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister of Disaster Preparedness has a collective responsibility to ensure that Ugandans are not killed and are not tear-gassed to death. He should also be aware that we have a God-given right which we do not derive from anybody, not even the Government of Uganda, to use our two legs or even to be in our houses whether there is a demonstration or not.

It is common knowledge that in the last one week people have been throwing teargas canisters. The Army, the Military Police and the Police have been throwing expired tear gas canisters into schools, hospitals and people’s residences. Is the honourable minister in order to come here and try to trivialise the suffering of those little babies and innocent people, and yes even indeed my own suffering? When I try to walk on my two legs, you try to blame me for walking on two legs as if he has the capacity to create a modified version of a human being which does not use legs for walking. Is the minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: You have heard. What is your reaction?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, this is not acrobatics. Tear gas fired by Police is not on the duty roster of the Police. Conditions induced by some of us lead to firing tear gas. Now, I am surprised that hon. Alaso has already tested the tear gas to find it is expired as if unexpired tear gas is better on human beings. 

So, I am talking about the challenges we have globally and we should aim at reducing-

THE SPEAKER: I think what we can really conclude is that the circumstances causing this are regrettable. I think that covers that and we move on. Without shifting this and the other, we just regret the circumstances that have provoked the use and we end. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order to the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness. He used the word “firing” on demonstrators - people walking. Firing could mean anything. Over the last one week and a few days, we have seen four innocent Ugandans losing their lives courtesy of the Army and the Police and plain clothed operatives. We have also seen a leader of a leading opposition political party in this country shot in the hand. As I speak he nurses a broken finger. We have seen several innocent Ugandans rounded up, including myself, and taken to police, held for so many hours and produced in court for simply walking.

Mr Speaker, is the honourable Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere in order to come and make fun of innocent lives that have been lost and babies that we see being carried by the Red Cross who have been tear-gassed by the regime in power? This is really an insult. Is the honourable minister in order to insult Ugandans?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we debated this matter last week and I must say the circumstances giving rise to what has happened are regrettable. Honourable minister, aren’t you regretting the circumstances that have given rise to the suffering? Honourable minister, aren’t you regretting the circumstances that have given rise to what has happened in Kampala? (Mr Amuriat rose_)Let him answer.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, as you said, what is happening that is leading to loss of lives and loss of productive labour time is regrettable. I feel that I have nothing now to add to what has already been said. 

THE SPEAKER: He is not regretting. If you do not accept, I have expressed this regret on behalf of the entire House. (Applause)  Yes.

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TOURISM) (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Speaker, the Members wanted names of those companies doing pre-inspection. I will provide them and the letter from the Minister of Finance.

I am happy with the concern raised by the Members of Parliament on the importance of inspecting goods before they come into the country. You are preaching to the converted. When we had that problem we insisted with the Ministry of Finance and now they also accepted that we must inspect the goods before they come into the country. 

Secondly, on the capacity of Uganda National Bureau of Standards, I am happy that Members are also supportive. I hope year by year we shall allocate enough resources so that at the end of the day, we have a competent and capable body to ensure that what comes into the country is fit for consumption, we protect our citizens and also protect our economy against inferior goods coming into the country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 108/1/8 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.44
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, MBALE MUNICIPALITY, MBALE): Mr Speaker, I rise on behalf of hon. Oduman who is indisposed and has asked me to read the following question to the Ministry of Finance:
“In the ministerial policy statement for FY 2008/09, the minister promised to bring to Parliament the following Bills: The Microfinance Bill by September 2008; the SACCO Regulatory Authority Bill by December 2008; the Anti-Money Laundering Bill by March 2009; and the Accountants Bill by March 2009. Would the minister inform the House why the above important Bills have not been presented to Parliament as promised?”

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Oduman Okello Albert, MP Bukedea County (FDC) for having raised this question. I request that my responses be distributed to the Members. There are two sheets of the copies of the responses.

The question has about three parts, asking about the SACCO Regulation Authority Bill, the Anti-Money Laundering Bill and the Accountants Bill – I want to begin from the bottom.

I have here a copy of the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009 which was gazetted on 4 August 2009. It was presented to this Parliament in January 2010 for first reading and that means that the Bill is before the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

On the Accountants Bill, I have here a copy of the Cabinet Memorandum of 2011, which my minister is going to present to Cabinet. I apologise that we have delayed to print out the Bill and table it to Parliament. However, we are faced with a problem of some provisions of the Bill which had a bearing on the Accountants Examination Board, which were in conflict with those provisions regarding the Uganda National Examinations Board. The Minister of Education and Sports was, therefore, requested to harmonise the two examination bodies in accordance with the national regulations. That was the cause of the delay, for which I sincerely apologise.

On the SACCO regulation, the policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, which I possess, talked about producing the SACCO specific law and regulation instead of the Micro Finance Bill as quoted by my honourable colleague.

I would like to give a background which will explain why my ministry has delayed in coming up with a SACCO regulation. Until now, the SACCOs, just like any other cooperatives, are regulated by Co-operative Societies Statute, 1991. Experience in Uganda and elsewhere in the world, however, shows that SACCOs can thrive only and only when they are regulated by and supervised under a SACCO specific regulation, because: (i) while SACCOs are co-operatives, their specialisation in financial services makes them different in many significant respects from other co-operative societies; 
(ii) while the general Co-operative Societies Act can provide guidelines for the governance of the operations of agricultural, consumer, commercial and industrial co-operatives, it is inadequate for the SACCOs, whose business operations most closely resemble banking institutions; and
 (iii) providing a separate regulatory framework for SACCOs ensures that SACCOs continue to operate according to the co-operative principles while also providing a careful system of internal and external controls that protects the safety of members' deposits and enables the SACCOs to access formal financial sector institutions and services. 

It is against this background that Cabinet sitting in January 2008 approved the guiding principles and provisions for a SACCO specific Act and regulations, and requested the minister to conduct consultations on the draft Bill and regulations before finalisation. Accordingly, consultations were carried out with stakeholders countrywide. However, when the ministry organised a workshop for Members of Parliament to discuss with them the proposals, they recommended that the regulatory framework should cover not just the SACCOs but all micro finance institutions that were not regulated by Bank of Uganda under the Microfinance Deposit Taking Institutions Act. It thus required more work to be undertaken on the recommendations of Members of Parliament. 

Bringing a regulatory framework for all microfinance institutions required further consultations and also understanding the entire terrain of the industry. As you are aware, microfinance institutions are not regulated by the Ministry of Finance. They are regulated under the Money Lenders Act which is under the jurisdiction of area magistrates where they operate. Getting information on the number of institutions, which is about 6000, and the size and breadth of their operations became a challenge. But this does not mean that it is impossible.

We recognised the importance of evidence-based policy making and the critical role that data plays in the policy making process, from designing and implementing to monitoring and evaluating policies. With rigorous, objective and reliable data, policy makers can accurately diagnose the state of microfinance industry, judiciously set targets, and determine existing barriers, craft policies that work, and monitor and assess policy impact. 

It was as a result of the need for accurate and reliable data that we contracted UBOS to undertake a census of all microfinance institutions in Uganda, including SACCOs, in 2010. The results have not been officially released but we have no doubt that the results will help us in the design of a regulatory framework that will allow the industry to be sound and to grow. As we await the results, we are currently working with Bank of Uganda, which is expected to play a major role in the licensing and supervision of microfinance institutions, including SACCOs, on the design and architecture of the law. I beg to submit.

4.53
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This question should have been answered in 2008. It came in a policy statement of 2008/09. This shows us clearly that the government is not even ready. That question is just being answered today, several years later and yet Ugandans have been affected.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, do you have a supplementary question?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes, Mr Speaker. This is it: Does the minister know that money lenders have taken advantage of exploiting Ugandans because of the absence of the relevant Bill? Does the Minister of Finance know of a company called TEAM and Dutch, which exploited many people in Kampala and other parts of Uganda?

4.55
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Does the minister know that without the regulatory framework or policy for the SACCO, our people are abused by even very important personalities in the country? Let me give the example of the former Vice President of Uganda, Dr Specioza Kazibwe, who went to Gulu and collected all the different small groups for the interests of votes. I found that a gross abuse of our people at the grassroots. Maybe, if the regulatory policy had been in place, such a thing would not have happened. So, does the minister know anything about that? Thank you.

4.56
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I say much, let me just ask for your indulgence on one issue. Today as we met officials from Ministry of Finance, an issue about NPART came up, where we were told that the ministry cannot collect Shs 100 billion because the law relating to the creation of NAPRT expired in 2007. Right now, because of there being no Bill of such nature coming to Parliament, we have at stake over Shs 100 billion. For over five years, Ministry of Finance has failed to bring us a Bill to help them collect this Shs 100 billion. You can imagine how much that money would have done to the country.

Having said that, it is good that the minister is talking about these Bills and I am happy to have the Anti-Money Laundering Bill coming, but these micro deposits that we have been talking about, how long does it take the ministry to bring to Parliament a Bill in respect of that? How long does it take to bring us a Bill to regulate things like SACCOs, which Prof. Kamuntu was advocating for before he became a minister? It is disturbing that now that he is a minister, he has forgotten. 

My question, therefore, to the minister is, what do you benefit from delaying such Bills?

5.00
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, before I ask my supplementary question, allow me to first give this brief background. The regulation of SACCOs is indeed intended to coordinate the conduct of business in those SACCOs. This is because to be a SACOO, you must be registered by the Registrar of Co-operatives in the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. So, I wonder whether the Ministry of Finance has plans to issue guidelines or some form of regulations to local groups known as NIGINA – (Laughter) – you are laughing, but it is a very serious issue - that gather and collect money in the name of voluntary groups such as CBOs and yet in that same spirit, NGOs have come in with people collecting money under seemingly co-operative movement and saving societies? 

We see every day – and I think even you, Mr Speaker, could be receiving these calls from voters about NGOs starting work in their respective areas. 

THE SPEAKER: What is your supplementary question?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, my supplementary question is, given that background, what plans have been put in place by the Ministry of Finance to comprehensively regulate the question of people taking each others’ money at the micro level of a village?

5.01
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Finance has promised to table a Micro Finance Bill to cover SACCOs, but these SACCOs are under the Co-operative Society Statute of 1991 under the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. Secondly, I am told that the Micro Finance Bill is also intended to cover the Money Lenders Act, I hope, but which also are under the jurisdiction of the area magistrates. 

The minister further says that she has tried to collect information through UBOS since 2010. That means other areas have been left out. Could the minister tell us how far she has gone with collecting information in respect of other areas such as money lending, other than SACCOs, to help her come up with a comprehensive Micro Finance Bill. I am asking this because what I see here is only about SACCOs.

5.02
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question to the minister is whether she is aware that Parliament has been pushing a lot of money in building the capacity of SACCOs and UCSCU without the law? Is she also aware that due to the lack of that law, very many societies have now closed down because they do not have competent managers and efficient capacity to run the monies that we give them?

And lastly, about one year ago, this country had more than 1000 registered SACCOs. Is the minister in position to inform this House how many of those SACCOs still exist after such financing from this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, I have always said that in some jurisdictions, 20 questions are answered within 40 minutes. Therefore, we should know how to ask supplementary questions. We should also know how best to respond to such questions. I am saying this because if somebody asks you whether you are or not aware of something taking place, and you are not, you definitely will say that you are not aware and that will be a complete answer.

5.04
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under what laws do the mobile telephone companies operate money transfers? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is that really a supplementary question arising from the main question relating to the SACCOs?

5.04
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Now that it has taken us four years to come up with the Accountants Bill, in your projections, how many more years do we need before we get that Bill tabled in Parliament?

Secondly, in the absence of these laws relating to SACCOS, what are the guidelines Government is giving to the groups in the villages? Thank you.

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I would like to thank colleagues for the questions. 

Question No.1, I am aware that TEAM and DUTCH and COWE are groups which fleeced Ugandans of their money. The Governor followed them up to the courts of law but the problem was that the evidence the Governor would have used was hostile evidence to him because the people whose money was taken produced receipts which had words like, “Thank you, for your contribution”, and this was because our people are not sensitised. Because they want money urgently they are told to sign or put their thumbprint and they do not read through the agreement these people have. But there is a provision which the Governor can use to take on these guys.

Secondly, I am not aware that Prof. Wandera came to that place in the North, gathered groups and did not give them lunch. You are just informing me now.

I know that this regulation is badly needed. And I know that because of the absence of this regulation, some of our SACCOS are really suffering. I regret that we have not come up with this regulation yet.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi talked about NPART. I will request hon. Kamuntu to respond to this because I do not think this was a subsequent question from my response. He wanted to know how long it takes to bring a Bill. 

This is very elastic and it depends on the type of Bill. If it is too technical and it needs going back to the people or involving many stakeholders, it might take long. But if it is a simple Bill, it can take a short period. But I know what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is concerned about, and it is a genuine concern that my ministry has unnecessarily taken long. As I explained, it is not because my ministry did not care; it is not because I benefit from the delaying Bills, it was because of the technicality I explained earlier. When I joined the ministry, we had to go back to the drawing board to involve stakeholders. So, I do not have any selfish interest in delaying this Bill, which actually simplifies my work as minister.

Hon. Tumwebaze and hon. Bahati talked about the guidelines to the Nigina, these groups which collect money from its members. The introduction of SACCOS in every sub-county is reducing the creation of these Niginas because the Niginas know that unless they belong to a savings and credit co-operative, which is legally registered in the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry by the registrar of co-operatives, they will not access the affordable financial support which Government talks about. So, we are seeing these Niginas joining by buying shares in SACCOS and by doing that they will be guided by the regulations that guide the SACCOS. And before SACCOS are even registered by the registrar of co-operatives, many of them first register with the district commercial officers, who keep an eye on the operation of these SACCOS. 

What plan do we have to regulate comprehensively? I think by bringing this SACCO regulation framework, we shall have measures to regulate and not to suffocate the SACCOS but also regulate to make people’s savings and deposits safe. 

We have been trying to borrow from our neighbours, it is only Kenya which tried to come up with a law in 2008 but up to now they have not even licensed a SACCO. We have tried to look at Ethiopia; we have tried to look everywhere but we have not come across a government which fast-tracked this kind of Bill within a year. Some countries have taken 10 years, but this does not mean that I will take 10 years. 

Hon. Bahati, I do not even need six months to bring the regulation. UBOS has already done the work. We have harmonised almost everything and I want to be on record that I do not need a year to bring the regulation.

Hon. Mugambe, I have indicated here that the Anti-Money Laundering Bill is already before Parliament and I know that it has provisions which will help us regulate the money lenders. So, I do not think we need to use UBOS again to go and carry out consultations on this. It is only on SACCOS – can you imagine these minute institutions at sub-county level, in some sub-counties, we have five SACCOS. They are many in number and you cannot compare them to the number of money lenders that we have. 

Hon. Tashobya, it is true, we have been building capacity of SACCOS despite the fact that we do not have the regulation. However, we have some regulatory framework. We have good success stories where SACCOS are doing well and we have those who are on the negative side not necessarily because of lack of regulation but because of corruption. You find a SACCO being managed by sons and daughters, by the family, “aboluganda, abako n’abemikwano” - I am saying that we have seen success stories and negative stories. You cannot absolutely attribute the failure to lack of regulation. It is majorly because of corruption, where people connive and steal people’s savings. So, hon. Tashobya, I am sorry I cannot give you the statistics of the SACCOS, which still exist and those that fell off but I will dig out the information and bring it at an appropriate time.

Concerning the law under which Mobile Money operates, I would like to believe that we have a legal framework which licenses the Mobile Money. I do not want to quote a wrong law but the Attorney-General can -

THE SPEAKER: No, let it not be a supplementary question to the main questions asked.

MS NANKABIRWA: Okay. With that, I think I have responded to the Members’ questions. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: A supplementary question must arise from an answer given on the main question. It cannot come outside a different subject. That cannot be a supplementary. I think we should master these things.

QUESTION 121/1/08 TO THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS

5.15
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): “(i) Aware that for a long time many Ugandans have lost their lives through violence, would Government consider setting aside a day to be known as ‘The Day of the Dead’ and declare it a public holiday?
(ii) Is the Rt hon. Prime Minister aware that as a country, Uganda does not honour its sons and daughters who died when they should not have died? 
5.16
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I wish to point out that I forwarded my response to the oral questions raised by hon. Okello Okello on 9 December 2009 to the Speaker and I copied it to hon. Okello Okello.

So, when I got his question, I answered it a long time ago but it was not put on the Order Paper. I should have answered it forthwith.

In reply to hon. Okello Okello’s question for oral answer, I confirmed that for a long time, many Ugandans have lost their lives through violence. May the bereaved be sustained by God!

However, I am aware that since the NRM acquired political power, state-inspired violence has systematically been addressed and law and order have been restored. 

Am I aware that for a long time, “Many Ugandans have lost their lives through violence, would Government consider setting aside a day to be known as the ‘Day of the Dead’ and declare it a public holiday?” Yes, I am aware that many Ugandans have lost their lives through violence. This is why Government has taken systematic steps to address the problem of violence.

I would not and I repeat, I would not ask the Minister of Public Service to advise Government to set aside a day to be known as the ‘Day of the Dead’ and declare it a public holiday. This is so because the issues raised by hon. Okello Okello can be covered when Uganda is celebrating the Heroes’ Day and Martyrs’ Day.

I must add that Uganda celebrates 13 public holidays. These are already too many and costly for a developing country like Uganda. You may wish to know that Britain, a developed country, has eight public holidays and South Africa, another developed country has ten public holidays.

“Is the Prime Minister aware that as a country, Uganda does not honour its sons and daughters who died when they should not have died?” The life span of any individual is only determined by God. Those who died and had made major contributions to the affairs of the country have been honoured as heroes by the National Heroes Committee, which is chaired by Prof. Mondo Kagonyera.

5.19
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister but I am not satisfied. I have three supplementary questions: One, if it is the high number of public holidays which is the problem, would the Prime Minister consider bringing a motion here for Parliament to review whether we need all the 13 public holidays? 

Two, the Prime Minister appeared to contradict himself. He said, everybody is covered under either Martyrs’ or Heroes’ Day and yet his last sentence said that those who become heroes are those who have made major contributions.

Does the Prime Minister believe that the two youths who were shot dead in Gulu last week about which the Army has apologised, the people who were killed in Kireka yesterday and others like those named do not deserve to be honoured?

I will reserve the third question. Thank you.

5.21
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): I would like to thank the Prime Minister for these responses and to agree with him that we have too many public holidays, some of which we could actually do away with.

Mine is just to inform the Prime Minister that there is soon to be a motion - this day called Tarehe Sita is not needed. I am just rising to commend the Prime Minister on his answer because we have too many public holidays. (Interjections) This is not a market, this is not for heckling. Where merit is due, it should be given but you do not just heckle.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, our rules provide for the manner in which to ask questions and supplementary questions. You have repeated it even in this very session. Is the hon. Member in order to meander around, to stand up on a point of information, to insinuate that Members of Parliament are hecklers when he is actually going against our rules? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have already explained what a supplementary is. I think in your case, what you can say is that we have 13 public holidays and they are excessive, would you consider deleting this and this? Be bold enough if you have an issue. That would be a supplementary question.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a number of public holidays that we could do away with. Would we consider having the Tarehe Sita and then the 26th January deleted from the rest of our public holidays in this country?

5.24
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the Prime Minister aware that the process of becoming a martyr and a hero in this country is so complicated that road accident victims, of who we have the highest number in Sub Saharan Africa, do not qualify? That our infants who barely see their first birthday do not qualify and is he aware that the people who died in the IDP camps as a result of cattle rustling do not qualify to be martyrs and heroes? Is he further aware that our mothers who die every day, 16 of them giving birth to Ugandans, cannot qualify to be martyrs and heroes and yet we want to honour them? Is the Prime Minister aware?

5.25
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the Prime Minister said that ever since NRM acquired political power, state-inspired violence has been systematically addressed and law and order have been restored, is he aware that – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is the Ambassador Exponential and the current Minister of State for Finance, Prof.  Ephrahim Kamuntu in order to receive phone calls from the House when we are debating important issues? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: No, receiving telephone calls is not in order. (Laughter) 

MS AOL: So, my supplementary question is, is the Prime Minister aware that the Northern and Eastern parts of Uganda were in a state of war for over 20 years?  And is he aware that there was the Atiak massacre, Barlonyo massacre, Muchuini massacre and the rest of them? Is the Prime Minister aware that the locals mark those days on their own, without Government’s recognition? 

I would also like to ask whether the Prime Minister is aware that we even do not have policies to compensate those people who die. 

THE SPEAKER:  Please, answer. 

5.27
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Members for raising those important questions. Hon. Okello-Okello is difficult to satisfy but I will endeavor. First of all, he said that we should perhaps review the 13 public holidays.  But that is a matter that we are considering and the new government may – we are still considering that matter. But the problem is that once you remove one public holiday, various groups are alienated.  So, it is complicated.

He also mentioned a number of people who have not been recognised and my answer is simple; submit them to the Kagonyera committee and they will be considered. (Applause) 

With regard to the Tarehe Sita, it is not a public holiday. How do you delete such an important day? We were liberated and you are enjoying the fruits of liberation.  How can you ignore the liberation whose fruits you are enjoying? 

The same applies to hon. Alaso’s question. Again if you feel that those people who died have not been recognised, I suggest that you make a recommendation to hon. Prof.  Kagonyera and copy it to me. But you should be systematic and propose the best way of doing it. 
 
Hon. Aol was saying that people are recognizing, for example, Atiak massacres on their own. And your prayer was that we should nationalise these martyrs. What I suggest you to do is that you write to the Minister of Public Service, and I am glad the Minister of State is here, so that the matter may be dealt with. 

With regard to the issue of compensation, it does not really arise from a question for oral answer. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much.  Hon. Members, the next item is Item No. 5 but it has generated some problem which has not been solved. So, we may not deal with it tomorrow but I suggest that we deal with Item No. 6, that is, The Insolvency Bill. Meanwhile the minister concerned deal with the issues of Item No.5. So, I think we cannot start on this Insolvency Bill now; we shall deal with it tomorrow. 

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have addressed most of the issues concerning this Bill. We would pray that the motion moved by hon. Epetait be put to rest because as far as the workers are concerned, their major concern was with the constitution of the board; they would like their representatives to be part of the board.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what I am suggesting between now and tomorrow, is that you should please, liaise with hon. Epetait and those others concerned so that tomorrow, you make a report. But since I see that there is no problem with the Insolvency Bill, we shall deal with it tomorrow. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. I think the Minister, hon. Fred Omach is not sincere.   We agreed on something. He even took hon. Bahati and I, and gave us copies of the so-called Liberalisation Bill, which he was going to bring; he gave many of us copies. We thought that he was going to tell us that he has brought the Bill. But he is now telling us that he wants to meet hon. Epetait, why did you call us if you are not sincere? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, since this was between a few of you, try to solve your differences among yourselves. What I am suggesting is that the minister and those concerned talk over this matter and report tomorrow. But we shall certainly deal with the Insolvency Bill tomorrow. So, you have been put on notice. 

5.34
MR PATRIACK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sometime last Tuesday, I raised concern to do with the proposed increase in university tuition and there was a promise by Government that a statement would be made today. It is unfortunate that there have since been developments that have led to strikes in two public universities, Makerere University and Kyambogo University. I think since you are considering what we may discuss tomorrow, could it be possible to include this item on tomorrow’s Order Paper so that Ugandans and particularly students are reassured.

THE SPEAKER: I was saying that we may not be able to deal with the Pension Bill today; instead we shall handle it tomorrow. Notice of business to follow includes a statement by the minister about the increase of university fees and corporal punishments in schools.

I think it will come tomorrow and we deal with it. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00pm.

(House rose at 5.36 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 April 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)






