Wednesday, 10 April 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE BILL, 1996

(Debate continued.)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I beg to support the Bill that was moved last week by the hon. Minister of Wildlife, Tourism and Antiquities.  At that time, you had requested that the Committee Chairman presents a report or in the absence of the Report, the Bill should continue.  Mr Chairman, this particular Bill which is being debated was brought to the Sectoral Committee which is handling Natural Resources and that of Wildlife, Tourism and Antiquities.  

MR SERUNJOGI: Point of Order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for this House to continue deliberating this important matter when they do not have a quorum.  Is it in order Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In my opinion it is in order.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I appreciate your wise judgement over this.  As I was saying, we got this Bill whose background is contained in the Uganda Wildlife Policy.  There was now need that a Law be in place to guide the management, preservation, conservation of the species, wild plants, wild animals.  The Committee, therefore, met and found out that the Bill as presented at that material time and was read for the First Time had a lot of anomalies which necessitated going through and as a result of which the Committee came up with over 66 adjustments or amendments.  Because of that, we found that it would not be doing a service to this august House if we allowed it to be presented in its original form and therefore, there was this need for a reprint which was done.  

I would like, therefore, to report that the Committee did not take this lightly and as the concerned bodies and in this case, there were other Line Ministries that were left like, Ministry of Environment Protection, which also include other departments like Forestry.  So, the Committee had the opportunity to meet the team from those Line Ministries and held all these discussions with them.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, the Bill which we now have the pleasure and it was, therefore, presented can be seen that it is divided in 16 parts.  It is meant to provide a sustainable management of Wildlife, consolidate Wildlife Management Law, and establish a Body to coordinate, monitor and supervise the above functions.  

Under the first area, this is the powers of the Wildlife Authority.  Most provisions of the original Bill had put this authority directly under the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.  The Committee after lengthy discussion with the Minister found it appropriate and most suitable to make the Uganda Wildlife Authority and independent Body.  The roll of the Ministry is to be that of the supervisory.  

Relations of the Authority with other lead agencies are foresaid Mr Chairman.  The original Bill had not taken into account the roles and functions of other lead agencies which are not part and parcel of the authority but whose functions in one way or another clash with those of the authority.  The Committee therefore, made provisions in Clause 7 of the new Bill now to the effect that in carrying out its functions the authority does, then in consultation with other leader agencies.  It is provided that Uganda Wildlife Authority issues permits or licenses.  But the leader agencies carry out the control and supervision under the regulations set up by the Uganda Wildlife Authority.  The Committee, therefore, knows that also the functions of the Authority as far as education is concerned will only be limited to encouraging.  But the training will be handled by the Uganda Wildlife Training Institute whose Bill will be presented by the hon. Minister before this august House soon.  

The Committee, therefore, reports that special precautions be taken in this Bill so that, as much as possible, the activities of NEMA are clearly separated from the authority to avoid unnecessary frictions and conflicts.  We can see that there is declaration of an area; conservation area.  The Committee scrutinised the earlier provisions in the original Bill on the Procedure for the declaration of the Wildlife Conservation areas provided in Clause 18.  I wish to report that after careful analysis, and with regard to the provisions of the Constitution, we made the provision to the effect that the Minister may with consultation with local authority and approval of Parliament, declare an area of land and water to be a Wildlife Conservation area.  

As regards appointment of Members of the Board, Mr Chairman, Members disagreed with the argument on the appointment of Members to the Board as representatives of the Ministry all their positions in the Ministry and instead asked the Minister or the Ministry to consider appointing these Members on their individual merit.  On matters of Policy, Mr Chairman, the Board could only have X-Official from Ministry to the Board.  The Committee therefore, acknowledges that all these provisions were taken care of in the new Bill.  

We also had to look at the Acts which, according to this particular Bill should be repealed.  These were the Game Preservation Control Act whose Schedules according to the new Bill before us is retained or are retained, and that of the National Park Act, the Committee ran through and was in total agreement that the Acts be repealed as proposed. 

Mr Chairman, before I conclude, I would like to say that our endeavour we looked through and even had to tackle these other areas which from time to time are wrangled among members here, Mr Chairman, like in Clause 2, under the interpretation: ‘other than we struggling with he, she or she, he’.   So, we took note of that and even in between we have seen that as I had said, Mr Chairman, that this particular Bill before the House has its background in this booklet which was actually circulated to the Members of the Sectoral Committee and we found that it is justifiable that whatever was conceived here be translated into a Law to make it practicable.  As I had said, Mr Chairman, this is the Conservation Act which is seeking abolition or to be repealed.  In the same way there is this other one which has to do with National Parks.  

Members also found that the Bill has the authority with its very functions which we have taken into consideration and it is justifiable that these functions which the authority advocates be delegated to a Board.  Then there is in place a Board which is to be the Board of Transits and which will be doing the day today’s work on behalf of the Authority.  With this, Mr Chairman, and with all the troubles that the Committee has taken, I beg that this Bill be given careful consideration and passed with limited time wasted.  I support the Bill, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, at the beginning of this Session today, one of the Members raised a point of order to the effect that the quorum was not realised.  But before I made a decision for the House to continue I knew for sure that quite a good number of hon. Members had signed this afternoon.  It is very surprising to find that those who signed this afternoon have just left Parliament.  Hon. Members, let me tell you, in no and certain terms that from now on, until this House is officially dissolved, any hon. Member who will not attend Parliament shall not be paid.  I am going to give direction to the Clerk and if you complain, I am ready to pull to your Constituency during the Parliamentary campaign.  

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, I raise to support the Motion and I would like to avail myself of this opportunity to congratulate the two Ministers for the excellent work done in bringing this Bill to the House.  

In my very brief intervention, I intend to talk about one aspect which on Wildlife protection, which may not have been given enough emphasis.  That is the importance of research.  

When you look at Clause 9, sub-Clause 2, (h), you find that among the duties and responsibilities of the Board we are trying to set up, it is included, ‘to encourage education, training and public awareness of Wildlife and Public Participation in Management.  Now, as I said earlier on, I want to emphasize the importance of research and given the opportunity, I shall be moving an amendment that the word research be inserted somewhere in that sub-Clause.  
Mr Chairman, it is not necessary for me to emphasize the importance of research when you are talking about the Conservation, Protection and Development of our valuable Natural Resources.  Research is very much lacking.  It is not enough for us to encourage the public to protect these flora and fauna. But if facilities were available for research to help those who are concerned with the protection of our fauna, as well as the general public which is expected to cooperate with the authorities, I think we could go a long way in encouraging Wildlife Protection.  

In this connection, hon. Members, let me invite your attention to the work of a very enterprising person in my Constituency of Mbarara Municipality.  A gentleman called, Joseph Katatumba, who through his initiative, and I must say he is a genius, took one stretch of land along the gorge of the river Rizi which passes through Mbarara Town.  This gorge stretches for about two kilometres and it stretches just a few yards on either side.  So, he has set up a Wildlife on Nature Conservation Area.  He was motivated by the fact that there used to be a lot of animals and plants which he used to see during his childhood and which have disappeared because the people living on the banks of that river have mismanaged the land.  So, he spent considerable amount of money by buying off people who live along that gorge of the river.  By restricting or stopping the cultivation, construction of houses and so forth, the natural vegetation that had disappeared is beginning to come back and because of that, there are several birds, animals, squirrels and what not, which had disappeared are beginning to come back.  He even told me recently that hippos can move all the way from Lake Mburo, which is some 20 miles down stream and come right into the middle of the town.  So, through this action, hon. Members, this gentleman has created a Wildlife Sanctuary right in the heart of a growing city.  So, one of these days, if somebody does not have enough time to go Queen Elizabeth National Park, he will be able to merely by taking a five minutes drive from the Hotel and go and watch those little birds which by they way he says are providing music free, and a lot of the animals and he intends to put up a snake park and so on and so forth.
One of the things he told me that he expects from the authorities that be, is to be accorded sufficient research and knowledge so that he can be helped to develop that Game Sanctuary into a very viable undertaking.  

So, I would like to appeal to the Minister of State to move an amendment in that Clause 9 - 2(h) so that in addition to providing education and so on and so forth, so as to encourage the public.  Hon. Minister, please, insert in the word, ‘research’.  Even if research can be made available to people like them, either freely or at subsidised rates, you will be surprised to see how the protection of Wildlife will be carried out.  

Secondly, and finally, Mr Chairman, as I was reading through this Bill, I found that Clause 51 talks about the use of fire.  It is a pity some of us have been used to using fire as a way of helping ourselves to clear the land and so on and so forth.  But again I need not go into the dangers that fire causes by destroying some of the flora which also discourages the existence of fauna.  But over the years, many people have been losing property.  Even farmers who keep cattle and so on, have lost property because some careless people simply come and light a match and set farms, ranches and national parks and game sanctuaries on fire.  Some of them just do it for the pleasure just to see grass being set ablaze.  

Now, I would like to appeal to the hon. Members that because of the seriousness of this offence, they should think in terms of bigger penalties.  At the present moment, it is the local community, the RCs who have taken it upon themselves to discourage or prevent people from setting farms and bushes on fire.  But I would like to see the Ministry of Wildlife Protection coming out more vigorously with more stringent and stronger measures so as to completely discourage the use of fire.   

With these few words, Mr Chairman, I would like to support the Motion.  Thank you.

MR HARUNA IMAGA:  Mr Chairman, I thank you. Mr Chairman, before I make my contribution, allow me to say something about Mulago Hospital.  It is unfortunate that the Minister of Health is not here.  

Last week I was at Mulago Hospital.  Mr Chairman, what really annoyed me I may say, is the way dead bodies are handled in Mulago Mortuary.  I went there to remove a dead body of a certain Lieutenant.  When I was waiting for the death certificate, I saw a tractor drove speedily and parked.  After few minutes, I saw dead bodies were just thrown on that tractor and they were naked.  So, I wonder whether there is no proper nature of the office.

MRS OKER: Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to raise a topic which is completely out of this Bill.  I would have thought this Member could have brought this as a Motion rather than information which would be exhaustively discussed and a conclusion is made.  Therefore, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The hon. Imaga Haruna in the first place asked for permission to give the information and he was given.  So, he is in order. 

MR HARUNA IMAGA: Mr Chairman, I thank you.  Mr Chairman, to conclude on this point.  There are two churches and a mosque.  Why does the Government not really assist the Churches and the Mosque so that while a body is not claimed for and if that a person belongs to a Catholic Church, Protestant and Moslem, those Churches can care for him or her.

Coming to the Bill, Mr Chairman; it is a very important Bill.  I really support it.  But in general terms I wish to say that when you look at the North part of this Country, I come to the conclusion that today the rampant poverty in the North emanated from the way these Game Parks and Forest Reserves were demarcated.  The most fertile land was demarcated and gazetted as a Game Park or Forest Reserve.  The typical example is Ajai Game Park.  If you go to Ajai Game Park you will find the Madi Tribe were pushed upwards to the most stony and dry land.  If you come to the Jonam side, these people were pushed towards the hot and dry sandy land.  So, the fertile land between here is a Game Park.  If you look at that land, you will find that it is a land where every type of crop can grow.  Today you do not hear any such crops like coffee are not grown in the North simply because the area where such crops would grow nicely were demarcated as Game Reserves.  This is my observation and who ever disagrees with me, will have to study it.  

Mr Chairman, my suggestion to this point is that I am not saying that this area should be degazetted but just should be a Research.  Certain areas are too large for nothing.  Why does Government not really try to degazette part of these Game Parks, Forest Reserves so that the wananchi who are cultivating on poor land can use this land to cultivate.

MR ROMANO DRADRU OSIKU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, may I take this opportunity to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that a land which is very fertile and rich can also become poor if it is badly handled agriculturally.  So, it is not that Ajai Reserve was a rich land.  Maybe it was a rich land but not cultivated.  In fact the area which was left open for public resettle they did not follow up the procedures for maintaining its fertility.  It became poor.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, if Osiku knew Ajai Game Reserve very well, I think two years ago I asked a question about Ajai Game Reserve, why it should not be degazetted.  Actually that was an area which was settled.  Ajai Game Reserve originally was started in a poor land.  But after that the Wildlife, particularly the white Rhinos, were actually moved away from an area called Wombi to an area called Ariku, which is Ajai Game Reserve now.  That was an area which was settled by people.  But those people were pushed away not that the land was not settled.  Thank you very much.

 MR HARUNA IMAGA: Thank you for the information.  Mr Chairman, to reply the information from Romano Osiku, it appears as if he did not travel when he was young.  First coffee was introduced in Maracha.  When it was doing very well, later that area was gazetted as a Forest Reserve.  Coffee was experimented in Lodonga, Robosa.  When it was doing well, it was restricted that nobody should grow coffee around there and the place became Forest Plantation.  Okay, I agree with him on the other side.  If the place has become rich because it has been a Forest Reserve, then let it be exchanged.  Let that place come to the people to settle and the poor place becomes a Forest Reserve and we can see whether there will be any difference.  
REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, in Clause 9, sub-Clause 2(d), this Bill takes care of what the hon. Member is saying that it will recommend the declaration of Wildlife Conservation areas, and -(Interruption)- of such declaration.  That means this will taken care of in that way.  Thank you.

MR HARUNA IMAGA: Mr Chairman, in fact I have a place in mind if this Bill becomes a Statute, it should be immediately implemented.  I have been told that there is a very huge coffee plantation between Gulu Rhino Camp and Ajumani within that area.  So, that area I think Government should take initiative particularly the Ministry of Agriculture, to find out exactly who planted that coffee and why was it abandoned.  So, when I am complaining that in the North most fertile area was demarcated as Forest Reserve, Game Park, I think I have reason to back my argument.  

Finally, Mr Chairman, I think we should not depend on mere tourism alone.  Let us do a bit of research, particularly in two areas.  I have been reading some books and people have been telling me that some wild animals can be tamed.  Like in India they say, buffalos have been milked.  Why do we not try this and see whether we can tame some of these animals.  Because they would be more tourist attraction than only visitors to come and see the animals in the Park.

Secondly, if there is a possibility, I am suggesting, that somebody should be dealing in slaughtering these wild animals for meat.  If I put a question, how many of you have tested meat of hippopotamus or buffalo?  So, the young generation, I am sure have never tested this.  So, I am suggesting that this authority should really encourage - you see, sometimes my ideas are new.

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, before we answer whether we have eaten meat of the hippo, I want to seek clarification whether the hon. Member has tested the meat of a pig.

MR HARUNA IMAGA: Mr Chairman, maybe he is trying to create a joke.  He knows very well Moslems do not eat pig.  Even there is no religion that recommends eating of a pig.  So, if he is eating a pig he should stop eating it now.  

MR MAYENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, while I agree with the hon. Member on moslems not eating pork, I do recall a Swahili proverb which is very intriguing.  It says, ‘okule nguruwe, kula alionona’ which means, if you decide to eat pork and you are a Moslem, eat a fat one. (Laughter)

MR HARUNA IMAGA: Mr Chairman, let me educate my Colleague a bit.  You see, eating pork, Moslems are following the gospel of Jesus because it was Jesus’ time when eating pork was stopped.  So, if you are a catholic, you are like a Moslem who should not eat pork.
Finally, Mr Chairman, I would like the Government really to take this matter very seriously and try to introduce the meat of animals in our usual diets.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Mr Chairman, I thank you.  Mr Chairman, I strongly support this Bill.  One of the strength of our economy today even if it is not fully developed.  But more importantly tomorrow is the area of preservation of the natural habitat, that Wildlife Conservation; fauna and flora.  This is also particularly so because Uganda is not right now intensely occupied by human beings.  If you travel across this Country you will find that we are still lucky because sizeable chunks of land are still in their natural state, which therefore, means, we still have resource which to many other countries is very, very expensive to create.  

We have an opportunity once this Bill is in place.  First to ensure that there is no destruction of what exists as Wildlife, both in terms of animal species and also in terms of ecology, in terms of areas which we would like to preserve for the future generations which would also in time, be revenue generating from Tourism in particular.  

Mr Chairman, it is held by particularly many economists who have been looking at the International Tourism and Wildlife.  Tourism which is related to nature is going to be the industry that is going to survive the 21st century.  This is because it is held that many merry many industrial goods are going to be produced in the back yard.  There is already evidence in many countries, one of which is India, for example, where the goods which are marketed are produced on small scale in the backyard.  Therefore, if we preserve the nature in this Country, if we are deliberate, and we encourage this to grow as part of our cultural heritage, Mr Chairman, we will be earning foreign exchange which is necessary as an intermediary for purchasing what we cannot produce here particularly technology without incurring too much cost.  

Mr Chairman, modernisation today had very high costs.  We have already been told many times they effect has had and continues to have on the ozone layer.  We have had the effects of industrial pollution.  We have had the effect of cities over flowing with populations which have no natural habitat to resort to at least for purposes of holding locally.  So, when this Bill is brought I would like to support because it is going to enhance the future natural state of Uganda and also it is going to bring in the benefits through tourism as an economic activity.

Mr Chairman, we have a problem in those areas where:

(a) There is a cattle population.  These areas keep encroaching on other areas to be preserved because of the problem of lack of water.  I think Mr Chairman; this Bill should not just be tackled in isolation.  It should be tackled with other associated activities so that when you declare an area as a preserved area, you also create the facilities so that the human activity - the economic activity is not pressurised circumstantially to interfere with the preserved ecological area.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, in giving the information to support his view of coordinated planning, many of us have observed with concern that in the City of Kampala the natural habitat of very small birds and squirrels have been cut down; the trees have been cut down, bushes cleared to give way to concrete jangle to bricks and it seems that the City of Kampala authorities either are looking with approval or they do not even know what is happening around them.  I do not know whether the Minister can throw light on this devastation of fauna in Kampala City when it seems that we do not know what we are doing.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the Minister will have to give that reply during the time he is winding up.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Thank you very much.  Mr Chairman, some of these matters appear very simple to many people who probably have not traveled as much as I have, and as many of my Colleagues have probably.  But Mr Chairman, you find many Countries trying to create something natural in order to preserve nature in Cities.  Now, our City is so badly planned that when you think about Kampala in the next 50 years, you think about Kampala which is either in Lake Victoria because water has washed it off, or it will be a slum.  Now this has been aggravated.  Do you, Mr Chairman, recently when the Government was selling to civil servants these houses in Nakasero, Kololo, Bugolobi and elsewhere, these houses which previously were planned on some reasonable acreage, probably half an acre, have now been cut into small pieces of land where numerous houses are going to be sighted only to make the situation very, very - it is a shame.  

When you travel along Bombo Road, would you recall that from Wandegeya most up to near, I think General Motors, there used to be very many trees which, during the day and evenings used to attract birds.  These birds were very, very interesting.  They are a scientific item to watch.  I know that Germans for example, used to book a long period in Canada to come and pay scientific expeditions to watch the behaviour of birds.  Now here are birds which were very free, where foreigners would come and watch, record, pay a lot of money in our hotels and so on, these birds are no longer there because their habitat has been destroyed.  This goes on country-wide.  The West Nile the hon. Member was talking about has been destroyed by the residents.  First of all West Nile was one of the richest areas as was Kabale with natural vegetation.  They started with natural wood.  They cut it. Then, as I have said before, there was a Government Project of replanting West Nile with afforestation.  This was also cut.  Now naturally when you have a situation like that one, you cannot expect any fertility in the soil.
MR ROMANO DRADRU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I have more information to my Friend who was on the Floor that there is both ignorance on the part of administration particularly local government and there is selfishness on the part of Forestry Department that after our Independence everything went loose and we are actually destroying this country.  I will say this, even now when -(Interruption)- these trees like mahogany which covered lost parts of West Nile, after we had returned from Zaire, and after we had returned from Sudan where a lot local men knew pitsawying, we were going to have no mahogany trees.  They are cutting them without any protection.  The same is applying to even trees, which the Forestry Law says, do not cut, because they provide oil.  Others are now cutting all of them for making charcoal which is so much needed in the towns.  Even if the Forestry Department knows that these trees are illegally being cut, even the Forestry Department knows that charcoal is being made out of trees which the Law does forbid, because of corruption, they close their eyes and they seem to be getting shares of some of these profits and eventually letting the whole Country lose these riches.  

Another worst is that the valleys which were full of water when I was a headman, before the British went, every season we were clearing the environment, the rivers were full.  Now they silted to a level, we do not have water.  But I think it is a problem of administration.  We must as Members of Parliament think wisely and see how we can improve on this.  Thank you very much.
MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, while Government has put in place the policy of preserving trees, some of the major culprits are people who are in National Parks and the Forestry Department itself.  Mr Chairman, I have got a letter here which I want to put forward to you and the Minister concerned.  You find that I have given the National Parks Director letters where trees were cut.  One of the employees of the Forestry Department who has now been transferred from Mbale to West Nile or some part of the North, issued a receipt and this receipt was not in the Government official receipt books.  Instead of firing or dismissing this character, he is still an employee of the Forestry Department and the Director for National Parks is here, aware of the information.  The Minister himself is aware of the letters.  So, the main culprit is the Forestry Department and National Parks.  Unless the Minister can take steps and the Government as a whole, this Law which we are going to put forward may not work until we get dedicated people to do their work.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Minister will react to this later.  

MR NTIMBA: Point of information.   Mr Chairman, the additional information I wanted to give the hon. Member was that recently there was a report in media which I think was very sad indeed because we were told that in the Municipality of Arua, some people who were developing the area, not only interfered with flora but they disturbed the dead by trying to build houses on what was or is a cemetery and this provoked a lot of protest from the British High Commission because that symmetry is supposed to have had some British people buried in that.  At this stage maybe our Colleague from Arua Municipality could tell us what action was taken to prevent further disturbance who have gone to the other world.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: I thank the hon. Members who have given the information. Mr Chairman, I would like in conclusion to appeal to the Ministry now responsible for enforcing this Law in due course.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Wanendeya you have given a different letter.  This letter is advising the RCs to make sure that the people who were encroaching on the land may stop cultivating.  So, you are not in order.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, my Colleague has raised a very important point.  These three towns we replant - Masaka, Mbarara and Arua, after the war.  Unfortunately, the planners in the new plan did not indicate that area where these Europeans were buried as a cemetery.  So, they just indicated clearly that that was a residential area.  That is why the Municipality Authority went ahead went ahead and allocated those plots.  I think, after the issue was raised they have reserved that part.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: I am obliged, Mr Chairman.  In conclusion, I would like to appeal to the Ministry concerned now, to try and convince other Ministries, that is particularly the Ministry that oversees planning; Physical Planning, Town Planning, and also the Ministry that is responsible for afforestation that is Ministry of Natural Resources, to try and coordinate with this Ministry so that they do not destroy the efforts of what the Ministry may intend.  It is possible and it is done for high revenue in Canada that is in the British Columbia, in Sweden to export and rely on timber sales for revenue.  But you have to be deliberate; you have to plan.  There is something called, rotation - inner forestation.  If you want to plant eucalyptus trees, you must decide at what centimetre volume you want to cut your trees, that is, by a study which I conducted in West Nile.  If you want to cut your eucalyptus at six inches diameter, you should allow a minimum rotation of 5.5 years on average light soil. So, in other words, if you want to have a sustained economic activity which does not disturb the ecology of the area, you have got to plan the afforestation along those lines.   You should not cut  a two or three year without knowing that that is likely to have a negative impact.  If you are dealing with soft timber, for example pines, they require 15 to 20 years.  If you are dealing with mivule, you know that you should take 200 years before you have come back to crop them.  But if you travel through Busiki, you will find lots of young trees - mivule, fell down.  This is very dangerous.  So, that is why I am suggesting to the Minister that they work a plan which is well coordinated with the Ministry of Natural Resources so that in fact the areas bear lots of economically useful trees so that they have the trees which can co-exist with the ecology in the area.  Not every tree grows every where.  But that is technically known by the technical people in those Ministries.  

I will, therefore like to request the Minister for those areas which have got animal species which are likely to be extinct.  For example, white rhino.  In the early 1970s and late 1960s, I used to see white rhinos very near where people were living, but you can hardly find them.  The elephants had gone into exile from the partly Nebbi and Acholi habitat.  I think there should be a plan to attract these back.  You can attract them back by creating conditions at the border which do not frighten them to continue a little further inside.  That is possible.  But once they are there, they should also not become a problem for the other free area.  That is why planning is essential.  So, I am calling upon the Minister to work with his Colleagues so that once Law is in place, there is a coordinated activity so that the natural habitat is preserved, the animals ecology, the fauna, the flora and this will not be at a very cost to the nation because the International Tourist Revenue will come in.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I wish to thank all my hon. Colleagues who made the contribution towards this Bill for the efforts in trying to support the Bill so that it will become Law.  I wish to emphasize the context in which this Bill has been formulated and it is one of the main pillars we are creating under those pierces of the Ministry of Tourism, in that this particular Wildlife Authority which is being proposed in the Bill will be responsible for maintaining for preserving their main natural heritage of this Country which will be used essentially for purposes of marketing the Country as a tourist destination.  We have of course, in place other pillars of the Tourism Ministry doing different things.  But the specialization of the proposed Uganda Wildlife Authority will be preservation of the heritage that will mark it a tourist product.  Specific contributions which were made that I found very appealing are:
One - the amendment which was proposed by hon. John Ntimba about research.  Indeed that this is an area that is of prime concern to the propose Wildlife Authority because it does constitute the centre peace of the activities of the Wildlife Policy of this Country.  

Permit, Mr Chairman, at this stage to read just for purposes of emphasis one or two sentences from the Wildlife Policy Document which preceded the preparation of the Bill.  The Wildlife protected areas under the stewardship of Uganda Wildlife Authority provide limitless opportunities for a scientific research on bio-diversity and natural echo systems, and economics of human interactions with them.  They also provide an important best line for broader ecological modeling and conserve a sentence to the study of natural regional or global change in atmospheric pollution climate and bio-diversity among other things.  The Uganda Wildlife Authority will establish a scientific research division under a Research and Planning Department at its headquarters which will be responsible to advise on research and so on, to coordinate with other organisations involved in research activities.  So, I would like to assure the hon. Member who raised the particular question of research that that is going to be a cardinal activity area of the proposed Uganda Wildlife Authority.  
I found the contribution from my Brother Colleague of Arua Municipality rather enchanting and puzzling at the same time because it is not just the trees that make the fertility of a place and indeed as other hon. Members pointed out, I think that the reason why there is a major difference between the vegetation of Ajai Game Reserve and the surrounding areas is simply because of the bad hand of man which is very good at destroying its own environment and habitat.  Although the hon. Member suggested that we should reverse, reallocate animals into the bad areas and people into the good areas.  Perhaps what he forgot is that, we would be taking the people to the good areas complete with their hands which will go and do the same destruction on the good land as well.  In that particular area, the vegetation and the soil conditions are about the same.  I do not see any particular ground to suggest that the most fertile area which is reserved as Ajai Game Reserve is any better than the soil conditions on the surrounding area.

(Incomplete.)
