Thursday, 19 April 2007

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s afternoon sitting and we have the following announcements:

Yesterday I informed you about the death of Mrs Oyite Ojok; we have now been advised about the programme for her funeral: there will be a funeral service tomorrow, 20th April, at Christ the King Church at 10.00 a.m. Thereafter, the body will leave for Lira where it will lie in state till Sunday. The burial will be on Monday, 23 April 2007 at Loro Atidi in Oyam District. I understand the central funeral organising committee is passing a form around for members to make some contributions.

Secondly, the Minister of Health would like to invite Members of Parliament for a legislative, corporate and donors’ breakfast in commemoration of the Africa Day, tomorrow, 20 April 2007 at Hotel Africana. So, you are welcome to go and interact with the Minister of Health and the health officials. It is tomorrow at 7.30 a.m. to 10.00 a.m.

Honourable members, as you are aware, a number of our committees have been engaged in evaluating the situation in the North especially with regard to the children. Today in the strangers’ gallery we have two children from Northern Uganda, one from Oyam District and the other from Lira District, accompanied by officials from Save the Children Fund in Uganda, and other civil society organisations. They have come to visit Parliament but more particularly to listen in to the debate, which will ensue very shortly, on the report of the situation of the children in Northern Uganda. You are welcome. (Applause)

I would like to amend the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Finance to lay some papers on the table.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.56
THE MINSTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I beg to lay on the Table a paper seeking authority to borrow from the International Development Association of the World Bank, for the purpose of financing the Sixth Poverty Reduction Support Credit No. 6.  This is a total of US $125 million, which is meant to be support to the budget, and the implementation of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan, and this will come from the World Bank.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I commit that to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back to the House. Yes, hon. Kaliba?

2.57
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much. This House will recall that on 19 March 2007, I did present a petition on behalf of the people of Mpanga S.S., who happen to be in my constituency and, Madam Speaker, in your own wisdom you ruled that the petition be sent to an appropriate committee of Parliament, and that is the Committee of Natural Resources.

The committee expeditiously handled the matter; they quickly rushed to Fort Portal to find out the facts on the ground so that they could compile a report advising this Parliament on the way forward. Madam Speaker, when I presented that petition, there was a provision in our Rules of Procedure, please allow me to quote rule 27(4): “Any Member may move a motion that the petition be rejected on the ground that it is not properly and respectfully worded, or on any other ground and if the motion is duly seconded and carried, the petition shall be rejected.”

When I presented this petition before this august House, the petition was accepted and sent to the appropriate committee of Parliament, and the committee came to Fort Portal, but what is disturbing my people in Fort Portal are the statements made by one minister, which were made even when the committee of Parliament was doing its work in Fort Portal on 4th and 5th of April this year. I have a recording of what the minister said on Voice of Toro, a local FM radio station based in Fort Portal. The Minister of State for Environment, hon. Jesicca Eriyo – as the committee was doing its work - she made a lot of statements that really disturbed our people. In the first place she gave a notice of 60 days for people to demolish all buildings that are within the land, which is under dispute. The buildings include a storied building for members of staff, the headmaster’s house, and two other staff buildings, plus a toilet.

Also, we have about 50 containers in that disputed land, Madam Speaker, in which people have invested billions of shillings. What is worrying me most is that the Minister has directed the workers in Fort Portal to fence off that 4.08 hectares of land, and I have even got a call from the headmaster that the students will not access the school because the two entries to the school are in that disputed land. So, I thought I would raise this matter so that I can pray to this august House to really come out with a way forward as regards this matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us ask the chair of the committee how far they have gone with this in the committee. Hon. Dombo?

3.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Emmanuel Dombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You and the House will recall that a couple of weeks ago a petition was moved on the Floor of this House and it was competently forwarded to our Committee of Natural Resources. In order to expeditiously conclude the various petitions that we had on our agenda, we moved very fast to get the preliminary information from Fort Portal, and met all the necessary witnesses. I must say we got a lot of information and the process of compilation of the report has started, although, because we are now having the budget framework period until 25th of this month, we are scheduled to meet the last witnesses on the 26th after which we shall submit a report to this House.

The only issue, which must be guided by your office, is that immediately we received the petition we notified all the relevant stakeholders and while we were on the ground, we requested as a committee that we wished that the status quo would remain until our report came out. This hopefully would help in providing a way forward, given that they had petitioned this Parliament in order to get a way forward. This was the understanding when we left Fort Portal on 5th until this week when I received a telephone call from somebody who said he was the headmaster of the school. He told me that NFA had gone ahead to breach the common understanding that we had arrived at. I immediately notified the minister responsible and asked her to find out what exactly was happening so that we could get a way forward. 

The only thing I would like to request for is this. Since the minister is under the Leader of Government of Business who is the Prime Minister, wouldn’t it be prudent for this House and especially the Speaker, if she formally wrote to the Leader of Government Business? That way the issues that are indulged in, especially when a petition has been presented in this House, the common agreement could be respected so that we create harmony that will enable Parliament to function the way it is supposed to do.  I do not know but this is a challenge. The only problem I see is that if this type of situation continues in future, the authority of Parliament gets grossly undermined and may progressively diminish before the public. I thank you very much.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I remember in the Seventh Parliament we had a standing order from the Leader of Government Business but as we are Members of Parliament, we are development agents of government programmes, whereby for a minister to go in a constituency, he must pay a courtesy call to the Member of Parliament of the area. This was at least to work in harmony but it seems since we started the Eighth Parliament, ministers have been going there even without informing MPs. This really undermines the work of MPs and if we are to move as a team, development issues do not segregate and we must work as a team. 

I call upon this House that if it is your wish, the Leader of Government Business should inform ministers, at least if they are going to our constituencies to inform us so that we work in harmony with them and then we move as a team for the development of our country. I beg your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course the work of the Parliament is as much in the public interest as that of the Executive but we think that if the Executive interferes with the work of this House before it is completed, in some instances really it will negate the reason for enacting the rules that we did concerning people bringing here petitions. So, we shall be liaising with the Leader of Government Business to ensure that there is some restraint on some of these matters. For instance, there is no need to hurry and knock down the buildings in Fort Portal. So, we shall do the needful but we want to restate that we should have respect for one another and also, what hon. Kakooza has raised about visiting the constituencies; it has been a standing order in a way for a long time. I think we should abide by it. Thank you 

(Mr Lukwago rose_) You have a problem? But you did not tell me about it. Hon. Kaliba told me about his. (Laughter) No, honourable members, I have been reminding you that if you have something urgent you want to raise in the House, you come to see the Speaker before 11 a.m. so that I am aware and I create time for you. But this negotiation on the Floor is not right. [Mr Lukwago: “I was not yet here.”] You have a telephone; hon. Lukwago, I think let us not set precedents where we negotiate in the House. (Laughter)

REPORT ON THE SITUATION OF CHILDREN IN NORTHERN UGANDA

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY FORUM FOR CHILDREN (Mrs Ruth Tuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You remember on 30 January 2007, I laid a report on this Table concerning our mission to the North, for Members to read and internalise ready for debate.

Introduction

The all party Parliamentary mission to the North was organised by the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for the Children to assess the situation of Children in Northern Uganda and to bring the issue of Children affected by this conflict to the attention of the Eighth Parliament. The forum, a non-partisan, all party Parliamentary group, was formed during the Seventh Parliament. Today, more than 120 Members of the Eighth Parliament from all political shades and backgrounds have joined the forum. These Members share the same belief that as elected representatives of the people they must protect the interests of the children who constitute over 56 percent of their constituents. Because while the children cannot vote, we can, while they cannot make policy decisions we can, so we must.

Honourable members, most of you will recall that before the 23rd February 2006 general elections, the forum launched a children’s manifesto, addressing some the most important issues affecting children in Uganda today. In that manifesto we challenged all the leading political parties to demonstrate their commitment to the children. The forum spelt out what the political parties must do in the Eighth Parliament to support and protect the children. One very urgent issue we singled out was the long running conflict in the North, particularly the humanitarian situation and protection of the children affected by it. In the manifesto, the forum sought support from all political parties, for a broad agenda concerning the situation of children in Northern Uganda, and for the resolution of that conflict.

Mr Martin Mugwanja, the then UNICEF Country Representative said during our general meeting held last May in Entebbe, that by launching of the joint monitoring committee, the Government was issuing a promissory note to the children of Northern Uganda; a promise that they will see peace, not in their lifetime, but in their childhood like other children. Moved by this situation on the ground, and inspired by this statement, the mission travelled to Northern Uganda from June 26 to 03 July 2006. The visit was facilitated and funded by Save Children in Uganda. The visit was to find out what has changed in the lives of these children, and bring the findings back to Parliament. 

For the MPs involved, the trip represented a chance to engage with issues, show their concern to the people of Northern Uganda, and to see for themselves the reality of the situation. This first hand experience is what we bring to you today, to inform your debate on these issues so that you can further express your strong solidarity to the suffering people and children of Northern Uganda, whose voices we today represent.

We had some objectives. The main objective was for the mission to establish what developments had taken place regarding children in the conflict affected area, with the aim of bringing key issues to the attention of Parliament, for action. The overall objective of the mission was that the Eighth Parliament will today use these findings to rejuvenate and contribute to the important dialogue between people affected by the conflict, and institution of power, particularly of Parliament.  The list of participants is on page 2 and there are two more members on the third page. 

The methodology we used: 

During this five day mission to the North, the mission team was able to hold several meetings with the Resident District Commissioner in Gulu, the Fourth Division Commander, the District Security Committee, the Heads of the Departments of Gulu and Pader District Councils, UNICEF and 13 other civil society organisations working in the North. We visited the night commuter centres, specifically Lacor commuter centre and Noah’s Ark commuter centre. We also visited the reception centres, specifically GUSCO reception centre and the World Vision reception centre both in Gulu, as well as Pajure reception centre in Pader District. We went to the IDP camps; we visited Kochigoma, Anaka Prongo and Alero IDP camps in Gulu District, and Pajure IDP camp in Pader District. In the interest of time I will highlight the issues of concern, which we picked.

1.	The abduction of children and the number of children unaccounted for: Rt. hon. Speaker, honourable members, we have read in the press of the numbers of children abducted and we have the figure of 25,000 children who have been abducted. But we also know that 10,000 children are unaccounted for. 
2.	The re-integration of formerly abducted children.
3.	Child mothers and child-headed households.
4.	Child soldiers.
5.	Total orphans whose parents cannot be found.
6.	The night commuters.
7.	The children in the IDP camps.
8.	The challenges of camp de-congestion on the children.
9.	Children’s education and the affordability of the education. 
10.	Child health and sanitation in the IDP camps.
11.	Child labour.
12.	Child poverty. 
13.	Acute food shortage.
14.	Fire outbreak in the IDP camps. 

I would like to inform you that when we were there and we were entering one IDP camp, one hut caught fire and within about 10 minutes, 200 huts had been burnt. That was tragic yet we were not allowed to go and put out that fire because we had to find a beautiful girl to be sacrificed in order to appease the gods so that they could stop those huts from catching fire -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, honourable. What did you say? You had to find a girl to sacrifice? 

MRS TUMA: Madam Speaker, as soon as we got to the camp, one little hut caught fire. We all run out of the bus to go and put out the fire but we were told to keep away. We were told that if we put out the fire, the gods would let the fire burn us, unless we found a beautiful girl who could be used as a sacrifice to stop the gods lighting up those little huts –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please hon. Otto these are findings of their report.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, with all due respect to hon. Tuma for all the great work she has done in Northern Uganda, I want to set the record clear that in Acholi, there is no death sentence and there is nothing like sacrifice of human beings. Those were just rumours that were circulating in the camp. I beg the Members of Parliament to take it as hearsay and not facts, which actually took place. We do not want to lower the integrity of the Acholi ethnic community. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MRS TUMA: Thank you very much for that information but it is redundant. My colleagues who were with me are witnesses; we all read this report and we agreed to that. 

The challenges of NGO interventions

We found out that there were many NGOs who were uncoordinated. As such, we had to call on Save the Children to make sure that at least we get the NGOs working in the North to get together, so that each of them would know who is doing what. This would enable co-ordinated efforts to alleviate the problems of the children in the North. 

These are our recommendations, Madam Speaker.

To the Government

1.	Set up an inter-ministerial committee on children in armed conflict, that will provide punctual recommendations to the joint monitoring committee and the action to be taken under the emergency plan for Northern Uganda.
2.	Work to improve the humanitarian situation in Northern Uganda, ensure co-ordinated response, plan for, and fund post-war reconstruction. 
3.	Immediately establish emergency impact indicators that particularly focus on children. 
4.	The shortfall in funding for work of the World Food Programme in the region should be addressed as a matter of urgency. 
5.	The Parliament should be updated monthly on progress made on the situation of the children in the North.
6.	Provide more budget support to the Amnesty Commission so that a harmonised community-based programme for the prevention, removal and re-integration of child soldiers and other vulnerable children is established.
7.	Take strong action to address crimes and human rights abuses against children in particular, by its own forces.

Recommendations to Parliament

1.	As the Eighth Parliament, we would like to mandate a committee of Parliament to carry out a more detailed study to establish the extent of the problems facing the children and make appropriate recommendations. 
2.	Review all budgetary proposals in relation to sectors that affect the delivery of services to the children in the war-affected area. 
3.	Scrutinise the Defence Budget in order for it to target measures to adequately protect civilians in the North.
4.	Take action on the sexual abuse of children in conflict situations, by requesting establishment of a child protection mechanism in the North through Parliamentary questions and debate.
5.	Take appropriate action to re-shape the UPE programme in order for it to address the peculiar situation in the conflict area, such as increased number of teachers, schools, scholastic materials and the need for school uniforms.
6.	Increase the budget for government support to secondary school students in payment of school fees in the armed conflict area.

Conclusions

Our conclusion is that, let it be remembered by the whole world, let it be recalled by history, that at a time when it seemed so dark for the children of Northern Uganda, when fear, terror and starvation dominated their lives, when education, healthcare and protection was not for them, this Parliament, the Eighth Parliament, stepped forward and stopped it. “Children first” is our motto. For God and my Country.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Tuma and your forum for this very informative report. 

3.22
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to register my gratitude to the chairperson of the forum for the commendable work done, and for that report and the recommendations made.

The recommendations largely talk about security, which is the cause of the untold suffering meted out to these children in the North. I would request that we look at this matter seriously and from a holistic point of view, because security is degenerating in this country. Right, this insecurity is within even the heart of the country, that is, Kampala. It is in the city centre and this problem will escalate if not addressed as a matter of urgency. Madam Speaker, we are talking about -(Interjections)- yes it will escalate and we shall have more children suffering countrywide. We already have a number of children on our streets and these are not from Kampala Central here, largely. They are from Karamoja and all these other places. This situation is causing more concern. 

Right now the security agencies are in total disarray. You witnessed recently, Madam Speaker, in Kampala Central, a group called the Kiboko squad, or hit squad, scavenging the city streets, beating up –(Laughter)- people indiscriminately. The children are the worst victims of this indiscriminate whipping. Whereas we the adults can easily take off, it is increasingly becoming difficult for the children to get protection. 

Madam Speaker, on a more serious note, the issue of security is a concern countrywide right now. In the recommendations by the forum, they are saying we should enhance the capacity of the UPDF and all other security agencies to deal with insecurity. How are we going to enhance the capacity of UPDF or the lawfully recognised security agencies when we are still breeding a group, which is not known, in our law, the Kiboko or hit Squad, which is akin to the Intarahamwe of Rwanda? The situation is degenerating to unmanageable levels. I would wish to know from the Minister responsible for Security in this country whether we still have a force in charge of our security. Do we still have the Police? Do we still have the Army in place to protect our children and the people in this country? –(Interruption) 

MR KALIBA: Madam Speaker, the honourable Attorney-General in the Shadow Government is very well aware that had it not been for our good security in this country, the Thursday saga would have resulted into more loss of lives and property. He is very much aware that it is the same security that actually protected him on that day because he could have been injured. It is also the same security that actually put an end to that chaos that could have been a catastrophe for this country. So, is the hon. Attorney-General in the Shadow Cabinet in order to insinuate that our security is in disarray when we are even here deliberating on very sensitive matters and there are people in charge of our security? Is the minister in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think he is asking how many security agencies we have. 

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. That is precisely the question. I would like to know whether among the institutions in charge of our security, that is, the Police, the Army and the intelligence security organisations we also have another institution called the Kiboko or hit squad? Is it a new innovation to deal with security in this country? I will raise other matters at an appropriate time. I thank you very much.  

3.29
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the Chairperson of Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children. I also rise to raise the issue of re-integration of abducted children. She did not mention that but there are very many children who have been rescued or who have managed to find their way back. In most cases they go through reception centres and these centres are many. There are estimated to be about 17,000 abducted children but these formerly abducted children are actually facing a lot of problems. 

There are a few of them who are a bit comfortable as we have a school for formerly abducted children in Gulu and the ones in these schools are a bit comfortable because their education is being catered for. Their main problem could be stigmatisation because they are on their own in these schools otherwise their welfare is actually catered for. Also among these formerly abducted children we have very many child-mothers. 

Sometimes these child-mothers come back only to learn that both their parents are dead. The child-mother has children and her parents are dead yet she wants to go back to school. You find that this child-mother is actually challenged about where to put these children. Sometimes the father of the children is actually dead in the bush. So this is a very big problem -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am back, and thanks for your prayers. I would like to add more information to what the honourable member holding Floor is saying. The issue of children suffering as a result of various situations is not only limited to the situation in question. Not alluding to what happened; I found that where I was the children suffer even more because their mothers have been imprisoned. These children are innocently under detention and they are not even able to access basic needs. 

I experienced this where I was, and you are aware of the new home where I was retained for some days. I was in Luzira Prison and I cried tears for what I saw. Mothers who have been retained have suckling children and these children are also imprisoned. This is very alarming. I found there were 20 mothers where I was and at night they were crying because they did not have enough milk for their babies. Therefore, I would like honourable members to look beyond what we are discussing. Just yesterday I saw a mother with a two months’ old baby being taken to Luzira and she was entering the bus crying. I cried with her. So, the situation of children in prison as a result of their mothers being imprisoned is very critical and this House needs to address this urgently. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS AOL OCAN: Thank you, my sister. That is really looking beyond the abducted children. But back to the re-integration of these abducted children, there are a lot of questions we need to ask ourselves. 17,000 children in the community is not a small number. I told you about the stigmatisation. Some of these children actually face a lot of problems as they are not accepted in the community. 

After these children come back, they go through the reception centre, which gives them psycho-social support but this psycho-social support is for a short time; I think it is about two to three months and then they go back into the community. After that it is the community that helps continue with the psycho-social support. These children need a lot of counselling after staying in the bush and witnessing a lot of nasty things and you find that they are haunted all the time. I particularly train some of these children under “Jamia kupatanisha” and they actually tell us that people sideline them and say, “Look at her; that is the behaviour of abducted children so we are not surprised. Is that the child who came back from the bush?” This makes the picture remain in them and it becomes very difficult for them to get that picture of the bush out of their minds. 

Also as a result of education these children get a little bit of support from some NGOs but not all of them. A good number of them are out there supporting those who are back in the community. Unfortunately, I am not very sure if the reception centres where they go follow all of them up. There are only a few advantaged ones who are followed up but very many of them are not being followed up and they are hard up in the communities. Very many of them want to go back to school but they cannot. 

When it comes to their welfare, economically things are very difficult in the North. This includes feeding and even how to continue living as very many of them are orphans. You find that it is not easy for these people. Some of them I am sure have considered committing suicide. I remember when I was still in the district we asked probation and welfare to continue taking record of these children and to see how best to follow them up. However, sometimes they are taken up by other activities and leave that aside and this is very unfortunate. Even the NGOs who are undertaking the work of children are sometimes taken up by deskwork so that the practical work on the ground has a lot of gaps. 

It is very important for this Parliament to actually see to it that - we know that the problems are still there but what are going to do to evaluate the formerly abducted children who have been re-integrated back into the community? What mechanism are we going to undertake to make sure that we undertake this evaluation and access the situation? How are we going to address the gaps that are there? We really need to do this and this requires a kind of action plan that we need to come up with, together. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was waiting for us to have sufficient numbers. I want to announce that Parliament will sit on Monday next week. I want you to adjust our calendars because we shall also sit on Monday afternoon at 2.00 p.m. 

3.38
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to thank the Chairperson of Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children and to ask for support from Members of Parliament to really take these recommendations very seriously because I know hon. Tuma did not find enough time to give us all the findings. I was a member of that team I want us to try and imagine the lives of children in IDP camps now. If you take a walk randomly in one of the villages in Northern Uganda and you ask one child to draw for you a picture he will draw for you a picture of a gun, a soldier holding a gun, soldiers who have laid an ambush on the way, or burning houses. 

This situation is leaving a lot of children vulnerable and subjected to violence. If we don’t do something about this as Ugandans and as peace loving citizens then we are going to see a very bad generation coming up. I want to give an example from the findings of UNICEF in May 2006. They found out that 9,350 children live in IDP camps and out of this 20 to 25 percent are malnourished. 

Imagine that 20 to 25 percent of children in Northern Uganda are malnourished as a result of this war because they don’t have enough nutrition! Their rights are also being abused, they are exposed to violence, are living in congested conditions among others. I want to appeal to Members of Parliament to look into this very seriously.

Just a few months ago government came out with a plan to decongest the camps trying to argue that it would reduce the problems in congested camps. However, this also came with a lot of challenges on children. A number of these children are left in the big camps while their parents go to construct shelters in the smaller ones. They are left there because the smaller camps don’t have facilities like schools, health centres and other facilities that are necessary for children. So these children remain in the big camps unattended to and unprotected should fire start out in the camp. This is also another bad circumstance that is there and is still on going. In my district, two weeks ago we had a fire accident in one of the camps and thousands of huts got burnt. A number of children were left without where to sleep, without food and without many other necessities. This is still ongoing much as we are thinking of decongesting big camps. 

Also as a member of this team I saw the effect of this war on children whose parents have died. We have a number of children who are total orphans. They don’t have their mothers and some even don’t have relatives. For example we went to a community centre in Gulu and found two children who were born in the bush. They don’t know their mothers or fathers as they were rescued from the front line and now they are living in these rehabilitation centres. What will happen to these children? Let us assume that peace comes today or tomorrow. What will happen to these children who do not know their parents and or who do not have even a single parent? There are also others who are living in the camps, who don’t have their parents but are heading their own families. They don’t have any financial resources to help them go to school, to dress or to get access to good health care facilities. 

I ask Members of Parliament to support the idea of affirmative action for all children in Northern Uganda to have their school fees paid from primary up to university as this would be a better idea.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Akello for giving way. When I hear lamentations about the children of Northern Uganda I really get worried and lost. There are so many NGOs operating in Northern Uganda purportedly taking care of the welfare of the children there. The managers of these NGOs are living in expensive hotels and some of them are indigenous while others are foreign. They are holding workshops in air-conditioned houses everyday. 

If you were to divide the children of Northern Uganda among the NGOs there each NGO would take care of about 20 children. So where is all this resource going? Are we using our children to enrich other people? I am about to recommend as I give this information that NGOs in Northern Uganda, including the Parliamentary Forum on Children -(Laughter)- be investigated on what they are doing with our children in Northern Uganda. We cannot afford to take advantage of those disadvantaged children to enrich ourselves. People are driving four-wheel drives –(Interruption)- the information I am giving is that non-governmental organisations working in Northern Uganda should be investigated and audited, including the indigenous ones and the foreign ones. We risk ending up being used as merchandise in Northern Uganda. I thank you.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Akello and indeed this House that even as we probably borrow hon. Kibanzanga’s idea, we need to reflect on how many reports have come to this House from the Sixth through the Seventh Parliament and how we as the Uganda Government have performed in terms of meeting the humanitarian needs of those children and of the people in the IDP camps. 

Before we even throw a stone at any NGO that is taking advantage of us, we need the ministry responsible for the internally displaced people to tell us how much money they are putting into food. I was in Amuria and Katakwi over the weekend, and I am telling you, the people who have been sent home are on the verge of starvation. There is no food and they are pleading, telling us, “Go back tell government to give us food for only the months of May, June, July and perhaps we will be able to get our own food.” So, even before we think of these things, our own government keeps telling us the World Food Programme is feeding them but we have money, we collect revenue as Ugandans and reports keep coming to this House!

The other information that I would like to give to the House is the question of the marginalisation of children. I read a report from UNICEF. UNICEF was saying that sometimes when we define Northern Uganda and the interventions, we are thinking of only the true North. The UNICEF report was saying there are no interventions that are significant about children in the Teso sub-region. So, before we begin blaming everybody, hon. Kibanzanga, we need to blame ourselves. We apportion money in this Parliament, how much money do we give to buy food? How much money do we give to address parliamentary recommendations on Northern Uganda? Madam Speaker, that is what I would like to substantiate.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my two honourable colleagues. The first speaker was asking for clarification from me, unfortunately or fortunately, hon. Alaso has given a bit of advice on the way forward on that issue. In my district, Pader, hon. Otto came out with a committee to investigate the work of NGOs. This is the effort of Members of Parliament in the district to ensure that we assess and see the real work of these NGOs because we do not to some extent agree with all of them. This is part of what we are doing to look into that. 

Coming to the information of hon. Alaso, I want to thank her for that and I think she has already summarised almost what I wanted to conclude with. I want to call upon all Members of Parliament to please take this report very seriously. Reports have been placed in this House and they could not have been taken seriously but let this be a special report for attention. Thank you very much.

3.51
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Parliamentary committee, which made that trip to Northern Uganda to assess the situation of children. I would also like to –(Interjection)- okay, I want to thank Members of Parliament who went to assess the situation of the children in Northern Uganda. I would like to thank Save the Children Fund for funding this trip. 

Uganda being a signatory to the UN Convention on the Rights of Children and the Children’s Act, has an obligation to look into such issues of disadvantaged children in Northern Uganda. However, when I read this brief report, I realise that as much as this country has held many sensitisation workshops on gender issues and gender balance, I see there is a note on child mothers but I think there is also a problem of child fathers. I wish the next research could also look into this. 

Madam Speaker, with the presence of five Members of Parliament representing persons with disabilities since 1996, I feel that this committee should have also looked into the situation of children with disabilities. Imagine the situation, which befell you when you were at the camp when fire gutted out the huts. How did children with disabilities escape this fire? It is good that at the end of this report we recommend that a more detailed study be done to establish the extent of the problems facing children. I beg that those categories of children who were left out be considered during that study. Thank you very much.

3.54
MRS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I happen to have been on the team, which went to Northern Uganda last June and I rise to speak about child poverty and child labour. 

When we visited the IDP camps and the night commuter centres in Northern Uganda, we found children who were abjectly poor and orphaned by the war and AIDS, notwithstanding abduction, which was so rampant at that time. The Northern insurgency has left behind many orphans leading to child headed families and with children who are unable to meet their basic needs without undertaking some commercial activity. This is how child labour set in. My colleague who spoke before me has said that Uganda is a signatory to many conventions, especially on children, but we also feel that Uganda should adjust its 1995 Constitution. The laws therein state that there is provision for protection of children. We welcome that very much, but the contention is that it is just on paper. It is not operationalised. We wish to have this operationalised so that child labour is minimised. The laws are there but they are not in force.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LABOUR (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable member for raising that important point. The information I want to give is that a few months back, Cabinet passed the Child Labour Policy. That policy will be launched on 01 May, on Labour Day. That policy will address all the issues that have to do with child labour. I thank you very much.

MRS OBURU: Thank you very much, honourable minister. It is just going to be passed but it is not yet enforced. Madam Speaker, although Uganda has in the last 15 years experienced a fast growing economy, this growth is grossly unequal. For instance although 38 percent of the population is living in absolute poverty, the average for Northern Uganda is over 60 percent. That is too high. Poverty affects children the most, you know it. When there is poverty in the homestead, it is the child who is affected most because there will be no basic needs for that child in the home. These children, therefore, become prone to exploitation, poor upbringing, mistreatment, lack of care and protection. The numbers are appalling in the IDP camps, as we saw for ourselves. For that matter, there is a very strong co-relation between child labour and poverty. 

While we were at the IDP camp we saw children trading in maize and groundnuts so as to earn a living. We asked some of them why they were doing this trade, one of them started crying. I think it was traumatising for them to be asked that question. We asked one of the boys, “Do you go to school?” and he started crying. He told me he goes to school but he does not have basic needs like soap and that is the reason he was selling groundnuts. These children are also at risk of abduction especially when moving alone in the evening. What we are saying is that if these peace talks, which are going on in Juba can really take root, then these children can be integrated into society. Such children would then go back to their homes and those who are orphaned settled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Try to wind up.

MRS OBURU: Madam Speaker, the poverty situation in Northern Uganda is regrettably a push factor to child labour. There is almost no means of economic livelihood in the camps; that is why these children were being used. Children and youths, the majority of whom are out of school, were redundant and that is why they were engaged in those activities. 

According to testimonies from these children, poverty and the appalling situation in the IDP camps contribute to conditional recruitment of children in the Army because it is seen to be the most and only viable source of employment. 

Another source of income is child prostitution and drug abuse. We saw children on verandas inhaling drugs. They were smoking bhangi and inhaling fuel that intoxicates them. Therefore, eradication of household poverty is a precondition for reducing the incidence of child labour in Northern Uganda and indeed in Uganda as a whole. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have noted that Members who comprise the committee are also seriously interested in speaking. Why don’t you allow the other Members to react to your report? Let us have other Members who did not contribute to the making of the report.

4.01
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): On behalf of government, I would like to thank hon. Ruth Tuma and her team for adding more experience to the problem of children in the North. Each day that passes, each minute that passes that brings in more information towards our understanding of the problem in the North is most welcome. As I welcome this group who went, I would also like to appreciate the work that was done by the Parliamentary committee, which visited the North and also gave a report. This is important because as we share the frustrations of handling the situation, as we get more and more understanding of what went and what is going on, we are going to be better able to meet the challenge of overcoming the effects. 

I think this report is simply the tip of the iceberg indicating the impact of the war in the North. It has just isolated the case of children but it can as well apply to the elderly. It can as well apply to even adults, men and women who have been in camps living an abnormal life, people who looked after themselves, who fed themselves, who chose the food they wanted to eat but who have now to depend on rations given out at times which suit those who can deliver. I think this is where, I wish hon. Lukwago were here, I would have used the expression we use in social analysis: misplaced concreteness. We are focusing on a human situation in the North and he comes and dramatises about the people in town and Kampala and so on and so forth. To me, children -(Interruption)- yes, hon. Anywar is a child, of course of her mother and father, but we are talking about children who are much younger and unable to look after themselves and should be looked after –(Interruption)

MRS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are talking about the situation of children with a case study or reference point to the Northern part of Uganda. We are looking towards how best we can improve the situation of children generally and probably learn from what is happening in the North. We are quite aware that the effects felt by children in the Northern part of Uganda equally spill over to other parts of Uganda. When we make reference of incidences elsewhere that could have culminated into a situation of what is happening in Northern Uganda so that we learn from it, it becomes like we are perfecting our activities and our policies. 

When we refer to the situation where children - just as mothers who are imprisoned with their babies in Luzira where I spent two nights - it is the same situation of mothers in prison in the Northern part of Uganda who are being imprisoned together with their own children. We are aware that this is something we are trying to address. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable minister, who is supposed to spearhead the way forward of how to solve the problems of children, to allude that we are trying to dramatise the situation, which is not in connection with what we are talking about? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are all discussing children. Let us all discuss children.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, we are talking about the report specifically based on the situation in Northern Uganda. We are not talking about Kasese or Bundibugyo because there have been situations there, but we are talking about Northern Uganda. I do not want to go into this because I think it is not going to be helpful. 

What I want to point out is that this report in its itemised presentation, talks about the abduction of children. When you are dealing with the abducted children, certainly you are dealing with different situations of children, from the child of a woman on whom a sentence has been passed and she is going to jail, and so on. The kind of rehabilitation that you are going to give to that child in the prison with her mother is not the same as the child who has been abducted and has suffered in the bushes.

Madam Speaker, we are talking of children abducted but largely those who have come back. This House should note also that there are children who are still uncounted for, who are still in the bush. These children also need our voice. We must talk loud and clear and support the effort being made for the peace talks in Juba. There are children who are living in circumstances probably worse than in the camps, those who are in the bush in Garamba and other parts of Southern Sudan.

I am looking at the reintegration of former abducted children. Yes, it is a very difficult thing. If you look at wars in human history, you still have problems of integrating the fighters of the Vietnam War; you still have people suffering from the effects of the First and Second World Wars; so it is a very frightening situation that all of us have got to be aware of as we integrate people. In fact, one of the major issues that are going to face us and this House is when the agreement is signed and we have to reintegrate the people who have lived outside the fringes of society to come back and live among us.  

Child mothers are not mothers in the case of, like where you have defilement, these are two cases and very hideous as they are, but you have very bad cases as we now know what happened to the children from Aboke and so on and so forth. I would like to correct one point, which hon. Oburu in her experience, was talking about. She talked of child soldiers and she seems to be saying that children are recruited into the Army. I hope it is understood here that UPDF does not recruit children into the Army. We do not recruit children into the Army.

Madam Speaker, we have orphans –(Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable minister for giving way. I would like to inform the minister that the recruitment of children was there in the Army. I do not know now, but it was there in 2005 when we were just about to go in for our elections. I witnessed a child who went and killed a seven year old, using a gun in the then Laro division, which was mine that time, in Gulu District. I was so annoyed. I went to the police station but could not even see that child soldier -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, hon. Aol, Was this child in the UPDF uniform?

MS AOL: Yes, he was in the UPDF uniform and accordingly it was also admitted. We challenged and it was admitted that these were children recruited in the LDUs. It happened! Let us not run away from it. Maybe it is not happening today but it happened up to 2005.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Kabwegyere for allowing me to give this information. The policy in the UPDF under which we recruit, especially regarding age, is that we take on people aged between 18 to 25 years. That is the policy. The procedure especially in Northern Uganda is that we seek recommendations right from the LCs up to the RDC level. The UPDF officer in charge of recruitment in that unit gets the recommendation from those authorities. 

When I hear of 5,000 children within the UPDF, I wonder - without any information that will help the House and the Government to go down there in the unit, identified by the UN, which was given to the committee, which went on the ground - I wonder whether that information will help us. The mentioning of 5000 children without giving further information like the names and the units does not help much. We have only 53000 soldiers in UPDF.

MS WONEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Minister for giving way. The clarification I would like to get from you, hon. Minister, is on the issue of registration of births and deaths. What is this government doing in as far as registration of deaths and births is concerned? And do we have these birth certificates so that we are –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a bigger problem. I want to know whether our army actually employs children. That is what I am interested in; leave the registration first.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Minister for giving way. My name is Simon Oyet, Member of Parliament, Nwoya County. Before I came to Parliament, I was involved in child protection activities at the level of a centre manager in one of the reception centres in Northern Uganda. Madam Speaker, we participated, together with UNDP, in a fact-finding mission to find out whether there was recruitment of child soldiers in UPDF. We moved in about three different districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader. 

Madam Speaker, it is a known fact that UPDF at one point were recruiting children below 18years into their forces. We went to 503 brigade in Kitgum and found over 28 children in armed force.  But what the brigade commander told us was that they were in the process of sending these children to school to have them upgrade their education until they reach the required age of recruitment. 

When we left 503 brigade, we went to Third Division Headquarters in Acholi B. There we found over 37 child soldiers recruited by UPDF. They also told us the same story that they were in the process of taking them back to school because they did not meet the age requirement. So, it is a known fact, and we must admit that there was some element of recruitment of child soldiers. That is the information I want to give. Thank you.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, sometimes it helps when we admit a mistake such that it is handled. The problem is that, while most of the children today, at least those in P7 currently, can say they have birth certificates and it is easy to identify their ages, it is very difficult to identify the ages of those aged 15 to 17. And this is where possibly the UPDF and those who are recruiting have a problem. Those children want to enter UPDF and because these people recruiting cannot determine their ages, they end up recruiting them. 

I was a bit disturbed by the hon. minister trying to question the report. Well, it is your right. But to ask the Parliamentary Forum for Children to tell you the division, the number and the section, is laborious work, and even if you went there, there is no division where they will tell you the number unless you are a minister. And as far as we are concerned, we are only expressing our concern and saying, “Hon. minister, go down and do not just come here to defend the undefendable”. We know the children but we do not want to carry them here as evidence to show you. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the minister.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I am one of those who identify a mistake and admit that it was a mistake. I am, therefore, going to stick to my principle and policy under which we recruit in the UPDF. 

I am greatly privileged by the information given by the hon. member from Amuru. At least he went ahead and said -(Interruption)- yes, Amuru District, Nwoya Constituency –(Interruption)-I visited him so I know where he comes from. That is the kind of information that can help us. 

I wanted you, honourable members, to appreciate the difficulties UPDF faces in the recruitment process. Every person forwarded to the UPDF has got a recommendation and every recommendation says, “Yes, he is 18 years.” Most of those children you see, say they are 18 years old because they cannot say they are 19. If someone is 17 years, he will say I am 18. And why is it like that? Because he wants to get the job in UPDF- (Interruption)-Let me develop my point please. 

In addition to the above, the people in the LRA who were attacking and terrorising their parents were children. Can you imagine a UPDF officer telling a father who has brought his son to be recruited in the UPDF, that his son does not qualify to be part of those who defend the community and yet those who are terrorising them are much younger than even this boy you are denying -(Interruption)-Yes. 

On the problem of lack of birth certificates to ascertain one’s age, unless you are a doctor who could use scientific means of ascertaining one’s age, we are bound to have some mistakes. 

What do I want from this august, House Madam Speaker? It is that whenever somebody has some information about children they have identified within UPDF, they should inform us so that we immediately remove them from the force. We are not interested in recruiting children. If you have information about children in UPDF, forward his name to us so that we together clean the institution -(Interruption)

4.20
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Prof Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker, what I am happy about is that this report is almost a year old. As such, some of the situations have changed, not totally changed, but there has been a significant improvement. Take the case of the night commuters. I think that situation has certainly radically changed. The congestion in camps, that situation has changed in many parts and people have moved closed to home while many have reached home. 

We are witnessing a real enthusiasm with which people are witnessing a sense of hope and a sense of peace. That is why this House must urge all those involved in the peace talks to really expedite this. Many of us wanted the peace earlier, say by December. We wanted it earlier than that but we are still waiting and I am glad resumption is now soon to take place.

Madam Speaker, the question of food, on this I would like to really take on, if she can allow, hon. Alaso. I am in charge of relief and she is representing the people she visited.  She finds that there is shortage of food but she does not pick a phone and say, “Prof. Kabwegyere, there is a situation here.” If I was not here I might not have known –(Interjections)- I am not taking information yet. Let me first make my point. 

If it is Kabwegyere and I find there is a need and there is somebody who can attend to that need, I will address that need first and come to the House after I have addressed it.  I believe that we can have capacity to send food but that capacity must be activated by report –(Interjection)- please, let me make this point –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, the Minister who is responding to this food issue has a full mandate of the appointing authority to handle the welfare of the IDPs’. I would like to find out if he is in order to just wait for the day Alaso will run into the camps in Katakwi and Amuria and come to him so that he executes his mandate.

Two, is he in order to wait for me when inside his office his deputy is a Member of Parliament for Amuria County.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, I do not know how they operate in their office. So, I am really unable to rule on this matter.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, if we do not have a sense of trust, we cannot address emergencies. You ring the Police and say, “An accident has taken place.”  If you expect the Police to be everywhere accidents occur the Police will never help you and this is the fact.  

Hon. Alaso has repeated this and I am beginning to wonder whether what she says is the truth or not because we have offices in every district and we get reports.  When we get reports - we have food stores - we organise the food to be taken but if a district does not report that there is an emergency how is one supposed to dream?  Hon. Alaso may have the capacity to dream about the presence of realities everywhere. I do not have.  (Interjection)- This is not the clarification I am looking for. 

The question of food shortage is being addressed. World Food programme for many of us releases support on our appeals.  We appeal to get food and exactly we have done that. They came to us and said the food reserve they have – and this is the World Food Programme. It is not a Uganda Food Programme that the food reserve they had was not enough and they were about to have a crisis.  

So, I wrote to all our supporters, those who give us food assistance, and the Prime Minister did actually have a meeting with our head supports.  Food has started coming in but it takes a bit of time and that is why honourable members will never be in control of a situation where people have to be supplied with food because you cannot deliver food when people need it. 

Hon. Alaso must recognise that if she was the Minister in charge of Relief, she would not do any better. She cannot be everywhere to know where the food is; the kilograms that have been given today are now finished.  So, this is the truth and this must be shared with all goodwill people who are ready to work with our people.  Instead we must work very hard to make sure that food relief stops. The conditions that demand that we have to supply food to people who are able to look after themselves must come to an end.  

Madam Speaker, a Joint Monitoring Committee was set up which answers the recommendation. Number one, where the chairperson is saying set up an inter-ministerial committee on children aimed at conflict that will provide punctual recommendation for Joint Monitoring Committee:  You see, the Joint Monitoring Committee is addressing the totality of the emergency situation, which includes children.  This is why UNICEF is a member of the Joint Monitoring Committee, Save the Child; indeed all the significant humanitarian agencies are represented in the Joint Monitoring committee.  

This committee also has the chairpersons of all the districts in the area concerned.  So, we are technically in a position to address all the challenges that come to our people but I want to say it again and again that you cannot do it adequately and do it to the satisfaction of the population. 

Lastly, about investigating the NGOs, I think this question of full utilisation of the money that is brought in this country is of interest to all of us particularly when it comes under the guise of humanitarian support.  

When I became Minister in charge of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, I was surprised to know of the numbers of NGOs, which are operating in the North. It is only recently when a committee of this House visited the North and found an NGO was trying to put a water system in an old camp. A water pump system in a camp, which is supposed to be emptied with the coming of peace and this is where an NGO wanted to show that it has put something, even when it is not serving the need of the people.  So, I have had to write to all the chairpersons to make sure that we do not have to show water pump system for the sake of them, but if they are humanitarian assistances they must be placed where people can use them. 

So, these are the shortcomings that we have to face and almost live with and this is why you should join me –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Thank you very much, honourable minister for giving way.  The information I want to gives regards the operation of NGOs.  In most cases the NGOs co-ordinate with offices of District Disaster Preparedness and the office of the CAO and take into consideration the district priority plan.  

I want to inform the Minister that installation of water supply in the old camps was not in the interest of the various NGOs in question.  But it was in regard, or it was in consultation with the District Disaster preparedness and office of the CAO.  So, that is the information I want to give you. Thank you. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you. So you can join me in expressing scorn at people who have the duty, the responsibility and electoral mandate to work for the people but instead they collude with forces that deny these people the humanitarian assistance. If this is there, I want the cooperation of all of us. I have said this many times. I have written to all members of Parliament from the area to say, “Please, let us join hands in fighting those elements that delay the departure of people from the camps and that delay the arrival of peace.” So, this is a challenge that we must all take on.

 It is, therefore, my pleasure to appreciate this report and the report of all those who come in to say “do this” so that we can avert the situation, “do that” because we are in an emergency; but those of us who want to dream about events, then we have a problem. I thank you very much for listening to me.

4.35
MR GODI AKBAR (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the team leader that helped us bring this report to the House. The report is about the children in the North. The Northern part of Uganda stretches up to West Nile and there are two walls that ravage West Nile. Even the Kony attacks hit some parts of Adjumani district and many people lost their lives along the Karuma- Pakwac road, which is a gateway to West Nile. At the appropriate time, I am very happy that a motion will be brought and I will seek that I add another amendment to that motion to see that in the final adoption of that report, West Nile should also be reflected. Thank you.

4.36
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Picking from exactly where my brother stopped, I would like to thank the people who wrote this report and to say that in the report there are many gaps. He has mentioned one gap of West Nile. Okay. 

The second gap which I would like to bridge here is that the report has not indicated to us progress so far made on the numerous actions taken in the direction of the rehabilitation of children, especially those who have returned home.

We have heard the UNRF II in West Nile. As far as I am concerned as a Member of Parliament, I wanted to see in this report the status of the children from the camps of the UNRF II who were said to have been comfortable because the picture we have in our minds as people of Uganda in this Parliament is that in West Nile there is no war, in West Nile the rebels are now home, the problem is over. 

So the question is, do we have a tracking system? Do we have milestones to follow up these children; how they are recovering, these rehabilitees, so that we can also identify the bottlenecks, which rehabilitation process has draw our attention to face particularly those bottlenecks.

Now, my proposal here –(Interruption)

MS ARUU: Thank you my brother, hon. Fungaroo. The information I would like to give is that the Kony war has resulted into a children’s home in Moyo district, which is a result of attacks on Adjumani district. 

Therefore, I would like to say it is really true that the issue of children affected by wars in West Nile region is not reflected. I would also like to change the title of this report to read, “A Report on Children in Acholi Sub Region”, not the Northern Region- (Applause) because Northern region includes four sub regions namely: Karamoja, Lango, West Nile and Teso. 

MR GODI: Madam Speaker, the information I am giving is, you see after the 2002 peace truce between UNRF II and the Government of Uganda, which was signed in Yumbe Boma grounds, part of the terms of the agreement were that the child soldiers would be integrated into normal life. Those who had the qualifications, as the Minister of State for Defence put it, and wanted to join the Army, were at liberty as long as they meet the requirements. 

But hon. Rugunda was a witness. The government said they are going to put up a primary school and a vocational school for those children who would be integrated. From that time 2002, until now as I talk, there is no single brick. Land has been allocated for that school but up to now nothing has taken place. So, we wonder whether the integration will start in 2011.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for all the information you have given me. So, these are some of the gaps. Another gap is that as a Member of Parliament or as a Parliamentary Association dealing with children, we should bear in mind that children know no borders. 

Today, the camps of the LRA are accessible. Camps of the Lords Resistance Army are accessible to us. If Dr Rugunda was here he would tell us. I wanted to find out from the members of this committee, association of children, whether they made attempts to go to Garamba and find out how many children are there. Do you have that information? (Interruption)-That information is not allowed -(Interjections)- Excuse me, Members, this is important -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But she is a member of the committee. She is informing you.

MS WONEKHA: Thank you honourable for finally giving way. Thank you Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to the honourable member is that this is a voluntary parliamentary forum, whose mission in this particular case was – the overall objective of the mission really is that the Eighth Parliament will today use these findings to rejuvenate and contribute to the important dialogue between the people affected by the conflict and the institutions of power, particularly Parliament and this debate is all that we wanted. We wanted the awareness, actually arousing the awareness and causing debate and putting the issues of the children of this country into focus. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR FUNGAROO: Now this is the debate. What you did not see is this, and this is where you missed the point -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, it is not as if Parliament directed them to go and conduct this. It was voluntary. It was just voluntary but you are acting as if they were instructed; you have not done this, you have not done the other.

MR FUNGAROO: Okay. This is a suggestion. I mean, it is not, from here, this report is going to another level. It is not to blame anybody but to enrich it and make it stronger. That is the basis of identifying the gaps. It is in good faith totally. 

Now, this is my suggestion. If it is like the way I understand here, that honourable members of this House have the interest of not seeing any child suffering, then I would suggest this one, that organisations that are allowed to cross boundaries of conflict like UNICEF, Red cross, Save the Children Fund, should be encouraged to find out whether among the children unaccounted for as reflected in your report are some who are living in the LRA camps in Garamba and whether they are immunised against the six killer diseases. These are children who are coming back home. Peace is coming and this is our prayer. We want those children to be brought home alive. Are they in school in Garamba? Are they vaccinated against -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. With all due respect to those in charge of the Garamba talks, I will want to inform you that with what I saw in Garamba, these NGOs, under the Sudan Chapter are active in the areas where the LRAs operate. They are, for example, involved in organising venues used to meet children. They have even constructed some children centres in the bush. 

So, Caritas Sudan Chapter and other related NGOs are also doing the work within their scope. I think that information can help to show you that there are boundaries as far as registration of some NGOs within a country is concerned.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, my brother, hon. Otto. As I conclude, I want to say that this is the kind of inter-organisational collaboration we need in order to help to address our interests and those of are our children. Honourable members, who participated in writing this report, please have me as one of your allies especially in the fight for the rights of children. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Why would the honourable members who went there really want to insist on contributing? I think this is your report and you should allow the others to contribute.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to be guided on whether the many MPs who actually visited Northern Uganda should be debating. When you read the report, it looks as if it is the chairperson’s report since it does not bear a signature of any of the members. So, I just want to encourage my sister that they should attach members’ signatures and names for us to compel them not to debate. Otherwise the moment they have not signed it, they are entitled to debate. 

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. The North has been more less a no-go area for most of us. Those of us who have dared to go there and especially if you do not come from there, need to enrich the report using the experiences we came across; the experiences of our touches with the realities on the ground there. 

Madam Speaker, I request you to offer us the chance. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are really introducing a new precedent here that those who are knowledgeable should speak all the time. I have here, a list of members who went and want to speak. If they all speak, none of you will speak. By the way hon. Kasamba, why didn’t you include what you want to say in the report? Why is it not in the report?

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, I think the report was tabled in a summarised form. It is very important to note that the North has suffered for 20 years. Therefore, I think that we need to be a bit considerate when we are discussing issues that emerge from there. It is a unique area and we need to give it the due consideration it deserves. So, I appeal to you. Thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: I would like to find out whether all the members own this report. If it is only the Chairperson who wrote it, then these members should tell us. Otherwise we are setting a bad precedent that members who contributed come to debate and deny the others the opportunity to contribute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is what it means -(Interjection)

MS TUMA: Unfortunately, I do not have the list of all the members of the forum, but this is their report. We have over 100 names of members who participated in the Mission to Northern Uganda on page 2. That means that members were selected from the forum, and I am sure this is their report. It is ours and it is an extract of the bigger report, which everybody got in his/her pigeonhole. I know everybody received this copy, on 30th January, and I am sure each of you has it. If you are a member of the forum, you subscribe to it; this report is ours. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to set a precedent where the committee goes to investigate something, sits and writes a report, and members come here to dominate the debate. The report is brought here for the other members to make comments. I do not want to set that precedent. I think that members of the committee who contributed have enough representation for now. Let us have a few of the others to give their comments.

4.55
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Forum for the work done on the children of Northern Uganda. However, I would love to also add something especially on the findings on the Children from the Karamoja Region, who were here on Kampala streets. I realise that we need to strengthen the role of local governments because often times, we go there as members of Parliament or as ministries, and assert our finds without asking the local authorities on what measures they have taken to combat the situations down there. 

For example, in the case of Karamoja, when the issue of children was raised in Kampala, the LC.V and Sub-county chairpersons were called to talk about the situation. So, I advise line ministries to always respect local governments and work towards strengthening their ability to handle such situations before they escalate.

The other issue is the coordination between implementing agencies. NGOs operate, the Forum goes and checks out, at the same time ministries carry out investigations. So, who coordinates the whole thing of Children? I think there should be coordination.  

Recently when stakeholders were called to Kampala to handle the situation of children from Karamoja, Leaders of Central Division were not invited, yet the children were being housed in Kisenyi area, which is part of Central Division. This forced Central Division to also immediately call a separate stakeholders’ workshop. 

In the same vein, we realise that the National Task Force is constituted in the Prime Minister’s Office where unknown people select the stakeholders, and because of this, we eventually see the repercussions relating to the return of children onto the streets of Kampala- (Interruption)

MR OBUA: Thank you, hon. Nabila for giving way. Barely two or three weeks ago, two committees of this Parliament were in Karamoja, these were, the Committee on Social Services and the one on Agriculture. I would like to inform you that the children, who were picked off the streets of Kampala and taken back to Karamoja, have threatened to come back. 

Their reasoning is that what forced them from Karamoja to come to the streets of Kampala, has not been handled. That is, the   issue of famine and the effects of clashes between Karimojong warriors and UPDF. So, they have threatened to come back because at least here they are able to get between Shs.50 and 100 from goodwill Ugandans.

MS AKIROR: I would like to inform my honourable colleague that the children we are talking about have actually not yet reached Karamoja. They are still in the disputed territory of Teso land. So, I wonder which children we are talking about because the ones said to have been resettled in Karamoja are still in Teso sub-region. I thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: I personally saw these children when we went to Karamoja. Some of them told us that the conditions there were still as worse as before and that they were about to come back. So, I think that the ones who are in between Teso and Karamoja, is another group –(Laughter) but the other group who want to come back -(Interruption) 

MS AKIROR: Let me clarify this to the House. The ones who were taken from Kampala were actually resettled in that land that is being contested for by both the Karimojong and Itesots, and actually a security meeting over this, was held last Monday. So, maybe those are new ones since the plight of children in Karamoja is very pathetic. Thank you.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, we have a specific team that had an opportunity to go to the North. We also have had a team going to Karamoja. The clarification I am seeking is to find out whether the two teams have tried to establish the reasons why, despite the persistent conflict in Northern Uganda, we have only had children from Karamoja coming to the streets of Kampala. If the cause is the conflict, why is it that children have not been coming from Teso and the Acholi sub-regions where people have been oppressed and destabilised by the war? Why have children been only, as I hear, coming from one Sub-County of Karamoja? What is the pattern? Did you find out?

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to continue and say that these children have slowly come back to the streets of Kampala. They are trickling in slowly, with the number growing daily. So, what we see is the uncoordinated efforts with all stakeholders with the Prime Minister’s office handling the resettlement, before consulting with areas leaders to find out what brings these children to the streets of Kampala. 

The Prime Minister’s office does not also consult with the MPs and local government leaders in Karamoja for their input in handling this issue. Therefore, the Minister of Local Government should come here and tell us what efforts he has put in, to coordinate efforts of handling this issue, with the local government leaders in the Karamoja area –(Interruption)

4.56
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable member for giving way. There has been coordination between the Ministry of Gender, especially the department dealing with children, and the Prime Minister’s office. We had a major coordination in the way the children were moved from here to Kampiringisa. I went there physically, my team was there and we organised their transportation from there to Karamoja with the assistance of UNICEF. 

The major problem is not how the children were transported. It is why they return to the streets of Kampala? We can come here and talk and talk, but until the situation becomes receptive to people with normal living conditions, these children will keep running away. 

However, I am happy to inform you that the two neighbouring districts, in a meeting that the honourable member was talking about, it was agreed that those children can live there until the situation gets better. I am writing to thank them for being states-man-like. I also want to thank the honourable member for bringing this issue.

However, I want say that the more fundamental problem that makes the situation non-receptive is that of cattle rustling. As a result we cannot retain children in this area. So, we have got to address that problem progressively with all those involved.

MRS SEMPALA: I would like to accept the information from the Minister, but with reservations because why I am pointing out the coordination, is that, in the stakeholders’ meeting all stakeholders are not put in the same house. As a result you have different stakeholders’ meetings taking place without the Minster in charge of Karamoja being present. Sometimes it is the Prime Minister, other times, in other stakeholders’ meeting, it is the Minister of Gender and eventually what happens is that- (Interruption)

MS OKORIMOE: Thank you very much, my honourable friend, for giving me way. The information I want to give you is that the Karamoja Parliamentary Group is soon laying on Table, a report with most of the issues, including the issues of the children. In that report we shall be able to tell this Parliament, which ministry is absconding from its duties. In the same report, we shall be designing a way forward. Otherwise, there is a lot of high-sounding nothing in Karamoja, and we are not happy. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Naggayi Sempala, please conclude.
 
MRS SEMPALA: I welcome that information. It has allayed my fears because when I see the escalation of children from Karamoja on Kampala streets, then I know it is a vicious cycle. So, I hope that this Parliament will urgently and patiently wait for the said report, to come sooner from the Members from Karamoja, and I think we should ask them when they are bringing it. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Yiga.

MR GODI: Madam Speaker, hon. Yiga is a Member, so he cannot debate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Yiga is moving a motion to conclude the debate.

MR YIGA: I am only moving a motion. It is a motion Sir. Madam Speaker, as we conclude the debate on this important issue of the situation of the children in Northern Uganda, I beg to move a motion as follows: 

WHEREAS the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, a non-partisan group in Parliament of Uganda, which was initiated to create a platform through which MPs may protect the interests of children within the framework of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Children’s Act 1996, the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and the African Union Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child; 

NOTING the disadvantaged position of children in our society where they neither vote nor get involved in decision making processes of the nation, the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children in partnership with Save the Children in Uganda, launched the Children’s manifesto addressing some of the most important issues affecting children today and in particular the long running conflict in northern Uganda, and situation of the Children affected by it, responding to the need to address the above issues, the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children constituted the Parliamentary Mission for the North in June 2006, composed of 14 members of Parliament with the objective of establishing what developments had taken place regarding children in conflict affected areas so as to bring key issues to the attention of Parliament and government for action; 

AND WHEREAS the said Mission recently concluded its work, and compiled a report under the title “Assessing the situation of the Children in Northern Uganda, what has changed, putting the issues on the agenda of Parliament,” a copy of which was layed on the Table of Parliament, and we have had the opportunity to debate it today; 

NOW THEREFORE, bring it before Parliament as follows: 
i) 	That Parliament does formally receive, acknowledges and adopts the report of the Parliamentary Mission to the North. 

ii) 	That Parliament mandates an appropriate committee to study the findings and recommendations of the said report with a view of establishing the real extent of the problems facing the children in the North, intervention mechanisms and to recommend appropriate policy and legislative solutions or measures”. 
Honourable Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? -(Interjection) Okay, it has been seconded.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to provide for a third aspect in the resolution to urge government to regularly update Parliament on resettlement efforts in the war-affected areas in Northern Uganda. This is actually a revision of what we did sometime when we had a select committee report here on the same issue.

During that time we did urge government to regularly update Parliament because we do not have that regular opportunity. I believe that if we take on this resolution, and government agrees to probably, once in very four months to come to Parliament to give an update, then that would be helpful. We will be able to continuously inform the process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that resettlement is a process that is going to end. Does it really encompass the issues that Members raised of concern like those concerning UNRF people, education and so forth? Does resettlement really encompass? –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, my understanding is that we would like to look into – I made this proposal simply because vulnerability in terms of children in the Teso region, Lango, West Nile and Acholi is really defined more in regard to the consequences of the war. 

It is not the standard definition of vulnerability of destitute children, which we look at in Kampala mainly caused by HIV/AIDS. The bigger component of vulnerability is defined in terms of the consequences of that war and so I thought if government comes here it would afford us an opportunity. Unless we would like to just have a regular statement on the status of children because I do not know whether this one can accommodate it. However, my concern would be the bigger perspective.

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, we have agreed as the department in the Office of the Prime Minister that is charged with the responsibility of coordinating the return and resettlement of Internally Displaced People to update members of Parliament and leaders who hail from Northern part of the country that is affected by internal displacement regularly and this is a directive from the Rt hon. Prime Minister. He will at various times travel to Gulu, Lira, Soroti and West Nile. This is to particularly tackle the question of Internally Displaced People. 

The information, therefore, that I wanted to give is that let us separate that from this specific programme that is highlighting the plight of children particularly in Northern Uganda as properly scrutinised by the Parliamentary Forum that has been able to visit Northern Uganda.

Secondly, I would also want to –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the Minister for giving way. When the Minister says the issue we are handling is a specific one as if he has got linkages with resettlement, I do not understand. What I wanted to inform the Minister is that the problems that are affecting children in Northern Uganda are problems concerning families, and the moment you update and handle the settlement of families correctly then indirectly you will be handling and taking care of the problems of children. Therefore, for you to separate the problems of children from the problems of families -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, hon. Karooro’s committee has been to Northern Uganda and that committee was more interested in the overall picture of resettlement and I am sure they will give us a report. This is specific to children so why don’t we separate the two and deal with the issue of resettlement, IDP’s and so forth when that report comes from the relevant committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Members, the issue of children may disappear if you it with so many other things.

MR KIBANZANGA: Finally, the Minister of State seems to agree that this House handled its constant briefing on resettlement. Now the amendment of hon. Alice was that while we are handling the problems in Northern Uganda let us also be informed regularly on how the resettlement exercise is going on. To some of us you cannot separate the two. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I really think that this is one of the few occasions that we are speaking for the children. Now if we are going to put in mabati, cement and iron sheets the children are going to disappear.  I would like to appeal to you, but it is up to you.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify on what the Minister of Disaster Preparedness raised here. He said that the Committee on Presidential Affairs went to the North and will come out with a report on resettlement. I think that is expecting too much from that committee. The committee did not go to do the work of the Minister. They went specifically on NUSAF so that- (Interruption)

MRS TUMA: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member who is a Member of the Committee on Presidential Affairs and who was also on that tour in order to assert whatever she is asserting when even the chairperson of the committee is not here? Is she in order when the report is not even written? You are not even supposed divulge what you found out. Is in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you did not file a minority report. If you disagreed with what they reported you should have a minority report. You are not allowed to disown what they have said as you are part of them. But, hon. Members, don’t we have a committee that can handle that issue of resettlement?

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I wish I could be given an opportunity to explain myself. It is important that at least you understand and then give the order. One thing is -(Interruption) 

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, our Rules do not allow her to anticipate if she was part of the committee of this House that went to Northern Uganda because why do you want to pre-empt the report?

MS AOL: No, the Committee on Presidential Affairs -(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA: But you are pre-empting the report.

MRS TUMA: I was just going to say that it did not include resettlement. We went specifically to address one issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs will be coming and it will be debated. Let everything else abide that report. Now I really want to appeal to you, let us not crowd the issue of children with everything else otherwise we are going to lose. 

AN HON. MEMBER: Amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to appeal to you. Let us not crowd the issue of children with everything else. We risk losing focus. These children will disappear. Let us wait for the other report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs and handle resettlement under it -(Interruption)- Can you all please resume your seats? Chairperson, what do you say? 

MRS TUMA: Rt hon. Speaker, this forum was formed specifically to look into the issues of children. A lot of reports have been written about children and nothing had been taken in action. I would like to beg this House to accept that this motion refers to only children because if we divert, we are going to lose focus. We must be focussed. Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM: Madam Speaker, I want to support the motion but resolution No.2. I want to be advised. We all know very well that issues of children are cross cutting and most of our committees deal with issues of children. Instead of singling out one committee, why don’t we as Parliament highlight the issues of children – because even in budgeting, we are supposed to mind the minors, the vulnerable and the children? If we take it for granted that we address the issue of children whenever it comes up, what about the security part of it, which is the root cause?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Nsubuga for accepting this clarification that I am going to give him. 

In the first place, it is true issues of children are cross cutting just like issues of disability. We need to appreciate that in the government structure, there is a specific ministry, which is charged with the mandate of handling children. 

As if that is not enough, when you look at all those conventions, which have been cited: the UN Convention on the Rights of a Child, the African Charter of Welfare and Protection of Children, there is a ministry in this country, which is charged with this responsibility. I think we need not lose that focus. The best we can do is to assign that lead ministry with a responsibility, and then it can coordinate as usual in the government machinery with the other stakeholders and other relevant ministries that can then be brought on board. 

When you look at other issues like health, it is cross cutting; education is cross cutting to some extent, and agriculture is equally cross cutting. There must be that line ministry which we must support and channel all these issues. To me that is the Ministry of Labour, Gender and Social Development. Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, hon. Wadri. Having heard that, there is no need to lament. We should be specific that this report goes to the Committee on Gender and Social Service. That is where the children fall. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the appropriate committee. I put the question that this House adopts the motion as moved by hon. Iga on behalf of the committee of the Uganda Parliamentary Children’s Forum. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The appropriate committee is the Committee on Gender and Social Services. 

PRESENTATION OF PETITION

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a petition to Parliament by the Islamic University In Uganda (IUIU) law students concerning accreditation for purposes of accessing the Postgraduate Diploma in Legal Practice at the Law Development Centre. On page 4, we have a list of 20 students, who are in their fourth year at IUIU. They have appended their signatures. 

This is a humble petition of the law students of Islamic University In Uganda called petitioners. It states that:

1.	On the 26 November 1987, at Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, the Republic of Uganda represented by His Excellency, Prof. Badru Katerega, then Ambassador of Uganda to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia entered into an agreement with the Organisation of Islamic Conference to establish the status and immunity of the Islamic University In Uganda.
2.	That pursuant to Article XIX, of the said agreement, the Parliament of Uganda ratified the said agreement and incorporated it into municipal law; vide the Islamic University In Uganda Act, (Cap 131 Laws of Uganda)

3.	That in 2003, the University Council exercised its academic freedom conferred under Section 7 (1) of the Act thereof by starting the law degree programme.

4.	That following the amendment of the Advocates Act in 2002, it is now a requirement by the Law Council that all universities conducting law programmes must seek clearance or accreditation from the Law Council before their students can enrol for the professional Bar course programme at the Law Development Centre.

5.	That in a bid to conform to the above requirement, the above Islamic University In Uganda did apply for accreditation from the Law Council in 2005. By the letter dated 3 May 2006, the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal Education and Training, Law Council requested the university to fulfil certain conditions in order for the accreditation process to be done. (A copy of the said letter is hereto attached and marked as Annexure “A”). 

6.	That subsequently, the university by its letters referenced IU/KC/ACC/LLB/06 dated 22 June 2006 and another one dated 20 July 2006 addressed all the concerned raised by the Law Council in theirs already referred to in paragraph five above. (Photocopies of these letters are attached hereto as Annexure C1 and C2 respectively).

7.	That in his letter referenced LC/CLET, dated 26 October 2006, the Chairperson, Committee on Legal Education and Training, of the Law Council, wrote inquiring about the status of academic staff at the Faculty of Law (IUIU).  This was replied to vide Islamic University In Uganda, letter referenced VR/151/18 dated 2 November 2006, answering all the concerns raised. (The two letters are also hereby attached and marked as Annexure C1 and C2)

8.	That the pioneers of the law programme in their last semester, ending 19 May 2007, form the target group that the Law Development Centre (LDC) is looking forward to train on its post-graduated bar course.  To this extent, LDC has run an advert, inviting applications from students, from recognised universities (mark recognised universities) for the academic year 2007/2008, setting 31 July, 2007, as the deadline for submission of applications.

9.	That, unfortunately, because of the delayed accreditation of IUIU by the Law Council, its law students are not sure of joining LDC for post graduate bar course.  The petitioners wrote to the Chairman for Uganda Law Council, vide letter referenced IU/ACC/LLP/07 dated 14 February 2007, seeking clarification on the delayed accreditation to which no reply has been received to date.  (The photocopy of the said letter is hereto attached and marked as Annexure “D”)

10.	That following The New Vision newspaper article of Monday, 12 March, 2007, on page 31, titled, “Islamic University Law Students may miss bar course at LDC,” the petitioners petitioned the Attorney-General, through their petition, referenced IU/KC/ACC/LP/7, dated, 21 March, 2007, and copied the letter to the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs e, among others.  (The said article and petition are hereby attached and marked as annexure “E1” and “E2”) 

11.	That as per the interview conducted by the press as reported in the annexure “E1” hereto attached, the Chairman of the Training and Legal Education Committee, Prof. F. Sempebwa, confirmed that the university had fulfilled all the requirements set by the committee, but that they were unable to accredit the university due to lack of quorum and expiry of the term of office.  

12.	That the petitioners are apprehensive that the delayed accreditation cannot be secured within the academic admission calendar of LDC, that is, 2007/2008, and reasons whereof, an immediate intervention is sought to mitigate on the loss such a delay is likely to occasion upon the petitioners.  

13.	THEREFORE your humble petitioners pray: - 

That in view of the circumstances alluded to herein above, and the dilemma in which they stand now, Parliament be pleased to prevail over the responsible authority to exercise its mandate and cause accreditation of IUIU without any further delay, well knowing that it is the Parliament which enacted the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2002, with the purpose to reduce on the factors that inhibit easier access to the Ugandan Bar. Your petitioners so pray.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. Member for Butambala, I did not have an opportunity to look at this text of your petition before.  So, I am having some difficulties in the prayer.    You are asking the House to prevail, but I do not know whether this House can prevail over them to do the needful.  I do not know whether someone can help us frame it in a slightly better way.  Attorney General, can you help us?

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I think there is conflict of interest because this petition is addressed to me.  Although I have not been quite briefed about this matter and I believe that the substantive Attorney-General has been.  But -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can change the word “prevail”.  I do not know whether this House can prevail.  If we could change the word “prevail”, I will be satisfied.

MR RUHINDI: We urge.

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, the intention of the petitioners is to ask Parliament to help these students not to miss their academic year.  The reason that was given by Prof. Sempebwa and his team is that there is no Law Council in place to accredit IUIU.  The other one expired in 2006, and up to now the Attorney-General has not constituted another Law Council that can accredit  –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have no problem with that.  My problem is that you are asking us to prevail.  Can you just change that to, “urge,” because I think we have no capacity to prevail.  If you change it to “urge,” I think it will be satisfactory.  

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your guidance and I agree to have the word “prevail” substituted with “urge”.  Thank you.

5.31
MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, though I really sympathise with the petitioners, paragraph 11 clearly says that the reason why the accreditation has not been done is because of two reasons, lack of quorum and expiry of the term of office of the council.  Now I am wondering what it is that we, as Parliament can do on this matter.  Do we constitute the Law Council?  Do we constitute a quorum? Parliament cannot urge the council when its term has expired.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe we urge the Attorney-General to do the needful very quickly because I think the lacuna is in his office.

5.32
MR RUHINDI: From the best of my knowledge, the substantive Attorney-General discussed this matter with me.  Unfortunately he is in Arusha, but I think he is coming back today.  The Law Council is being reconstituted and he discussed the issue of reappointing Justice Tsekoko as Chairperson, with me. So, that problem should not worry anybody. The process is ongoing and there is no problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would they still be eligible by the time the appointments are made?  We do not know how long it will take.  

MR RUHINDI: I think, Madam Speaker, we better look at this matter with the officers concerned and come back with the clear response in the very shortest time.  I will come with a report.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So we differ conclusion until Monday.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Judicature (Amendment) Bill, 2006, be read for a Second Time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, this Bill is intended to clarify the position as to how increase in the number of Justices of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal is to be made. 

Whereas Articles 130(b) and 134(1) b respectively, provide that increase in the number of Justices in the two above mentioned courts should be prescribed by law, Sections 3 and 9 of the Judicature Act, Chapter 13, provide that they should be prescribed by Parliamentary Resolution, and hence there is a conflict. 

The purpose of the new Bill, therefore, is to amend Sections 3 and 9 of the Judicature Act, to prescribe the number of justices of the two courts in line with the Constitution. Incidentally, according to Article 138 (1) b, increase in the number of High Court judges is required to be done by Parliament Resolution. Therefore, Section 13 of the Judicature Act provides that Resolution of Parliament should do this. So, in that case of the judges, there is no conflict.

The matter is urgent, Madam Speaker, because the current number of the justices in the two higher courts has been found to be inadequate. The present number of the Supreme Court Judges is seven, comprising the Chief Justice and six other Justices as prescribed under Article 130 (b). This number is being increased to eleven comprising the Chief Justice and 10 Justices of the Supreme Court. The present number of Justices of the Court of Appeal is eight, comprising the Deputy Chief Justice and seven other Justices as prescribed under Article 134 (1) b. 

The Bill proposes to increase this number to 12, comprising the Deputy Chief Justice and 11 Justices of the Court of Appeal. 

Madam Speaker, we have interacted with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs of Parliament with whom we have shared comments from interested parties. The committee also made comments on the Bill to which we responded and we are very grateful for their response. Throughout this exercise we have attempted to harmonise the positions of the different stakeholders. Madam, Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Judicature Amendment Bill, 2006,” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

5.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Peter Nyombi): Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Judicature (Amendment Bill), 2006. Copies of this report were circulated sometime ago. 

Introduction 

The Judicature (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was tabled in Parliament on 5 December 2006. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the Bill in accordance with Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedures of Parliament.

Methodology 

The Committee held a retreat from 19 December 2006 to 21 December 2006 at which the Bill was discussed with officials from the Uganda Law Reform Commission and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

The committee also met and received views from the following: the Uganda Law Society, the Uganda Judicial Officers’ Association, the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Chief Justice and his deputy, and the High Court Chief Registrar. The committee considered the Constitution of Uganda and the Judicature Act, Cap.13 to carry out discussions on the Bill.

The objects of the Bill

 The object of the Bill is to prescribe the number of Justices of the Supreme Court and of the Court of Appeal in accordance with Articles 130(b) and 131(1) b of the Constitution. 

The Bill also intends to clarify the position as to how increases in the number of Justices of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal are to be made.

Whereas Articles 130 (b) and 131(1) b, provide that increase in the number of Justices of the above courts should be prescribed by law, Sections 3 and 9 of the Judicature Act Cap13, provide that they should be prescribed by Parliamentary Resolution. The Bill therefore, amends sections 3 and 9 of the Judicature Act to prescribe the number of the Justices of the two courts in line with the Constitution.

Observations

Given the volume of work in these courts, the amendment will help to clear backlog of Appeal cases, which await trial for a long period due to the shortage of judges. This will in turn decongest prisons where appellants in criminal cases are detained pending the hearing of their appeals in these courts. There is generally an increase in the output from the High Court and therefore the need for a corresponding number of judges in the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court. 

The amendment would enable the two supreme bodies to ensure that there is quorum even in the absence of one the justices. 

It should be noted that the judges also have national and international assignments that they attend to. The committee proposes that the number should be raised to such a level in the Court of Appeal so that it is able to hold three sessions concurrently with regard to cases that are of Constitutional nature. 

There is already a lot of business in the Court of Appeal because all appeals from the High Court go there. If the number is increased as proposed, it will also be possible for the Court of Appeal to hold sessions in upcountry stations that have been gazetted for the purpose. This is hoped to enhance access to justice by the people in upcountry areas. You will realise that it has not been possible for the Court of Appeal to hold upcountry sessions due to the limited number of judges.

It should also be noted that the people in upcountry areas find it difficult to access the Court of Appeal because of the distance. Once the number of judges is increased, the courts will be able to handle more than one session concurrently which will speed up cases. 

Recommendations

The committee supports the increase of the justices because of the increasing volume of work in respect of both civil and criminal cases. The committee therefore, recommends that, subject to the proposed amendments, the Bill be passed into law. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. Honourable members, the report has a required minimum number of signatures, it is therefore open for debate.

5.45
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I am very happy with the Minister and the chairperson, on this matter. The report was circulated sometime back, so, I do not have my copy here. However, let me just seek clarification. 

When the chairman says that both the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal will be able to hold sessions concurrently, how is the issue of quorum going to be handled? I think that there is a standard quorum for these courts. For example, if you have 10 Justices of the Supreme Court, how is the quorum going to be handled? What is the quorum for each session? Is it going to be three? 

That aside, I want to say that the increase is overdue though on the other hand, this will not solve the problem of backlog cases. We need to come up with very serious guidelines and standards. We already have a report that says that in order to clear the Commercial Court backlog cases in this country, we need 100 years.  So, this will not solve the problem.  

I have seen a report by the Uganda Law Society, which says that the problem is the adjournment of cases. This problem needs to be addressed either in law, or by standard guidelines issued by the office of the Chief Justice or Principal Judge, and these standards should be acceptable. This business of judges adjourning cases, especially in corruption related ones when government officials fail to attend Court, and the judges make a ruling, has caused government to lose a lot of money. This is especially the case in Local Government where you find that the Accounting Officers keep on going to court until the hearing is adjourned. If they absent themselves, there will be expart ruling.  Therefore, honourable minister, you need to find means.  

The third point is on the behaviour and conduct of lawyers. The lawyers always seek adjournment which keeps on occurring, and which leads to the increased backlog of cases. We need to adopt what the Speaker of Parliament has done. Our committee is going to clear the backlog of cases for 7 years in a period of less than two years. So, you need to consult the Speaker and see how he is working with the committees to clear the backlog of cases that we have in the Auditor General’s report. 

Another very important aspect in the backlog of cases is the behaviour of the Judiciary in handling what are referred to as high profile cases. If Ekanya is arrested today, tomorrow his case will be attended to and he will get bail. However, the Constitution says that we are all equal before the law. I am very happy that my brother Hussein Kyanjo is here to legislate; the other day he was detained. But, there are people from his constituency who have been detained for five years, and people from my constituency who have been detained for 10 years. We should have standards really; it should be on a first come, first serve basis- (Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank my colleague. Hon. Ekanya, you very well know that even Parliament is independent and when Bills come, it is upon Parliament to decide which Bill to consider first.  So, I am just seeking clarification whether it would be prudent for this House to make the internal rules for the Judiciary -(Interjection)- yes, this question is with the Judges. What exactly do you want the Minister to help you?

MR EKANYA: I think we could prescribe a provision within this law or in the Administration of the Judiciary that a case should be heard within a certain time frame. If a case is not handled within that time frame, then the Judge or the Justice or the Magistrate who is –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Ekanya. I think we cannot do that. That is the work of the Chief Justice; we really cannot prescribe.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the Constitution of Uganda, for example, gives us a time frame to handle certain matters, like the Auditor General’s report. It gives a time frame within which Parliament must handle it, and puts conditions on us. Therefore, I do not see any conflict; why shouldn’t we also put conditions on the Judiciary? So, Madam Speaker, whether we appoint 100 more Judges, the behaviour in the Judiciary will not reduce the backlog of cases. 

This question of high profile cases –(Interjections)- No. I cannot wish hon. Hussein Kyanjo to be detained, but I am just saying there should be equity and justice.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the question of funding the Judiciary is a serious matter. We really need the Judiciary to be self-accounting just like the Parliament is, so that the question of funding is handled very effectively. 

The Judiciary also needs to have a recording system during the Court session.  Several people find it very hard to appeal because if you lose a case for example in the High Court, you have to rely on the recording of the Clerk and what the Judge has written. But if we have a system of recording, it will speed up the process of hearing. During Court sessions you have to speak and wait for five minutes until the recorder has recorded effectively. This is a serious matter. Honourable minister, this equipment is very cheap and it will help us to speed up the hearing process even more cheaply. 

The Judiciary should be allowed to manage their staff and appoint them just like Parliament does. The behaviour of some of these Court clerks has made some Judges and Magistrates’ work hard. I hope that those concerns, and others will be addressed in order to help us further democracy. 

One thing I need not to forget is the issue of children being in prison. Madam Speaker, there are mothers who give birth while in detention but they are detained with their children. These children have not committed any crime; they are very innocent. They are minors and they are fellow members of Parliament and Presidents for the future. 

I want to end here. Thank you very much, honourable minister. I want to give you maximum support in regard to this subject.

5.55
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for bringing the amendment, and the Chairperson for the good report.

Madam Speaker I agree with the committee and the Minister that the number of Justices of both the Court of Appeal and Supreme Court should be increased. But, I would like, to caution and advise the appointing authority and the Judiciary Service Commission that the integrity of those to be appointed as Justices should be taken as a serious matter.  Once the integrity of the Justice or the Judge is doubted, the judgments he makes will always be doubted. 

I would like to use this opportunity to call upon the appointing authority to appoint Justices of the High Court, who are of high and proven integrity, not cadres, and not to make political appointments. They should be experienced people, and not just any lawyer. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.00
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for this Bill, and the committee for the work they have done. I would like to go straight to why I think this Bill needs all the support it can get. 

It is common knowledge that in our prisons, there are people who have been there; well, beyond the time limit for being on remand. There are people who have had two years, others have had three years; they are all over this country. I believe that by providing for a greater capacity in the Supreme Court, in the Court of Appeal and probably in the High Court, we would be able to grant these people their right to access justice.

I would like to disagree with hon. Nsubuga because I believe that Article 126 of our Constitution, which provides for the exercise of judicial power, Article 126(2b) says that justice shall not be delayed. Whatever we do justice should not be delayed. Whether we are incapacitated or not, we should do everything to ensure that our judicial system has the capacity to expedite justice to all people irrespective of their social status or their sex. That is why I strongly support this Bill. I believe that it is going to address the badly needed capacity –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Alaso for giving way. I rise on a point of information and specifically to support the point she is driving home. I have had a personal experience in detention, and this experience led me to discover three very strange and shocking cases inside the cell in which I was residing at CPS. 

One Emmanuel Karangwa, a Ugandan, has been in CPS without going to court at all for seven months. There is also a Congolese called Dido Manyiroha who has been in CPS cells for six months. There is also a Rwandese citizen called Archilewo Kalinga who told me he was kidnapped from Mbarara sixteen months ago. He was tortured and lost his manhood and hearing capacity in one of his ears, and he is in the CPS cells as I talk now. It does not matter whether it is Kyanjo who is going to stay there longer or any other person, we must put the law to use appropriately. That is the information I want to give.

MS ALASO: That is a very disheartening piece of information. We were at the point where we thought the delays were just owing to lack of capacity, but to hear that people lie in cells for six to twelve months without even being produced in the courts of law in this country is, I think, another chapter that needs a lot of cross-examination. I hope that the Government of Uganda is listening and will address this matter.

Madam Speaker, alongside the good work in the Judiciary, the question of the security of judicial officers must be looked at. As the courts of Uganda become more theatrical in the events that unfold there, judicial officers need protection. I would like to urge the Attorney General to liaise with the people who deploy the military in the precincts of court, to ensure that judicial officers and lawyers who are going there to defend clients do not get the type of battering Kiyemba Mutale got when he was there defending the PRA suspects. It is no longer possible to make a distinction. I do not know how lawyers can be helped. 

My concern is that the Attorney General and the Minister of Justice need to work on an arrangement where they liaise with the kiboko squad and the black mambas. Maybe they can make the judicial officers wear nametags, so that as they beat the rest of us, which has become the norm, they spare the judicial officers. I believe a time will come when people will fear to go to court to represent some of these people whose cases seem to have a political connection. (Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Alaso. Hon. Alaso seems to be discriminating. She has said that the judicial officers should have tags while in the case of MPs and the general public, whenever we have a case, we can be beaten by the new security forces like the kiboko squad. I think such violence should be condemned totally. As much as we want the judicial officers to be protected, even the peasant needs to be protected. I think that should be the gist of the matter. We all want protection without discrimination. I thank you. 

MS ALASO: That makes my heart feel lighter, because we tried to move a motion here in the House to condemn some of these things and it did not carry the day. Now that we are all in agreement that it be condemned, I really feel good about it. I was trying to say that maybe it is normal to have me beaten as a member of the Opposition, but now that my colleague in the ruling party believes that this is a wrong thing, that is very good. I think we can move together as a country.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to express a fear, and I do not want to be thrown out of order because of this. I am expressing a fear. There have been persistent media reports about “cadre judges”. As we make this amendment, I would like the Attorney General to come here and assure the country that we are not just creating provisions for only cadre judges to fill the Bench. Some people have actually been expressing concern by asking, “Are you creating more jobs for the cadre judges that have been in the papers?” Is that the position? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.02
MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, permit me to thank the Minister for bringing the Bill and the chairperson for the report. I have just two points. The first one is that justice delayed is justice denied. Recently, I think we passed a resolution that the number of High Court judges should be increased by at least five each year. Since we have more High Court sessions, there will be more cases that need appeal and therefore this is timely. 

The most important point I wanted to make is that we need to de-mystify the courts, and for this we need public education. The Minister of Justice needs to organise so that all the people can be educated about court processes and about what the Court of Appeal, Supreme Court and High Court are there for. This is because most of our constituents are taken advantage of. The moment you tell them that you have a case that is going to the High Court, I am sure they think that the time for death has come. 

What stops Ministry of Justice from having radio shows, for example, to explain the court processes so that our people can learn? Sometimes NGOs try to sensitise our people on legal aspects of whatever cases. They also train what they call paralegals, but I would have wanted to see Ministry of Justice also helping our people learn and know about these courts. I am sure most of our peasants might not even know how to go to a court of appeal. In the long run, they are taken advantage of by court officers and sometimes even by the lawyers. My appeal is that, if necessary let us increase their budget so that our people can learn about all these processes and how to handle their cases if they are not attended to at the lower levels. 

The other issue is also about court officers as well as the office of the DPP, which needs to be strengthened. You find that many people are not taken to court because maybe the State Attorney is not around, as he has gone somewhere or he has a lot of cases to handle. Otherwise, I wish to support the Bill and the chairman’s report.

6.05
MR HENRY BAGIIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Bill. I actually thank the Minister and the chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for having come up and tried to address a problem that has been long overdue. Actually, this Bill should have come sometime back, not now. Like my colleagues have been saying, every person in this country knows how our prisons are full and how inmates are almost sleeping on each other just because the judicial officers are not enough to handle the cases. 

Madam Speaker, it is known that our population has grown for some years. I think also the numbers of judges must increase commensurate to this. This is because when the population grows, you know that the people who will be subject to the court system will also increase and this –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank Henry for accepting to take this point of clarification from me. My own understanding is that litigation is a process that starts right from the arresting authority, to the person who prefers charges, to the person who produces you in court for prosecution, to the adjudicating authority. This is minus prisons authorities who keep you while you are undergoing trial. 

I would like to seek clarification from you, from the Minister and most probably from the Leader of Government Business, because this involves many ministries. Is the need to have an increase in the number of justices commensurate with the increase in population? Also, if these other actors who have a role to play in the litigation process are not equally increased in terms of numbers to build their strength, how will you stop instances like those that have been reported by hon. Kyanjo, about a man spending 16 months or seven months in police custody? 

The Constitution is very clear that a person should not be in detention and police custody for more than 48 hours. Could such kind of delays be as a result of fewer police officers, fewer prosecutors or only one Director of Public Prosecutions? I think we need some clarification as to how the issue of numbers is related to this particular instance where a person stays in the Capital of Uganda, considering the fact that we are signatories to very many treaties that dwell on peace, the most important aspect of human rights –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Wadri, you are making a very long submission. (Laughter) You are smuggling in a submission.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleague, hon. Wadri, but I think the issues that he is mentioning are being addressed. It is known in this country that the exercise of recruiting police officers is ongoing. I think it is also common knowledge that when the Judges of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal are recruited, the DPP’s Office will also be allowed to increase on the number of its people. That will help in expediting the process. I think the Minister will add to this.

Madam Speaker, like has been said by my colleagues, hon. Elioda and others, justice delayed is justice denied. Recently in the papers there was a section on Northern Uganda, and in Lira there was a prisoner who had been on remand for over four years on a case of defilement. He was convicted but later on released because he had stayed in prison for quite a long time. 

This actually causes a problem because when people go and report cases where they have been affected, they expect some kind of punishment. When somebody remains on remand for four or more years, the people who reported the case lose morale. So, I think we need to support the increase of judges so that justice is not only done for those people who are reported but even those who report. 

Madam Speaker, as much as putting people in jail is a punishment, it also serves as a deterrent. Therefore, it should be made clear. I asked my colleagues to totally support this amendment Bill so that it goes through. This way, it will act as a deterrent, as people who are reported will be tried and convicted so that society does not continue with this kind of behaviour.

Lastly, usually when justice is delayed, witnesses at times lose interest. Some of them leave their places of abode while some of them die. As a result, cases that would have been strong lose meaning. It is, therefore, important that we support this Bill and get more judges, so that justice is not delayed and this country can move on. I want to thank Government for having brought this Bill this time, although it should have been brought yesterday. Thank you.

6.13
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to support the Bill but I also want to get some clarification from the Minister as to why some of the existing places for Judges and Justices of the Supreme Court have remained vacant. In the High Court, there are 17 vacant places. Of the existing number already approved, 17 are not in place. For the Court of Appeal, we are now raising the number to 12. However, even among the existing number, there is one who is not present. When you go to the Supreme Court, the existing number is seven but of the seven we have only five.

Why are you not replacing the numbers that were already provided for in the law? In any case, if a seat for an MP falls vacant, by-elections are supposed to be held within a certain time. Three months should not elapse before by-elections are held. The office of Chief Administrative Officer is not supposed to remain vacant for a period exceeding three months. Now for a Justice of the Supreme Court, why should the office remain vacant for 12 months yet this is a very important service? 

The point I am emphasising, Madam Speaker, is that we should fill the existing vacancies and also bring a law that states that positions should not remain vacant for a certain time, say exceeding three months. When you go to each court, you find that the registrar and others are acting. Why don’t you appoint substantive people? As I support this Bill, I also call upon the Minister to make sure that what is supposed to be done is done in time.

6.16
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I rest the case about the creation of Kagadi District, I will contribute to this matter. I want to thank the Minister and also the chairperson of the committee for the very good report. I want to strongly support this because in this country we need more judges and total independence of the Judiciary. We also need to create –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I need just clarification because I am very uncomfortable. When the honourable member says he is resting the case of Kagadi, has he already got it? I have not yet got Tororo, and you know it. I am surprised. Why is he resting the case?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Today, Madam Speaker, we are talking about the increase of judges, and you never know they can appoint a judge from Kagadi District, which is soon coming. I also want to say that as they look at appointing more judges, they should also look at balancing these appointments. I know that we are looking for good people to occupy these offices, people who have the fibre to stand on the independence of the Judiciary and to defend the law. However, we also have to be cognisant that we have this category of people in all the regions. Therefore, as we approve, the appointing authority should listen to what we are saying.

Madam Speaker, as we appoint these judges, I want to also say that we get disappointed when we see their judgements not being respected in some cases. I do not want to repeat this because it is a very big disappointment on our part. We raise the numbers, but these people who are mandated to do their work do not have their judgements respected. 

Madam Speaker, I want some clarification from the Minister on whether he looked at the increase in the number of judges as an increase of the wage bill. Where is he going to get that money and that facilitation? –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did it not come with a certificate at the first reading? I think it came with a certificate at the first reading.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Well, I am happy. I was worried that we were going to ask for a loan immediately to support them. So, if an answer has been provided, well and good. 

On the issue of adjournments, I think there should be a limitation -(Interruption)

DR TUMWESIGYE: I thank my colleague for giving way. My colleague, hon. Tinkasiimire, talked about balancing when appointing judges. It occurred to me that he might actually have a point. He is looking at balancing in terms of regions, but you might also want to look at balancing in terms of religion. In the U.S.A, they look at political leaning. So, your point is well taken, but in addition to regional balancing we should consider religion because it matters in some of the cases. Thank you.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. All I want to see is some kind of equality in sharing the national cake. 

Madam Speaker, I was raising the issue of adjournments, which had been raised earlier on. There should be a regulation to these adjournments. If a case is adjourned more than 10 times, there should be a way to handle it. I think the adjournments should be limited because we may never complete this backlog of cases. I have been to some courts and quite often found that some judges and magistrates report late and leave early because they have other things on their minds. This issue of a person who has a lot of work to do and instead chooses to abscond from his or her duty is a big problem. I am equally concerned because the cancer is catching up with us - (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I have a problem in the way we are proceeding with the debate, especially as far as hon. Tinkasiimire’s submission is concerned. I appreciate the concerns that he is raising. The problem is that given the nature of the institution we are talking about, the Judiciary, and bearing in mind that these judges are not here to defend themselves, I do not think hon. Tinkasiimire can go into details to substantiate which judge does a, b, c, d. 

I think there is a problem because of the nature of the institution we are discussing, more so when you talk about adjournments and so on and so forth. These are not related to the subject we are discussing. We are talking about amendments to the Judicature Act. We are not, for instance, talking about amendments to the Civil Procedure Act, which deals with such matters, or the Criminal Procedure Act which we may think about amending at a later stage. For the time being, because of the nature of the institution we are talking about, we need to be a little bit more careful.    

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I understand that the rules tell us not to go into the very - for lack of a better word - delicate or esteemed personalities of the justices of all the courts. I am worried though. I do not understand whether the rules do not even allow us to talk about the institution. What is the essence of the relationship, the oversight function, if we cannot talk about the backlog and the management? 

I have personally been in court. They make you wait. You are told that they are beginning the hearing at 9.00 a.m., but you sit there waiting up to 1.00 p.m. or 2.00 p.m. I also understood the rules regarding a substantive motion. This is a motion, which provides for general debate; are we not allowed to talk about the institution and suggest ways on how to make it effective or how to improve it? Is that the importance of this rule? I think it is important for us to clarify this, otherwise we will never mention the word “Judiciary” because we fear we would be infringing on the rights of the very esteemed justices of court by just the mention of the word. How shall we go about it in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you are talking about things like adjournments, it is not the judges who cause the adjournments. We are now debating about increasing the number of judges. You may find that it is the lawyers who do not attend or it is the prosecutor who is not there. So, when you focus on the judges and say that there are many adjournments, they are always late, they abscond from work, it does not really give a good picture.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What I was trying to say is comparable to taking a child to school. When you take a child to school, you do not just dump the child at school. You advise the child and say, “My child, I have taken you to school, remember to continue obeying school regulations, go to the library and I want a good report at the end of the day.” What we are saying is that as we bring on the judges, we want to see them turning up on time and we want to see -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tinkasiimire, can you name which Judge does not come on time please?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: At this stage, Madam Speaker, I do not want to go into those small details. On your advice, let me abandon it. Nevertheless, the point has been taken –(Laughter)

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I will ask the honourable minister not only to bring this Bill for us to pass, but to also keep in mind that in his department there are so many outdated laws that need to be updated. I want to thank and support him on this. I want him to continue bringing such things because bad laws are normally not good determinants of a developing country like Uganda. Thank you very much.

6.27
MS NABULYA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I just want to add my voice to those who are supporting the amendment Bill on the Judicature. This amendment is going to help reduce the backlog. The colleague from the Opposition has just told us that some people have overstayed in the police cells, and probably on remand in Luzira and elsewhere. Sometimes this is as a result of files going missing from wherever they should be kept. I want to urge the Government, through the Attorney General, to make sure that files are kept well. This habit of losing files denies people justice indirectly. Something must be done. Many people have been detained for long periods before they are heard because their files were lost. So, this must be looked into seriously. Thank you.

6.29
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise up to support the Bill and want to thank the Minister for coming up with this Bill. My concern is about the implementation of the resolution of this House. In the last Parliament, this House passed a resolution that five judges be appointed per year but nothing was done to that effect. I am greatly concern that we may pass this Bill and still no action will be taken by the appointing authority. I want to appeal to the appointing authority that it is important that we give justice to our people, and the only way to give justice to our people is to increase the number of judges in this country. 

Madam Speaker, the second item that I want to talk about is the issue of facilitation or remunerations in the Judiciary. We recall very well that last year when the PRA case was being presented before the court, specifically that of Col.(Rtd.)Dr Kizza Besigye, the Government of Uganda went ahead to hire Kampala Associates to try Dr Kizza Besigye. Government did this because the personnel within the Judiciary were not competent to handle the case. In my view, they were not incompetent but were lacking remuneration, facilitation or motivation. So, we really want to appeal to Government and to the Judiciary that the issue of remuneration should be taken into consideration.

Finally, we know that we have very few judges in this country, and they are really doing their best to serve this country. However, we have a big problem with some of the government officials in terms of respect to the Judiciary and to the judges. Madam Speaker, you recall very well when the Global Fund issue was being investigated, a commission was instituted, headed by the Principal Judge. In the process of that investigation, the statement uttered by a senior government official, the then Minister of Health, was so intimidating to the Judiciary. When he was asked to apologise to the nation, he retorted: “where were you when we were liberating this country?” This undermines the Judiciary. We need to give respect to the judges and to the judicial system. Thank you very much.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: I need some clarification from the Minister before he presents his answers and reactions to the comments that have been raised. The issue of equality as a human rights issue has been raised by several international conventions. How is he going to make sure that in case the number of judges is increased, that issue of gender is put into consideration?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in my other capacity as chair of the Appointments Committee, I do recall that there were a number of appointments that were approved for judges but they have never been appointed. Maybe you will want to remind the appointing authority.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for a good report. I would also like to thank the members who have made contributions. 

Some of the queries need responses, for instance hon. Ekanya is wondering what quorum these courts apply. Only when these courts are hearing constitutional cases do they sit as full benches, but in other cases any uneven number suffices. In the case of the Supreme Court, it is not less than five. I think in the case of the Court of Appeal, any uneven number above three suffices. The chairperson of the committee is checking on that. That would mean with the increases, you could have panels sitting concurrently at any one time.

On the backlog of cases and problems of adjournment, expert judgments will need time. I appreciated one colleague who said that there are many laws that need updating. Now, do not get tired of me because I will be coming back more often than not. There are many Bills we are bringing here in respect of the commercial sector, and there are many laws we are still bringing on this particular subject. Very soon, the chairperson will be coming here with an amendment to the Magistrates’ Courts Act and another controversial one, which I do not want to mention here. All I know is that the laws are in place to check excesses on adjournments and expert judgments. 

As the Speaker said, sometimes it is very difficult to pinpoint a particular sector and say, “it is the judiciary or it is the lawyers”. It is a multiplicity of problems. At an appropriate time we can always seek appointment, together with the chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, to meet with the Chief Justice and have a dialogue with him on some of these issues.  

On behaviour and conduct of lawyers, you are aware that we have got the Law Council. It sits on the fifth floor of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs every Friday. There are cases going on at the Law Council, trying advocates. I cannot be shy about it. I challenge my colleagues in the profession to stand up to their calling and be respected as such. There is a lot left to be desired in the area of ethics and integrity, and this of course is being addressed. We have got institutions and organs in place to do the needful. 

There was the issue of attending to high profile cases and ignoring the lesser profile cases. You see, if a high profile case is going to paralyse the whole country so that even the small cases may not be heard, I think it is better and prudent that we first hear it and put it aside. Certainly, we believe in equality before the law and fair trial, and we also respect the Constitution.  

On funding of the Judiciary and recording facilities, as you know, hon. Ekanya, the Commercial Court is very well facilitated and is doing a good job. It has had reasonable support from our donor community. Under the Justice Law and Order Sector, the programme is on course to have - (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I need clarification because when the Commercial Court appeared before our committee, the complaint was that they did not have a building and they did not have quorum. So, when did this Commercial Court become so efficient? I would like to get more clarification because we have had lots of complaints from them.

MR EKANYA: During the constitutional amendment, we also passed an amendment to give power to the Government to create an anti-corruption court under the Leadership Code. Some people resisted this, but to date this department has not been created. The anti-corruption court is provided for in the Constitution. I think if it is established, it will be similar to the commercial division. What is happening?

MR RUHINDI: First of all, as far as the Commercial Court is concerned, I am doing a comparison. I am not saying that the Commercial Court is operating at its best. Of course, they will always have challenges and problems. In this particular respect, I was actually focusing on the issue of recording because they are computerised -(Interjection)- They are computerised. If you actually go to the Commercial Court, you will see that they are computerised, but there are also challenges. However, I can assure you that they are performing. In terms of facilitation, they are performing much better than the other branches of the High Court.

I think what hon. Ekanya is talking about is the Leadership Code Tribunal. For that one we can always liaise with the responsible minister, the Minister of Ethics, to see that it is put in place.

Children with their mothers in prison are certainly very unfortunate. I think I have got to liaise with the minister responsible, the Minister for Internal Affairs, to see how to go about it. What happens if a mother delivers in jail? There must be some procedure in place, which I do not have off the cuff. So, I will have to liaise with the Minister of Internal Affairs to see how to go about that. 

Hon. Kajeke talked about the appointing authority and the Judicial Service Commission considering the integrity of the appointees and ensuring that they are not cadres and politicians. You forgot to include Parliament on the list of appointing authorities that you mentioned. We are also part of the package. The nominations come from the Judicial Service Commission and go to the appointing authority, who is also the Head of State. The Head of State then brings them here for your vetting and approval. So, if Parliament sees that this is simply a person who does not qualify, he is simply a political cadre, why don’t we refuse him? 

Hon. Alaso, justice shall not be delayed, of course. Hon. Kyanjo gave her some information in respect of persons who have been in CPS for seven, six and sixteen months. I will certainly have to get in touch with hon. Kyanjo to get more details so that I carry out an investigation on this matter. (Applause) 

However, I hasten to add that our constitutional provision of 48 hours is a very challenging provision. You can actually check on the internet for a similar provision in some other jurisdictions, including even the European Union. I have been doing research on this issue and I have found out that there is the challenge of terrorism. There is a fear that if a person is arrested on suspicion of committing a terrorist act and brought to court immediately, the racket may be bust. There are many other challenges involved, but some other countries have found a way around this issue. 

The Constitution of Malawi, for instance, also gives a period of 48 hours after which you must be brought to court. I have a copy of the Malawian Constitution that you can look at. If you are not yet prepared with adequate evidence to charge the person, you apply for further remand and the remand is given by the court. The good thing is that everyone knows that so and so is there, and that so and so has appeared in court but that the charge is not possible because of a, b, c, d - (Interruption) 

MR SIMON OYET: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I want to know whether you are aware that there is a lot of torture going on in the police cells. I do not know whether you are aware; if you are aware, how can we address that? Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I can appreciate the challenge you are alluding to, but I think the essence of this whole speedy trial and presentation before court is to prevent abuse that you may be subjected to privately. You can be locked up in a dark cell somewhere and then tortured, you defecate and urinate in a bucket in the same place, and nobody knows. So, while that challenge is there, I think it is really incumbent upon Government to ensure that these provisions, which are meant to ensure that this person who is presumed innocent until proved guilty, are utilised.  

Without you presenting me to court and providing the verdict, and then torturing me, holding me like I am already guilty or I belong to a terrorist cell, is actually not in order. It is only the courts that have the mandate to arbitrate in this matter since you are going to present evidence. So, for you to present this as a challenging situation, which needs to be looked into as I am kept in the cells, makes me a little uncomfortable. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I thought the Minister was providing a good example of how those situations could be avoided. He was giving you information about Malawi and how you can lawfully be on remand and still appear in court. I thought that is what he was doing.

MR RUHINDI: I will also be following up with that good example of Malawi and some other jurisdictions, including some EU courts that use the same principle. Very soon, when we are looking at amendments to our Constitution, I will propose it to you. If it is acceptable, we can adopt it.

On the issue of torture in cells, every year we debate a report from the Human Rights Commission through the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.  That is an investigated report, and it is always good that we go with investigated matters. However, it is a very big challenge. I think the best thing is to wait for that report and we shall have it debated - (Interruption)- I think that was a warning.

On this issue of deploying military officers to courts - this was also information from hon. Alaso - the Head of State has come out openly, through communication to the Judiciary, and regretted the incidents of that day. He reiterated that everything possible would be done so that such incidents do not reoccur. Why don’t we go with that commitment? Let me actually challenge each one of us. We all want peace for our people. Let us wake up to the challenge that our people want peace. Our people are not interested any more in subversive activities. People want peace.

Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye, High Court charges increase every year. On using radio talks to sensitise our people, I take that point very seriously. On strengthening the DPP’s department, I take it seriously.  

Hon. Bagire talked about congestion in prisons. Actually, the Bill we passed yesterday is partly to address that problem, but we shall go on trying. We hope that with the passing of yesterday’s Bill, being remanded for four years, for example, on charges of defilement will certainly be history. 

I would like to concentrate on hon. Mugeni’s observations on why the existing places have remained vacant. The Supreme Court is currently short of two Justices. The two vacancies arise from the fact that Justice Arthur Oder died in June 2006, while Justice Alfred Karokora retired in November, 2006.  The two posts have not yet been filled. However, I am happy to report that the Judicial Service Commission has already recommended some names for appointment to the Supreme Court and any time the President will be filling those posts. The only problem is that, if they recommended four for appointment in the Supreme Court, we cannot now recommend four to fill the Court of Appeal. The idea is that if two are not taken on in the Supreme Court, they would also stand a chance of being recommended for appointment in the lower court. So, we want to start from up, going downwards.

I am aware that in the Court of Appeal all the eight are currently there. The High Court so far has 30 Judges. The last Parliament passed a resolution that increased the number of Judges of the High Court from an establishment of 33 to 50, including the Principal Judge. This has never been achieved four years down the road.  It was presumed that five Judges of the High Court would be appointed every financial year to fill that gap. This has come to pass with no appointments. There are, therefore, 19 vacancies of Judges of the High Court to be filled.  

The only good news is that in this financial year we have a provision, subject to correction by the chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee if I am making a mistake, for appointment of nine Judges. So far as I speak, five names have been recommended to the President for appointment. If it was not because of the reshuffle of Permanent Secretaries, which saw the Secretary to the Judicial Service Commission go to another ministry and they brought in another one, the exercise of interviewing some of the proposed Judges was about to start. So, this exercise of filling these posts will be carried out shortly and finalised. 

On the enacting appointments, that matter has also been addressed by the Judicial Service Commission and very soon action will be taken it.  

Hon. Tinkasiimire talked about balancing appointments in terms of gender, religion and region. When the Judicial Service Commission is undertaking its job, it takes those aspects into consideration based on the directive principles of state policy in our Constitution. (Interruption) 

MS WINFRED MASIKO: I would like clarification from the Minister. When he lumps gender with religion and region, is that being fair when actually gender is separate, and women are more than half of the population of this country, and it is a requirement by the international conventions? Is he really doing justice to the gender issue?  

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am a student of Makerere University and I did a paper on gender. Gender is not about women or men. Gender is about equal opportunities.  

MS MASIKO: Thank you for that clarification. I do believe that you are a student of gender, but gender is very clear to all of us. It refers to the deferential treatment in regard to the roles based on sex. So when I am talking about gender, I usually emphasise the disadvantaged gender, and I think that is why I raised it as far as the Bench is concerned. If you look at the Judges we have, you can see that the imbalance is very clear.

MR RUHINDI: I will take the trouble, Madam Speaker, to bring the concerns of hon. Masiko to the Judicial Service Commission.  

Hon. Tinkasiimire, for the proposed increases there was a certificate of financial implications presented here. However, we are not stopping there. We are trying to ensure that the welfare and the working conditions of judges, and professionals generally in the Judiciary and in the Justice, Law and Order Sector, are commensurate with the cost of living.  There was a problem of the increases that were made to the Judiciary going to the top echelon, the judges. 

We are doing our best to ensure that the lower echelon of the Judiciary, the magistrates and others, are also taken care of. Not only that, we will also deal with the state attorneys and the Ministry of Justice because the high turnover of state attorneys in the Ministry of Justice is actually alarming. We have already got commitments from the relevant stakeholders that their welfare, their benefits, be looked into. (Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Minister, for giving way. I would like to seek clarification from you. We all know that at the moment we do not have an Auditor General. One of the issues raised was remuneration, and now you are talking about the judges and even the office of the Attorney General. So, doesn’t the Executive have a policy of improving the remuneration of all civil servants to match the cost of living? If I can just add, judges do not pay PAYE; they are actually exempt. That is already a very big boost. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, hon. Nsubuga cut me short because I had not yet finished. I was going to say, and I am not here to speak for the Minister of Public Service, there is a general policy framework to review the benefits of the government working force. So, it is in place. I can say this with authority because I have even already looked at the paper, but I believe the Minister of Public Service is in a better position to talk about that.

Hon. Ssentongo, I appreciate, and as a person who has practiced law I know what it means to lose files in courts. This is a big problem, but it is also compounded by one problem. I must tell you that for as long as I am still in the ministry as Minister of State, I have been toying with the idea of coming here with a Bill called the Administration of Justice Bill, to become Administration of Justice Act, -(Applause)- which would empower the Judiciary the way Parliament is empowered. 

Can you imagine that a Chief Justice and Principal Judge cannot hire and fire a clerk in that registry? It has to be done by the Public Service Commission. It is terrible! We must have a legal framework to empower them. Maybe when they are empowered, these problems in their registries, these problems of impunity, will stop. They will operate, more or less, like Parliament operates. They will have their own programmes, their own budget, and it will also go to strengthen their independence. When you talk about independence of the Judiciary, it must actually go with independence in the way they manage their affairs. Therefore, when I come here, please do support me.

The honourable colleague talked about respect for the Judiciary. To be frank with you, when a member rises and says the Executive does not respect judicial decisions, I tend not to be in agreement with that person. You know, I stood here and explained this issue of the decisions, which were reached in respect of bail in the case of the PRA. I tried to explain so much that by the time we left, we were more or less in agreement. Sometimes it is lack of clear understanding. Although some of these judgements are a bit long, if possible I will undertake to ensure that a copy of every court decision reached, every judgement in the court of appeal, will be accessed by the library -(Applause)- so that members can have a look at these judgements. 

You know, sometimes you get surprised. When we were here debating the issue of third term in the Seventh Parliament, I would ask some of my colleagues whether they had looked at Article 105(2), and hardly any had bothered to open the Constitution and look at that particular provision in detail. You would even ask, “By the way, what is the process of amendment of the Constitution, or under what part of the Constitution is this?” You would see that actually people did not know. What do we do with this culture of reading? Let us try to read.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. I would like to prove to the honourable minister that I am actually reading the Constitution, and Article 128 of this Constitution talks about the independence of the Judiciary. It says: 

“(1) In the exercise of judicial power, the courts shall be independent and shall not be subject to the control or direction of any person or authority.” 

It is on the basis of this that we think that when the courts make a decision, it is the final decision and no authority or person, not the Executive or Member of Parliament, shall begin to re-interpret, probably save for another court. We do not have that mandate. Honourable minister, is this the right position in regard to this Article on the independence of the Judiciary?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: While I was studying some administrative law, I was told and taught that it is not a guarantee that the opinion of the Attorney General, in either interpreting a judgement or some kind of law, is the interpretation a judge is likely to give. His convincing explanation was given here last time. I thought that it was a political explanation, and a political explanation does not necessarily mean that the judgement of the judge was either wrong or right. I wanted him to clarify on those two stands, the interpretation the judge gives and his interpretation.

MR RUHINDI: I think there is no conflict in what we are talking about. There is no contradiction. I do not think my submission is in contradiction with the position that hon. Alaso is referring to from the Constitution. You see, when the Attorney General advises, in his or her advisory capacity under Article 119 of the Constitution, it is advisory and he is advising Government. Government has a right to say, “We do not agree with your advice”, but the Attorney General will have advised. 

There are other areas of course which are a bit tricky. If the Attorney General advises on a contract, for instance, and the contract has been signed, you are not going to say at a later stage that the Attorney General was advising. He was not advising. He executed a function on behalf of the Government and that power is also given under Article 119. So, it is taken as a binding position of Government when later the interpretation of that contract is brought into issue. 

With those observations, Madam Speaker, I close my few remarks.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to read the constitutional provision regarding the court, which had said –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you can find it. Is it this issue of the Leadership Tribunal?

MR EKANYA: No. It is not the Leadership Tribunal. It is 232(2) (e), which concerns establishing a special court within judiciary for combating corruption and prescribing the composition, jurisdiction and procedure of the courts, and appeals in respect of that court. We have so many corruption related cases pending. My question is, when is the special court going to be established to combat corruption?

MR RUHINDI: I want to say, the fact that this has not been done does not mean that corruption cases are not being tried. It is just an administrative arrangement. Before the Commercial Court was established, it did not mean that commercial cases were not being heard and determined. They were being heard. It is a question of facilitation in terms of logistics, resources, and prioritising. For instance, when I met the chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee this morning, we discovered that there are so many of our priorities that are still in deficit and if you see them, you will be surprised. So, it is a question of prioritisation.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I have three or four short comments. On the congestion of cases in courts, I want to say that there is a Magistrates Courts Act (Amendment) Bill, which is coming. One of the objectives of this Bill is to increase the jurisdiction of magistrates so that magistrates’ courts can handle cases that would have gone to the High Court. This Bill should be coming shortly. 

On the issue of adjournments in courts of law as raised by hon. Ekanya, I want to say that proceedings in courts of law are regulated by Acts like the Civil Procedure Act, the Civil Procedure Rules and others. 

Before an adjournment is made, compliance with these laws must be adhered to. Adjournments are not made off-cuff. We must remember that in court cases, normally there are about three or four parties. There is the judge or magistrate, the plaintiff or prosecutor, and the defense counsel. Quite often, circumstances that warrant an adjournment usually arise between these different parties. So, whatever adjournment is made must comply with the rules that regulate court proceedings. 

Hon. Ekanya again talked about high profile cases. Yes, it is true that some high profile cases are given a lot of attention. This is mainly because some of the parties involved have the means to access legal services. They are able to access aggressive and vibrant private lawyers, compared to others. 

Fortunately, the Uganda Law Society has a legal aid project for people who cannot access these aggressive and vibrant private lawyers. This project is trying to assist in cases where the victims, suspects or whoever, cannot access such lawyers by offering free legal services. Women lawyers also have a body called FIDA, which assists women who may not be able to access expensive private lawyers. 

Lastly, the reason there are still vacancies in the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal is because, and the Attorney General may correct me on this, the Judicial Service Commission had not been fully constituted. However, as the Attorney General has said, this commission has now been constituted and it will very soon nominate judges for appointments to fill those vacancies. 

As I conclude, let me say something on the congestion of detainees in police cells. Madam Speaker, it is a good proposal to increase the number of police officers, but I think that this in itself may not solve the problem. My suggestion is that we need to ensure that professionalism prevails in the police force, bearing in mind that an arrested person is not supposed to be detained in a police cell for more than 48 hours before being produced in a court of law. So, professionalism must also be enhanced within the police force. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Judicature (Amendment) Bill, 2006 be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NYOMBI: The committee proposes that in section 9(b) we substitute “eleven” with “fourteen”. The justification is that given the backlog of cases in the Court of Appeal, there is need to have an increase that would enable the holding of three sessions at a go.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We all know that when this Bill was produced to this House, it had a certificate of financial implications, and the certificate was specific on 11. So, we cannot vary this because it would mean that we are putting an extra charge on the Consolidated Fund. You would find that – (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But supposing you are providing for another few judges in three years’ time, will that be a problem? Why don’t we allow the 14 and this year we appoint 11 as the certificate says, then maybe after two years we appoint another four.

MR RUHINDI: I have no objection to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 as amended do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the “Judicature Act (Amendment) Bill, 2006” and passed it with an amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Judicature Act Amendment Bill 2006” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Judicature (Amendment) Bill 2006 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE JUDICATURE AMENDMENT ACT 2006”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Title is settled and Bill passes. Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for your staying power and perseverance. The House is adjourned to Monday at 2.00 p.m. I wish you a good weekend.

(The House rose at 7.22 p.m. and adjourned to Monday, 23 April 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)








   



        





