Wednesday 18th April, 2001

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the distinguished visitor’s gallery this afternoon is a group of students who emerged as winners in the recently concluded Parliamentary Public Relations office national essay competition -(Applause).  That was sponsored through the State University of New York as a component of the USAID funded Uganda Parliamentary technical assistance project. These promising and future Parliamentarians are the following:

Mara Remus of Victoria Nile School, Jinja; Pule Esther of Bat Valley Primary School, Kampala; Nakamya Aidha of URDT Girl’s School, Kagadi Kibaale District; Serunkuma Herbert of City Parent’s School Kampala; Nsaba Emily of Wobulenzi Parent’s School, Wobulenzi; Ssemakula Moses of Namilyango Senior Secondary School; Asiimwe Frankline of St. Mary’s College Kisubi and Natumanya Ezrah of Butsibo Secondary School, Kabwohe, Bushenyi -(Applause).

This morning I had the honour to officiate at the prize giving ceremony to each of them and a trophy to the schools that had the best essay writers. I congratulate each of the winners in this first ever essay competition that featured on the topics:
“The role of a Member of Parliament in the society and the relevancy of the institution of Parliament in the life of Uganda citizens”; I think this is very relevant and it is hoped that these essays will be published for the benefit of your constituents. I would like on your behalf once again to welcome these youngsters to this august House -(Applause).

May I also thank our partners, USAID and SUNY whose intervention through the UPTAP project has made it possible for the exercise to be successfully conducted? Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK SDR 19.6 MILLION FOR THE THIRD STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT PROGRAM (SAP)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members you will recall that when we considered this item, we had actually concluded consideration except that we were not able to take a decision for technical reasons. The technicians have now made it sure that, that technical inability has been removed and we shall therefore proceed to pronounce ourselves on this motion. Namely, that Parliament resolves to authorise Government to borrow from the International Development Agency (IDA) of the World Bank special drawing rights of 19.6 million for the third Structural Adjustment Program (SAP). I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000


Clause 27.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members by way of reminder, we had reached a stage where we had to deal with clause 27, bearing in mind that the chairperson had given a notice of recommitting or notice for a motion of recommitting parts of clause 2 - is that correct - and I have seen a document where the re-committal is being extended to others clauses but let us start with clause 27.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Rwabita): Mr. Chairman, last time we discussed this clause, you recommended that the Committee should meet the stakeholders and consult the Office of the Attorney General, so that everything is put in line.  Mr. Chairman, I am happy to report that we did the necessary consultation; we involved the Office of the Attorney General and the Minister of Local Government also made consultation with the Cabinet. Then what we have now on this Paper is the position agreed upon by the Committee and Local Government and even Cabinet.

clause 27 is replaced as follows: "Section 95 of the Principle Act is replaced as follows: 
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 92, an Urban Authority may establish its own tender board, and an urban authority means the whole council not the Chairman alone, not the executive but the urban council of that authority will establish a tender board.

(2) An urban authority tender board shall consist of five Members including the chairperson all of whom shall be appointed by the council on the recommendation of the executive Committee.

(3) At least two of the Members of the Urban Authority tender board shall be women." We decided on this, Mr. Chairman, because it is difficult to split a person into one third. So we decided to state at least two women.

"(4) The provisions of sub-section (3) to (8) of section 92, section 93 and 94 shall apply to an Urban Authority tender board with such modifications as, maybe, necessary except the quorum shall be three members.

(5) No Urban Authority shall establish a tender board in the course of a Financial Year, because after passing this Law, we should not get either a division or a town, which never had a tender. The board says, now they are going to start in May. They should wait until 1st July so that they can start with the new Financial Year.

(6) An Urban Authority, which establishes its own tender board under this section, shall meet the expenses of the tender board."  

Now here, Mr. Chairman, if you take a case of Kampala City, Kampala City is a District, therefore, it is going to have a district tender board financed by Central Government. Now that we have given allowance to some urban authorities to have their tender boards, if they do not want to come to the district tender board, then they can have their but ready to finance it. I think that is very fair. That is the amendments for clause 27 and I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, are you happy with that amendment? 

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali) Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have no objection.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Chairman. First of all, I do not agree with the whole basis of this alteration in the amendment; but realising that the Cabinet, I hear, has already approved it I know that it will pass but the point I want to find out, the clarification I want to get from the chairperson and those who agreed on this, is number (5). Mr. Chairman. Does this not really nullify the whole thing; that no urban authority shall establish a tender board in the course of a Financial Year; now is there a time when there will be no Financial Year? So this will nullify everything that they never actually establish a tender board. So can I get clarification Mr. Chairman?

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, we might have written in Lusoga but the idea behind this was that after a district tender board has been set up, say, Kampala City Tender Board and in the manner that was suggested. Then there is a bit of disagreement here and there which could be handled administratively. Then the council concerns of the divisions, decides to set up a tender board there and then without having put it in the budget, of that current budget; so we talking of the current budget. 

It can be corrected from the construction point of view but that was the idea as we are suggesting somewhere else that divisions contribute membership to the district tender board. Now once they have opted to contribute and therefore use the district tender board, they should use it until the end of that Financial Year. If they want to change and withdraw, it should not be in the middle of the Finance Year. That was the intention behind.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Given the point raised by hon. Ongom and the explanation given by the Minister then sub-clause (5) is not well written. You cannot say, “no urban authority shall establish a tender board in the course of a Financial Year.” If we are to reflect what the Minister is saying, it should be written to say that, “an urban authority tender board established during the coarse of a Financial Year, the establishment shall not take effect until the next following Financial Year.” That is what, I think they wanted to say.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: So be it, Mr. Chairman, we agree- (Laughter).  

THE CHAIRMAN: Are we sure we understand what the amendment is saying? Can you repeat your amendment or write it down so that we can – you are amending (5) to the effect that the establishment of a Tender Board in the course of Financial Year shall not take effect?

MR. WAPAKABULO: No, until at the establishment of an Urban Authority Tender Board in pursuance of – we shall have to look for the clause, which gives that cover to break away. Yes, pursuant to 95(1) “the establishment shall not take effect until the start of the next following Financial Year”. "the next following" because if you say "following Financial Year", there are many following Financial Years.  Yes, we have to say "next following".

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, are you now amending 95(1)?

MR. WAPAKABULO: Okay, I move it formerly as an amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: To 95(1)?

MR. WAPAKABULO: To say that the establishment of a Tender Board in accordance with provisions of 95(1) shall not take effect during a Financial Year – shall not take effect until the next following Financial Year.

THE CHAIRMAN: Shall not take effect until the following Financial Year?

MR. WAPAKABULO: Because they are establishing it during the course of a Financial Year. Because you cannot say you shall never establish because every time is during the course of a Financial Year. So you establish it during a Financial Year. It shall not take effect until the next following Financial Year. And the word next is important because there are many following Financial Years.

MR. WACHA: Thank you Mr. Chairman, I think what the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality should be centring on, is not the establishment. It should be the commencement of the functions of the Tender Board, because the establishment can be established any time. But what we want – I think what (5) is talking about is that the Tender Board should not carry any functions. And I think you might be right.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Now, if we go by the suggestion of my learned and hon. Member for Oyam North, then if we say 'operations'; then we say a Tender Board established pursuant to section 95(1) shall not commence operations until the following Financial Year.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you captured it, Mr. Minister?

MR. KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. Member from Mbale Municipality ought to be more specific and make reference to the urban authority rather than leaving it general. Otherwise, I would go along with his formulation but I think should mention the urban authority aspect in his formulation. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us have it the two of you together.  

MR. WAPAKABULO: Mr. Chairman what I did was, I said we keep (5) and we say a Tender Board established pursuant to the provisions or in accordance with provisions of section 95(1) and if you read 95(1), it is saying “an Urban Authority may establish its own Tender Board”.  So having said in accordance with 95(1) shall not commence during a Financial Year; shall not commence operations until the next Financial Year or the next following Financial Year.  

THE CHAIRMAN: A Tender Board established under the provisions of subsection 1 shall not commence operations until the following of next Financial Year. But then you are trying to avoid operations in the current Financial Year. So you must make reference to that. All right?

MR. WAPAKABULO: Shall not commence operations until the next following Financial Year.  

THE CHAIRMAN: All right?  Have you got it?  

MR. WAPAKABULO: A Tender Board established with provisions of subsection 95(1) in a Financial Year shall not commence operations until the next following Financial Year. The next following is important because there are many following Financial Years.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Okulo Epak have you captured it?

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Mr. Chairman, there is no way you can establish a Board outside a Financial Year. Every day will be a Financial Year. So the formulation should really appropriately be like this. A Tender Board established by an Urban Authority in accordance with sub-section 1 section 95 above shall not commence work until the next Financial Year. Why next following?  It cannot commence work until the next Financial Year.

THE CHAIRMAN: Read it again. I am bothered about your word 'above'.

DR. OKULO EPAK: May I repeat?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

DR. OKULO EPAK: A Tender Board established by an Urban Authority in accordance with sub-section 1, section 95 above or you can leave the word 'above', shall not commence work till the next Financial Year.

THE CHAIRMAN: Minister, is it all right that a Tender Board established in accordance with provisions sub-section 1 shall not commence operations until the next Financial Year?

MR. BIDANDI:  It is acceptable to us, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question – I think we got the idea. Can the draftsman – (Interruption).

MR. WAPAKABULO:  You establish a Tender Board in a given Financial Year. You cannot just assume that because there is always a Financial Year.

THE CHAIRMAN: So can we modify it with the words, "in a given Financial Year - shall not commence the operations until the next…" – hon. Okulo Epak, are you happy with that formulation?  Can you recite it for the record?  

MR. BIDANDI: That is redundancy.

MR. WAPAKABULO: No, it is not redundancy.  I know that when you now say, “when was the Tender Board established?”  Then you say, “It was established in the financial year given such and such”.  So, you must mention it.  Then the operation starts the following financial year.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So, the position of sub-clause (5) should read this way, that “An urban authority Tender Board established in accordance with the Provisions of sub-section 1 in a financial year shall not commence operations until the following financial year”.  Is that okay?  We have dealt with five.  Is there anybody else?

MR. RUZINDANA: That particular one. It would be neater without the negative aspect. You can make it positive and it will have the same effect.  If you say that, “it shall commence operations at the beginning of the next financial year” it is much neater than the negative one.

MR. WAPAKABULO: I disagree with that, Mr. Chairman. You see the way it is formulated, it is prohibitive – it prohibits. But if you put it the other way, it is permissive. So, I would rather go with the old formulation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I subject to the amendment proposed by the hon. Wapakabulo, Mbale Municipality, as refined by Member of Parliament, Oyam County, South. I would like to put the question.  –(Interruptions).

MR. EKANYA: Mr. Chairman, I am concerned about (3) which says, “At least two Members of the Urban Authority Tender Board shall be women”.  Mr. Chairman, in accordance to the Constitution, we are supposed to have affirmative action; and I would like to move an amendment that will have one person – disability, and one youth, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is another amendment, let us talk about it.

MR. MWANDHA: I want to support the preposition by my colleague. I think if affirmative action is going to be a practice, it should be practised in all.

MR. ERESU: I rise on a procedural question Mr. Chairman. I thought we were about to vote on the amendment proposed by the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality, and as refined by a Member for Oyam when hon. Ekanya came up with another issue all together. I thought it would be procedurally correct for us to first finalise this one, then we move to the next amendment if any.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well I was thinking that we were going to pronounce ourselves on the entire clause, instead of this and that. That was the idea.

DR. OKULO EPAK: In that sense I have a clarification.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: But there is an amendment on the Floor.  Let us dispose of it. Can you repeat your amendment, hon. Ekanya?

MR. EKANYA: Thank you very much Mr. Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment on (3) that at least, one youth and one person with disability should be a Member of the Urban Authority Tender Board.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ekanya, if you are looking at sub-clause 3, this is what it reads:  “At least, two Members of the Urban Authority Tender Board shall be women”.   Now, how would you like it to read now?

MR. EKANYA: Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would like it to read that, “At least two women – one youth and one person with disability…”

THE CHAIRMAN: I will put a question.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification. I wanted a clarification from hon. Ekanya whether he is arguing that one of the two women cannot be a youth or disabled.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put a question on hon. Ekanya’s amendment.

(Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, since we have decided to pronounce ourselves on sub-clause by sub-clause, we better do it with the rest.  So, let us start with one.

DR. OKULLO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, (1) is a permissive provision. It says, “Urban Authority may…” Now, what about those, which do not opt to establish? I have checked Section 92.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are in a very awkward situation – let me explain!  The Chairperson is planning to recommit parts of clause 2 and some other parts, where they are proposing to retain District Tender Board, which will provide services to urban authorities who will not have established their own, but they are being given discretion to decide whether or not to establish.  If you look at overleaf, we are in that awkward situation.  We are going to deal with that matter when it comes to Recommittal – I am sorry about that!

DR. OKULO EPAK: This was saying, “notwithstanding 92”, I checked 92 there was no catering for urban authorities, but I think it is now somewhere in 26.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is right, which is going to come later?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: So your interest will be taken care of.  Is that all right? Let us now start clause by clause - (Interruption).

MR. PINTO: May I seek clarification to what you have just said, Mr. Chairman? Was there some kind of arrangements with the Chairperson, so that you can anticipate what is going to come and what is not going to come?  Could you explain please?

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you got this document? You have. I have seen re-committal. There are I think two clauses or three, which have to be re-committed and one of them is providing for a district tender board, which provides services to this urban tender boards. I am reading ahead.

MR. PINTO: But supposing it does not pass, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well that is a different matter. You can re-commit. Because the problem hon. Pinto we cannot re-Committee now, we have to go back there and then go through the process of re-committal. That is why I said we are in this awkward situation. So we proceed as I am advising. I now put the question to sub-clause 1 of clause 95 of the amendment there.

(Question put and agreed to)

(sub clause 2 agreed to)

(sub clause 3 agreed to)

(sub clause 4 as amended agreed to)

(sub clause 5 as amended agreed to)

(sub clause 6 as amended agreed to)

(Clause 27 as amended agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga Philip): Mr. Chairman I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga Philip): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled: "The Local Government Act (Amendment) Bill, 2000", clause 27 which had been stood over and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga Philip): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Speaker in accordance with rule 108 of our Rules of Procedure, I am moving a motion that clauses 2, 12 and 26 be re-committed. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

AN HON MEMBER: Seconded

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Speaker clause 2 - (Interruption).

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You have put the question to move back to allow the Chairman of the Committee to recommit. I thought once that is put we move to Committee and then he puts his arguments and we find out whether they are meritorious or not. Because now he is going to argue when you have already put the question to move to Committee to allow him to recommit.

THE SPEAKER: You see what the Chairman is doing is to have a motion that those provisions be re-committed and if the motion is carried then we shall - (Interruption).

MR. KAGGWA: Mr. Speaker, when you proposed and put the question nobody objected; so the appropriate way is to go to Committee and then we see if he has merits in his re-committal.

THE SPEAKER: I did not put the question yet. The question I put was adoption of the report but the problem was thereafter, the Clerk did not call for the Third Reading.  Normally if he called the Third Reading that is when the Chairman would jump out, but the Chairman jumped up prematurely. That is how we should proceed. Your motion is that clause 2 and what?

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Speaker clauses 2, 12 and 26 be recommitted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can you justify it?

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Speaker we shall start with clause 2. This House already passed the definition of Urban Authority, which includes city council, city division council, Municipal council and town councils.  By that definition coming in the definition for urban council stays on page 11 on the Local Governments Act.  So we shall have two definitions, one for Urban Authority and one for urban council remains. Mr. Speaker I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the motion is really simple that those provisions be recommitted you just put and do not go into merits as yet.

MR. RWABITA: Yes So, Mr. Speaker clause 2 is recommitted by inserting a new definition as follows; "Urban Authority includes a city council, a city division council, municipal council and town council” – and then the term urban council also remains. Then I recommit also clause 3 after clause 2.

THE SPEAKER: Really that stage is later on. All we really need to convince hon. Members that because of certain amendments, which had been introduced, it is now necessary to have a second look at clause 2, 12 and 26 and then I will put the question.  

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Speaker, I move a motion that clauses 2, 12 and 26 be recommitted.

 THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking guidance on - there is recommittal of clause 2 then there is a new clause 3. Does that come under recommital or that comes as a substantive, because was it discussed before?  Because if it had not stood part of the Bill, it cannot be recommitted, I do not know whether I am being- (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Which one is that?

MR. WAPAKABULO: On page two you have clause 2 to be recommitted, then 3 insert a new clause then 4 recommit, 5 recommit. Is 3 going to be re-considered because, if 3 was going to be reconsidered procedurally we should handle 3 to stand part of the Bill; then we go to recommital after, and then we can go to Third Reading. So that this is a new provision actually, which was not part of the previous one.

THE SPEAKER: You are quite right that recommital really is after you have originally dealt with and passed. Now, I did not take it that insert a new clause 3 after a clause 2 as follows, was it not amending what we had agreed, hon. Minister? How did this clause new 3 come in?  Is it consequential what is it?

MR. KARUHANGA: If the Bill has been recommitted, I would expect that it is then open and the House can do whatever they want to do with the Bill, including proposing consequential amendments. In fact earlier on, I had stood up to ask if these amendments which are recommitted affect other sections in the Bill; those sections will be amended as a necessary consequence of that amendment including some of the assertions which may be re-introduced. Having said that, and hoping that has cleared the situation the- (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Which rule are you referring to?

MR. KARUHANGA: You see, Mr. Speaker, I am talking about the recommital rule 108.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry.

MR. KARUHANGA: The recommital rule. Just that you recommit certain section- (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Okay let me read it out to you.

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Let me read it out to you. "108.(1) if any Member desires to delete or amend any provision contained in a Bill as reported from a Committee of the whole House or to introduce any new provisions in the Bill, he or she may, at any time before a Member rises to move the Third Reading of the Bill, move that the Bill be recommitted either wholly or in respect only of some particular amendment or amendments."

MR. WAPAKABULO: Therefore, the Minister should move that the whole Bill be recommitted to enable the Minister to insert a new clause. Otherwise, if you seek a recommital on specifics then the Committee will deal with those upon which the House has gone back into Committee. So that is why I was anxious that we do not pronounce ourselves on the recommittal on specifics if we are going to consider the proposal at 3. 

Therefore, the Minister’s motion should be that the Bill be recommitted into Committee and then we can have the power to introduce this one, which appears as amendments to section 5 of the principal Act. That is my proposal.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister ,are you comfortable with that?

MR.ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, I am- (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: No, it was the chairperson who actually moved the motion for recommital.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Mr. Speaker, but maybe if the Minister and the Chairman are not anxious that they recommit the whole Bill, they can recommit the clauses plus also a clarification that the recommital is for the purposes of inserting a new clause as specified under 3.

THE SPEAKER: Yes hon. Minister, it is getting a little bit too technical. The point is this, that according to this regulation, you can recommit the whole Bill or some portions. But in this particular case the Chairman has recommitted specific clauses, which he has named here; and yet one of the clauses does not seem to enjoy that protection of recommital because it is a new one.  

So the Member for Mbale Municipality is saying that in order not to tie yourself unnecessarily, you can open up your motion and say for purposes we are introducing a new matter or especially, a new clause namely, new clause 3 that is what he is saying.  Now, the question is, if you are not comfortable to recommitting the whole Bill then you can take his advice.

MR. OGABA:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, from my- (Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: Can I hear from the Minister then I give you.

MR. OGABA: I just wanted a clarification. The recommital clause 2 is talking about Urban Authority and its definition. The new insertion they want in clause 3 is basically specifying descriptions of city division, a municipal division and the equivalency of urban authorities. These are basically definitions, in their drafting I am asking, Mr. Speaker, would it not be possible to put this – it is totally a different section.  Whether this 3 cannot be incorporated in the clause 2?

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, let me I think first of all, give the House what we would like so that we are technically guided as hon. Members have tried to do.  In 2 as hon. Omony Ogaba has said, it is a question of definition, urban authorities to include City Council, city division council, municipal council and town council so that those are the urban authorities. Now, You will notice that in that one, the municipal division is not in as earlier discussed. So we want to open up so that we clarify this in the law. 

In 3 we are trying to – you know in the main Act as it stands, it says that a municipality, a town, a division is equivalent to a sub-county.  Because the city division has been defined as an authority equivalent to a municipality no longer equivalent to a sub-county, we want to correct that.  That is under 3. That is why we have said in (b), a municipal division and a town shall be equivalent to a sub-county because of the powers given to an urban authority, which are more than those of a sub-county. Mr. Chairman, we thought that by recommitting 2, then we will be able to introduce a 3. The first explanation was to give you why and what we intend to do.  Now the technical aspect of the approach is now where we need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, after listening to your explanation and to accommodate the technicality introduced by the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality, could we not start your definition this way?  I am looking at the first page of your document. Urban Authority includes a city council, city division council, municipal council and town council. Then you straight away go to city council, division shall be equivalent to a municipality and then another item, a municipal division and a town council shall be equivalent to a sub-county; and then you forget this business of replacing the marginal note with the following equivalence of urban authorities. I mean it goes as part of definition provision. The hon. Member for Mbale Municipality, would that be correct in drafting, so that we avoid this technicality.

MR. WAPAKABULO: I would rather Mr. Speaker, I have no quarrel with the substance except 5 under (3). You do not have to tell a draftsman how to replace marginal notes.  That is done there; but because we are trying to clarify on matters which have been hazy, it is better that we put it in this section. What I was suggesting is that the motion for recommittal should be that the Bill be recommitted in the following manner in clause 12 and clause 26, so that a new clause amending section 5 of the principal Act may be inserted or introduced; so that we then know that there is power to discuss beyond merely recommitting clauses which have been discussed.  Otherwise the people like the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi could go to court and cause us problems when it comes to discussing this Bill. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now hon. Member, you are moving an amendment to his motion?

MR. NYAI: Yes, I am seconding it.

MR. WAPAKABULO: That what I have said be taken as an amendment to the original motion by the Chairman, and I so move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, do you have any objection.

MR. RWABITA: I have no objection.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I am happy that the technicalities have been sorted out and we should move forward. In clause 2, we insert a new definition as follows; urban authority includes a city council, city division council, municipal council and town council; and having said that, then the definition of urban council remains in the principal Act.  

(Clause 2, as amended, and agreed to)

Clause 12:

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, we now move to clause 12. In clause 12 of the amendment Bill, we had recommended that we delete 12(4) but following the amendment we dealt with the election of LC 1 and LC 2 executives, then this clause cannot be deleted. We want to bring it back because a temporary chairperson has no authority now to make new offices in the executive. So clause 12(4) is amended so that it is reinstated Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Minister, are you okay with that?

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 12, as amended, and agreed to)

Clause 26:

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, clause 26 is going to be amended in paragraph (a) by inserting 1 after the word sub-section appearing in the first line and insert in the following sub-clauses before sub-clause 2 as follows; this is in connection with section 92 of the main Act.  One, there shall be a district tender board in each district which shall provide services to the District Council and lower local Government councils and administrative units within the district.  I beg to move Mr. Chairman. 

Now, 1(a) is that the district council shall appoint the chairperson and, at least, one as a person to the District Tender Board; l (b) says that an urban authority shall nominate for appointment one person as a Member of the District Tender Board; and l(c) where an urban authority hopes for establishing its own tender board its representative at the District Tender Board shall automatically vacate office, because they will be having their own tender board anyway. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member for Mbale Municipality, is the word ‘necessary’ there in drafting?

MR. WAPAKABULO: I think we could relate to other provisions, so we simply say that the office of a Member of a District Tender Board appointed in accordance with sub-section l (b) – where an urban authority proceeds or acts in accordance or pursuant to section 95(1) so that we are saying they have set up their own tender board.  The appointment of a Member of the tender board in accordance with section 1(b) shall stand revoked; really that is it.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Anyway, this is again a technicality of drafting, but the idea is that you cannot have it both ways. That is the idea. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING)(Capt. Babu): Mr. Chairman, some clarification on 1 (c); the idea of having people from the division is because the district passes part of the schedule, and the schedule involves everybody under that city. I will give you the example of Kampala City Council. Kampala City Council according to the schedule is in charge of all the tarmac roads, all the street lights, is in charge of the big drainages, and therefore, everything that passes in all the divisions is passed by that tender board, and that is agreed upon by the schedule. 

My request is, by getting people from each division means the interest of that division in that thing which is being passed in that tender board is taken care of, because part of the money of that tender board comes from the division. Secondly, the tender board established at the division is only for that division, it does not take part on anything else, and what passes at the district does not go to the lower division. I therefore, wanted a clarification why this punitive measure of wanting somebody to relinquish their seats because a division has started their tender board. If somebody can explain this I would be more than glad to understand.  
MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, this is a straightforward case.  We have said that there will be a District Tender Board that will serve the district and the lower local Governments; and in the formation – when we come to the schedules, we will have to specify how some of these are formed to take care of the different interests. But here we are talking of an urban authority like the one hon. Babu is talking about, which says no, we are setting up our own tender board, we are not going to use yours, alright?  So, they set up theirs; now they had contributed a Member to the District Tender Board because it is a commonly owned tender board, but now after they have withdrawn and they have their own tender board, what is the point of this person remaining there?  
Now, the point is that the City Council, for example as a district, whether you want it or not gets Members from the city; one or the other of the divisions; the City Council per se as LC 5 does not have its own geographical boundary, where we say it is different from the divisions. So, if they say Bidandi you are a Member of the tender board, definitely I will be there from Nakawa.  Now, if hon. Babu is contributed by the Central Division, and they say we are going to use that one, this is our Member because of that; then when you say, no, we are going to set up our own tender board and you want hon. Babu to remain there as a Member where you have disassociated yourself – this is the idea; otherwise, the District Tender Board continues to be there!
THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is my understanding of the situation really. Originally you will remember, hon. Members, this was a very simple matter and now we are going back to – originally the idea was that the appointment of the Members of the city central tender board should not be monopoly of those people up there, there should be contribution from the division. That was the idea, to take care of their interest. Now where the division says, look we shall not have anything to do with the common pool, we are going to set our own – I thought this provision is trying to take care of that.
LT. COL. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like the Minister to clarify on a situation where, for example, all the divisions of Kampala opt for their tender boards and they all have tender boards at their division; does that mean that the City Council will not have any tender board; and if the City Council is going to have a tender board, what is going to be the composition of this board where they are not taking care of all the divisions?
MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, the LC V District Council appoints a District Tender Board which serves the district and lower local Governments; now, where a situation arises as you say in Kampala – Nakawa, Makindye and so on have opted to have their own tender boards, it only means that the City Council sets a tender board without any contribution by any of the divisions. But remember that –(Interjection.)- Look, it is the executive, which picks on names, sends them to the council and a tender board is set up!  All the tender boards in the country, which are now in place, have been set up that way.
Here we brought it in; one, because there was a complaint, for example by hon. Babu, that the City Council tender board was delaying work of the divisions although the divisions except one still believe in that single tender board.  So, we are saying in order to take care of that, let the tender board be composed also of people contributed by the divisions who will take care of the interests of the divisions that have contributed them- (Interruption).

LT. COL. KATIRIMA: Point of clarification.  We start -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Katirima, I will give you an opportunity to contribute.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: I think that is the clarification. In case the divisions have set up their own tender boards, the City Council sets up its own tender board, statutory.  Instead of asking Makindye division to contribute one Member the Executive sits, picks on names, as it has been the case, presents them to the Council and the names are approved. So, you have a district tender board.

LT. COL. KATIRIMA: Mr. Chairman, we have just passed that if a tender board for a division is going to start, it must be in the subsequent financial year.  If we start in the first financial year with representatives from the divisions and in the following financial year, the first year of that Government Nakawa goes.  In the second year Makindye goes, in the third year Kawempe goes, in the fourth year Central goes, in the fifth year Rubaga goes, the City Council tender board will at the end of the five years have collapsed because -(Interruption).

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, if the Members are seven, for example, and one division withdraws, the Member falls off, the City Council replaces that Member and from the city.  So, once you opt for yours, the person who was taking care of your interests is withdrawn and the City Council elects or appoints another person in that place but the City Council could also opt to continue with that one, the choice is theirs.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mine is slightly different. We are setting up divisional tender Committees for those who hope to do so to deal with those matters the Act has said in the Schedules they will do. When you set up a district tender Committee, for whom is it going to serve? It will serve divisions; so hon. Babu is asking, “Why do you remove the person at the district tender Committee who is going to take decisions that will affect districts in the areas where the City Council is responsible but they will affect divisions?”  That is his quarrel.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wangubo, do you still want the Floor.

MR. WANGUBO: Mr. Chairman, mine has been taken care of.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I think what Members should understand is that, the district tender board is actually as representative of the divisions as that individual Member is. Personally what I see in what some Members are saying is extreme parochialism. The LC 5 Council is elected from the divisions their interests are represented by these people. 

The only reason why we are saying if you so wish you have your own independence is if you feel you cannot quite - I do not know whether you could call it trust or not – but I think it is not correct of anybody to stand up and say that simply because there is an LC 5 elected central tender board Committee, that tender Committee is devoid of taking interests of the various divisions. We should understand that at the centre, there are representatives from the divisions and these people should be charged with making sure that the tender Committee at LC 5 is reasonably representative. Thank you.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  My understanding was this, that there are two sets or three sets of powers. There is power at the district and there is power at the division.  What I remember when we last stood this thing over is that the divisions were complaining that we are giving too much power to the district or in the city to appointing Members of the tender board who would at the same time exercise the power over functions, which are specifically allocated to the divisions. Because at that time the divisions were not equivalent to municipalities and therefore, they could not appoint their own tender boards. 

Now we are saying the divisions are equivalent to a municipality, therefore, they can appoint their own tender boards. The question is, if you send a person from the division to the district tender board, would it also be in the interest of the division, LC5 also to say they should send someone to the tender board of the division because after all the division also is working on behalf of the people of the city at the district?  Are we then going to say, “ let us pass people from either so that we supervise each other?”  Then in that case why do we not have one?  Those are issues I just wanted to raise so that people can respond to them?

MR. NYAI: As a problem, Mr. Chairman, we have the city tender board. We have now the option of setting up division tender boards. In my imagination, I may be totally wrong Mr. Chairman, is that the division tender Committees will deal only with subjects under their purview. There will be other subjects, which override the purview of the divisions and I am wondering whether it is not possible that if the division has its own tender Committee to deal with its local native tribal matters, do we enfranchise that division on sitting on the City Council tender board, which has a wider scope?  I think this in my view is the dilemma we are in just like we have district councils.

I come from an area where there is a district council. If Arua district has Arua district council, therefore, should we not have a Member of a Parliament in Uganda?  I do not think so. I think what the scope of the operations of the various tender Committees is; should first be clarified. I think this is where some of us are differing.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I thought the problem had to do with how these Members of the board are identified.  How they are brought onto the district tender board. The idea is that if it is just allowed for the district council to do it, they will not take into account the interests of the divisions. I think that is how it started, that is why the divisions are saying let us have our own, let us contribute somebody on the board that was the idea.  

But now if they say, okay, we are not interested in contributing to the board ourselves; we are forming our own board; but that in my opinion does not mean that the district council or the City Council cannot appoint new Members taking into account their responsibilities throughout their jurisdiction.  

MR. LUKUMU: Mr. Chairman, in view of the explanations and the concerns raised by Members, I would like to move that this amendment 1(c) be deleted, so that divisions can also have representatives at the City Tender Board even if they have opted to have their own tender board at division level, since they have not actually –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but first of all you are speaking on a motion, which is not even seconded.

HON. MEMBER: Seconded.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, proceed.

MR. LUKUMU: Mr. Chairman, we are allowing divisions to have their own tender boards, we should not give the impression that, although, we are allowing them we are doing so reluctantly by obstructing them, by telling them that you are no longer part of the City or the district. What is the purpose of having to tell Members who are representing division to vacate the offices at the tender board of the district, if we still consider them to be part of the district, is this not really making it impossible for them to create their own tender boards if they so wish? 

Mr. Chairman, therefore, I feel in order to allow divisions the freedom to choose if they so wish, we should not at the same time obstruct them or make them appear to be not part of the district where they belonged before; because this would give the impression that we are punishing them for opting to have their own division tender boards.

THE CHAIRMAN: The motion on the Floor is that paragraph 1(c) be deleted; he is amending the Chairperson’s amendment.

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali): Mr. Chairman, I would like to oppose the amendment and I would like Members to try and remember the reasons for all that. First of all there is a City Council, City council is composed of Councillors from all divisions.  The City Council like any other district council is charged with certain responsibilities one of which is to start up a district tender board. As of now City Council has a tender board, so does every district. The argument which were brought by hon. Babu and it was sustained here was that when the divisions send work to be handled by the district tender board they tend to take long. I want you to remember because they have no stake there.

Now, here is a situation where for example now Kawempe, Nakawa, Makindye and so on say for us we shall continue to use the Central Tender Board. Then we say that in order to take care of the other problem, which were identified during the operation, let each one of these contribute to the constitution of the tender board so that their work will not be delayed; so that everybody’s interest is taken care of there. That is the reason so that their work is handled in the interest of the division; but now we have said that divisions may if they so wish.  

Now, after forming a tender board by all the divisions and then if they say, no, we are no longer interested in being served from there, we are setting now our own; the City Council should have the option to set its own Membership of the tender board for various reasons.  One, it may be that because of the individual contribution of divisions the element of affirmative action could not be handled. If we say two thirds will be women for example and each division has sent a man, so the City division is bound to take care of that interest so that if there was some imbalance and one division has opted out then there is an opportunity for the City council to remove that imbalance either on the basis of affirmative action or on the basis of geographical representation.  So, it is not true that you are withdrawing the interest of the division as long as the division is being represented at the full council and certainly at the executive level.
  
So, when they are setting the tender board centrally, they are definitely taking care of all the divisions. After all, where are they going to get the Members except by getting them from the divisions? And one of the most important aspect, when you are setting up that tender board, by the district tender board at district council is to balance a number of things. Do we have a Member from each division for example, do we have this representation and the other; that is at the centre but because you are saying no, no, we do not want to set out –(Interruption). 

DR. MWEBESA NTEGAMAHE: Thank you hon. Member for giving way.  The clarification I am seeking is on the financial part. When these Members are drawn from the divisions does the division contribute their maintenance on that Council? Because one of the biggest problems in these Committees is financial sustainability, you find that these people cannot sit continuously because of the money. Then I was imagining when you give this mandate to form its own Committee at the division, have you included the financial implications, so that this division which is venturing in starting its own Committee knows the financial implications and also is it aware that it is the ones to cater for the financial implications?

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, a reminder again, all district tender boards are financed from the centre, all district tender boards just like other statutory bodies.  Now, we are saying and the law has said that this district tender board serves the district and all other lower local Governments. Now, one of the local Governments has said, no, for us we do not want that service we want to set up our own. We are saying yes, you can set it up if you want, but you must be prepared to meet the operational expenses; because we have given you an opinion, which is free and you are saying you do not want it, if you are setting it, meet the expenses. So that answers. Even in this situation we are talking about the divisions are not contributing to the maintenance of the District Tender Board, no.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Mr. Chairman, what I wanted was if the Minister could think of this. What the divisions are worried about is that, you may find that a division has only one Member on the Central Tender Board and when it sets up its own that Membership is revoked; there is no guarantee that if any other Member is to be appointed, he would come from the same Division. Is it possible to word it in such a way that where an urban authority exercises its powers under Section 95(I) that is, sets up its own Tender Board.  The District Council may retain the person nominated by the urban authority or may appoint another person to the Tender Board but from that same urban authority. So that at least even if Nakawa has its own Tender Board, the Kampala District Council could decide to keep that Member previously nominated or in the event that in fact that Member has joined the Urban Authority Tender Board, the District Council may appoint another person to the Board to replace that person but from that particular division.

THE CHAIRMAN: You have got what he has said?

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Mr. Chairman, the only problem is that amongst the Members who have been appointed by the District Tender Board, all right, One or two of them might be coming from that very division; because the City Council LC. V does not have its own geographical area from where they pick the Members other than the divisions. They pick them from the divisions, but they have other responsibilities. Do not under rate the issue of affirmative action when we have said two thirds should be women? Now, this could be an opportunity for the District Council to correct this if all the five have brought women only or men only- (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I do not want us to just debate generally. There is a motion on the Floor that paragraph 1(c) of the Chairman's amendment be deleted. That is the motion on the Floor. You speak for or against and we take a decision. Now can you debate the motion?

MR.RUZINDANA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There is a bit of a problem that we are forgetting that there is Schedule 2, part 5 (a) and (b), which clarifies what can be done by the City and what can be done by the division; and what the Tender Board of the division will do, is what is in 5(b), and what the Tender Board of the City will do, is what is in part 5(a).  Therefore there is no need to say that the division will not send a representative to the Tender Board of the City; and therefore, I support the motion that we delete this particular No. 1(c).

(Question put and negatived)

MR. ONGOM: I was going to stand up, Mr. Chairman, in objection to your ruling but then I realise there could be a procedural problem. In a case where we may not have a quorum, if we stand up and we do not make 40 for reasons of having no quorum, would we not have a problem to this?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Sorry, I did not hear you.

MR. ONGOM: I am saying that if Members want to object to your ruling, they have to stand up and our rule says at least 40 to stand up.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Ongom, I think you are taking us backwards. I am now going to put the question on the Chairman's amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 26, as amended, and agreed to)

Clause 3.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, the Committee intend to insert a new clause 3 after clause 2 as follows; Section 5 of the Principal Act is Amended (a) by replacing paragraph (b) with the following; a City Division shall be equivalent to a Municipality, then (b) by adding a new paragraph as follows; (c) a Municipal Division and town shall be equivalent to a sub-county, and for the reasons already by hon. Wapakhabulo, © we shall delete it, it is not necessary, it is superfluous. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

LT. COL. KATIRIMA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to seek clarification from the chairperson, what this equivalency is supposed to achieve. Does it for example, achieve that the division like Kawempe will be represented by one Member of Parliament; like Mbarara Municipality or what?  What is this equivalence supposed to achieve?

MR. RWABIITA: Mr. Chairman, this amendment amends Section 5 of the Local Government amendment Act, and in 5 (a), a city is equivalent to a district. 5 (a) says, “a city shall be equivalent to a district and a City Council shall exercise all functions and powers conferred upon a district Council within its area of jurisdiction.”  

Now, following that, we found out that with our decentralisation policy, we should also make other urban areas equivalent of the Local Council, we have under the district and to clarify it so that when you are talking of a Municipality you know what it equals in our Local Governments. When you are talking of a town, then you know a town at that level in our politics; and now in decentralisation a town is a county. I think this clarifies these terms, so that people get to know what a Municipality is, what a town is, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Tumubweine: I want to seek clarification, Mr. Chairman, from the chairperson of the Committee. Does this mean that a City Division, it can also be sub-divided in such a way that you have got equivalencies of sub-counties in the same division; because if it is equal to a Municipality and a Municipality has got divisions which are equal to sub-counties, can a city Division now have sub-divisions which are equal to sub-counties?

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, this would depend on the demand of the society or community in that division.  If the division grows too big, then the authorities can decide to divide it in other administrative units or Local Governments. So, that can always come when there is need Mr.Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 3,as amended, and agreed to)

(The Title, agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT  (Dr.P. Byaruhanga): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.
(Question put and agreed to)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT  (Dr. P.  Byaruhanga): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill, entitled: :"The Local Governments Act (Amendment) Bill, 2000", the the recommitted clauses and the new clause and passed them with amendments. Thank you, I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT  (Dr. P. Byaruhanga):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. P. Byaruhanga): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: "The Local Governments Act (Amendment) Bill, 2000" be read the Third Time and do pass. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 1999

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, you will also recall that this matter was debated and for technical reasons, we were not able to pronounce ourselves on the motion; namely, that the Bill entitled "The Health Service Commission Bill, 1999" be read the Second Time. We had reached up to that point. I will put the question now; this is an appropriate moment to do so.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 1999

Clause 1.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr. Mutesasira): Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose that the year of the Bill be changed from 1999 to 2000, because it was read for the First Time in 2000.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do we not start with the  - oh, that is clause 1?  Okay.  What is the justification?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the Bill was read for the First Time in 2000. So we are saying that this Act maybe cited as, The Health Service Commission Act 2000 instead of 1999.

THE CHAIRMAN: Minister, are you happy with that?

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman, whereas if the Bill was read for the First Time in the year 2000, when was the Bill published, Mr. Chairman?

DR. MUTESASIRA: The Bill was published in 1999.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, where does that take us?

MR. NYAI: I think Mr. Chairman what I was proposing is that the publication of the Bill is what normally we keep.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yeah, and it does not lapse.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman I consent that we leave it as 1999, when it was published.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to clause 1.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 2 agreed to)

Clause 3.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose that in clause 3(b) we insert 'Scientific' between “administrative" and, "and.” This was done because we wanted to keep consistence as in the definition of a health worker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr. Wabudeya): I have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 3, as amended, agreed to)

Clause 4.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment and introduce a new sub-clause 4(1)(b) to read as follows: “The chairperson shall be a senior medical doctor eligible for appointment to the post of senior consultant.” Mr. Chairman, the post of senior consultant is the highest post in the health profession.  And it is hoped that by the time somebody attains this status, he or she is qualified and respectable enough to occupy that office of the Health Service Commission chairperson.

DR. WABUDEYA: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection to that.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)
 
DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, another amendment on clause 4(2) to insert human between “in” and “health “on line two. This is because the Health Service Commission is dealing mainly with health profession and medical profession at that.

DR. WABUDEYA: Mr. Chairman I agree to the insertion.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 4, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 5 agreed to)

Clause 6.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman we want to propose a new sub-clause 6(2) to the effect that a new sub-clause 6(2) will read “all the Members of the Commission shall be full time employees on contract.”  Mr. Chairman, the Constitution stipulates that when you are appointed a Member of the commission, you will have to resign your job. When you are a Member of Parliament you cannot be a Member of the commission. When you are on the local Governments you cannot be a Member of the commission. In other words, when somebody has resigned all other jobs and you are appointing him on part time and yet we want to attract people of quality and substance to this very important commission, we feel it is only fair to them that they are made full time employees.  

DR. WABUDEYA: Mr. Chairman I consent to the new clause.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 6, as amended, agreed to)

Clause 7.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to propose an amendment to insert a new sub-clause 7(2) to read as follows: “ The deputy chairperson shall deputise for the chairperson in his or her absence and undertake such other duties as a chairperson shall assign him or her from time to time.”  This is to bring it in consistence with the law of establishing other commissions and to give legal backing to the operations of the commission in the absence of the chairperson.

DR. WABUDEYA: Mr. Chairman, I agree to the inclusion of the new clause.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 7, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 8 agreed to)

Clause 9.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, clause 9, there is a proposed amendment to introduce a new sub-clause 9 (4)(d) by shifting clause 13(3) to clause 9, so that the new sub-clause 9(4)(d) reads as follows:  “All funds provided to the commission shall be administered as and controlled by the secretary who shall be the accounting officer,” because in 33(3) it was misplaced.  When you read the marginal notes it was describing the functions of the secretary and when it comes to clause (9) it is describing the finances of the commission.

DR. WABUDEYA: No objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 9, as amended, agreed to)

Clause 10.

DR. MUTESASIRA: The Committee agrees with the proposal in the Bill.

(Clause 10 agreed to)

Clause 11.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose that clause 11, (5), (6) be deleted, because we have already passed in a clause that Members of the Commission shall be full time employees and sub-clause 11 (7) also takes care of this. We also propose to introduce a new sub-clause 11(5) to read as follows:

In dealing with matter of discipline including removal from the service, the Commission shall, in the spirit of Article 173 of the Constitution, observe the rules of natural justice and in particular, the Commission shall ensure that an officer against whom disciplinary proceedings are being taken is: 

- Informed about the particulars of the case against him or her
- Given the right to defend him/herself and present his/her defence in writing and where necessary appear before a properly constituted meeting of the Commission or at any inquiry set up by the Commission for the purpose.
- Where practicable, given the right to engage an advocate of his or her own choice; and 
- Told the reasons for the decisions of the Commission.

THE CHAIRMAN: First let us deal with the first amendment. Did you say clause 11 (5), (6) should be deleted?

DR. MUTESASIRA: (5) and (6) – clause 11 sub-clause –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Are we talking of sub-clauses?

DR. MUTESASIRA: sub-clause (5) and (6) of clause 11.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yeah, I thought so.

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali): I just want a slight clarification. All what you have read that the Commission should do, if you said the person will be given a fair hearing. Does that not take care of all what you are trying to put in the law? –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Now hon. Minister let us deal with the first amendment then we go to this one. We are dealing with the deletion of sub-clause (5) and (6) of clause 11.  Is that correct?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Yeah.

(Question put agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: So we now go to the new sub-clause (5).  Hon. Minister of Local Government, we are now where you are concerned. Namely: this business of natural justice fair trial and so on. You wanted clarification. Can you repeat for the sake of the chairperson?  That is now sub-clause (5) – it is a new sub-clause (5).

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I was attracted to this when he kept on reading what –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Minister don’t you have your Bill? I want you to take on the chairperson by reference to the Bill.  –(Interjection) -I can lend you mine.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: It is here.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, proceed.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: I was concerned about the possible clumsiness of the drafting of that particular part and I just wanted to be assisted by lawyers, whether the fair hearing does not constitute to all that is being said; so that instead of coming into all that to come in the Law, we just use, as I have seen somewhere else, somebody will be entitled to a fair hearing. I am just seeking clarification. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, in criminal trials all those elements cited by the chairperson are required to be – well they are even there in the Constitution, but what you are saying is, you are wondering why the Committee should repeat them. Whereas according to you, if they say, it shall receive a fair trial whether that is not sufficient.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, for the interest of the Minister after legal consultation I was informed that for clarity and avoidance of doubt.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 11, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 12 agreed to)

Clause 13.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we propose to delete sub-clause 13 (3), because it was shifted to clause 9 as (4)(d) and it becomes a new sub-clause 9(4). And then there is a proposed amendment to insert a new sub-clause 13 (3) to read as follows:  

New sub-clause –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not see sub-clause 13. You said delete 13 (3) or delete sub-clause (3) of clause 13?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Transfer sub-clause (3) of clause 13 and shift it to clause 9 as sub-clause (4) (d). Mr. Chairman, that sub-clause (3) of clause 13 was shifted to become sub-clause (4)(d) of clause 9.  We are now proposing an amendment to insert a new sub-clause –(Interruption).


THE CHAIRMAN: Had we passed that amendment?  We did not pass it. Now you are taking it back to clause 9 –(Interruption).

DR. MUTESASIRA: We passed it in clause 9 (4)(d).

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we are proposing new sub-clause (3) (a) and (b) in clause 13 to read as follows: 

sub-clause (3) (a) of clause 13; the Commission shall be self-accounting and shall deal directly with the Ministry responsible for finance on matters relating to its finances.  

And the new sub-clause (3)(b) of clause 13 to read as follows: 

The funds of the Commission may, with the approval of the Minister responsible for Finance, include grants and donations to enable it to discharge its functions.

The justification Mr. Chairman, to allow it to deal directly with the Minister of Finance was that, some of the negotiations with the line Ministry have been sometimes tortuous and not given the priority that they deserve.  And since it is a Constitutional Commission, we thought we should give it this access to be Self-Accounting.

Secondly, they have not been accessing the Donor funds and the Grants because I think this is an operational guideline of the – it is a policy of Government that all financial matters dealing with Donors, Grants and so on have got to go through the Ministry of Finance.

THE CHAIRMAN: Those in favour of the amendment reflected as new sub-clause 3(a) of clause 13.
 
(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: And then those in favour of new sub-clause 3(b) of clause 13

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 13, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 14 agreed to)

(Clause 15 agreed to)

(Clause 16 agreed to)

(Clause 17 agreed to)

(Clause 18 agreed to)

Clause 19.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we were proposing to introduce a new sub-clause 4 to read as follows “any person aggrieved by the decision of the commission has a right to appeal”.  

THE CHAIRMAN: You have deleted to the High Court?  

THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Ms. Kadaga): Mr. Chairman, I think I have a problem with that amendment because the place where the person appeals from is not specified. I do not think we can live it vague.  You must say where the person goes to appeal.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, when you say why we deleted to the High Court; was because you can appeal to the same Commission which had your case for a fresh hearing. And the Standing Orders Chapter 1 section (f) and 5 and PS Regulation 43 section 2 provide that, the responsible officer shall in writing require an officer – no, we had wanted to introduce to the High Court but this may not be necessary because Article 42 of the Constitution provides sufficient safeguards to an aggrieved person.

In addition, an aggrieved person could still appeal to the Health Service Commission against its decision, if he or she raises fresh grounds not previously provided in his or her defence. The Commission may in consideration of available evidence reverse its decision. If is not satisfied, he/she can go to the High Court, but we want to restrict only to the High Court. I think we are giving only one excuse.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are reading copiously from where?  What were you reading from?  What is your source of that - the Article of the Constitution you refer to says” any person appearing before any administrative official or body has a right to be treated justly and fairly  - That is what the Minister of Local Government was pressing for- And shall have a right to apply to a Court of Law in respect of any administrative decision taken against him or her”.  But you were reading something very interesting. If you can disclose the source, it might be well.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, these are working papers of the Committee. I thought I would not bother you to put these in my report, but we can share the information Mr. Chairman. And Article 42 – (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: I got the impression that where you are reading from, “any person aggrieved by the decision of the Commission appeals to the same Commission for review of its decision on the ground that new grounds have come up, which the Commission should consider”.  What is the source of that?  

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, when we were debating this paper, we consulted several people; The Permanent Secretary – Ministry of Health, The Public Service Commission, The Minister of Public Service and they provided us with that information; and we thought we should shift our goal post from appealing to the High Court; because we thought the information they gave us was quite useful and I can make it available Mr. Chairman for you to look at.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mayanja Nkangi – The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, we have a problem of this person who is not satisfied with the decision of the Commission which we were creating – rather which the Constitution created. Not so? Yes created by the Constitution and we are trying to legislate here that such a person may appeal. Now, in the Bill, it was may appeal to the High Court, was it not?  Or was it not there in the Bill and you had introduced it in your report?

DR. MUTESASIRA: It was not in the Bill originally; it was introduced by the Committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you thought it was to be introduced in the report by saying appealing to the High Court?  And now you have been upon on consulting further, you have come to the decision that you should delete the appealing to the High Court, but then the Minister of the Parliamentary Affairs wondered appeal to where, to who?  You are saying, you read something very interesting. I thought it was from somewhere, Public Service Standing Orders or something. To appeal to who now; is it possible to say to appeal? This is an administrative tribunal. Is it not?  

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): I will also say that it has to be some place, some authority where to appeal. Unless it is clear in the law itself that, when you move from here, you go this way. They do not just leave it dangling.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know!  You have to appeal to somebody.

THE MINISTER OF STATE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga Phillip): Mr. Chairman, the information I would like to give my professional colleague there, is that actually some of these functions of The Health Service Commission are to some extent, in fact to a very big extent, been delegated by Public Service Commission. So, we could actually give this officer an option to appeal to Public Service Commission if he/she feels aggrieved. I do not know how you take that!

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the original position of the Committee was to give the aggrieved party the right to appeal to the High Court. During our last meeting with the relevant Ministry, that is The Ministry of Health, we were persuaded to drop that clause. We do not feel too strongly about deleting it. If this House feels that we give – because we had informed that actually you can appeal when new grounds appear; because in its ruling or decision, The Health Service Commission will give grounds for having arrived at a decision.

Now, when you think the aggrieved party thinks that some of the grounds did not come out very well, then he can appeal to the same Commission. But if we feel that the only channel of appeal should be straight away to the High Court, I have no problem, Mr. Chairman, because that was the original position of the Committee. But we thought the administrative channels, which have been operating in the Civil Service would take precedence.  

But regard to appeal to The Public Service Committee, I think the work of the Health Service Commission is to deal specifically with Health professionals and the Public Service has its own mandate as stipulated in the Constitution. I think there we shall be acting ultraviolet to the Constitution when you say you appeal to the Public Service Commission.

Mr. Chairman, I would like to say that we could add and re-draft to say “Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Commission has a right to appeal to the Commission when new grounds have been discovered; or in any other case to the Courts of law”.

What I have in mind is that, according to the Bill as it was, the decision of The Health Service Commission was final and when they had taken a decision, that was it.  But now we want to put in an element that if you are aggrieved in the law by the decision of The Health Service Commission, you should have somewhere to go and say, “Look, my case was not fairly handled”. Whereas apparently in the Bill as it is, you do not have any other exit.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, normally there are steps. You may appeal to High Court, you may appeal to the Chief Magistrate’s Court; it depends on the nature of the subject matter. Now, do you have a straight automatic appeal from Commission’s decisions to the High Court?  May be not!  Why do we not just say, if someone has been aggrieved by the Commission, and he/she goes to the Commission and not satisfied, then has got a right under the normal law to decide where to take the case – may be High Court, may be wherever.

Why do you not leave it in that real, specifying it in the attitude itself? If I go back to the High Commission, the Commission may also say, it is also okay; he will sort it out again. If after that, he/she is not satisfied, then I think, rather than we say, go to the High Court or Supreme Court, unless it is specifically provided for in the Constitution, then leave it – let him or her go and decide where to start the action – whether in the Magistrate’s Court or High Court or wherever?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think these matters of appeal are dealt in a procedural law but only confined to whether you are appealing from a lower or a higher Court. But here we are dealing with the appeal or application from any Administrative Tribunal where the individual feels that his or her constitutional right or otherwise has been infringed, and I think from there, what the Minister is saying, then he could then initiate the process of contesting the matter in the Court of law. Now, whether he starts in the Magistrate’s Court, whether he starts in a High Court or elsewhere, it will depend on the subject matter.

But still it does not take us somewhere. Are you suggesting, Mr. Minister, that this person may apply to the Commission to review his or her case on the ground that new facts have now come to light, which were not available to the Commission and therefore, the Commission would entertain it and also give him another ladder; that even after that if he or she is not satisfied, then he takes up with the law courts?  Is that what you are proposing?

DR. WABUDEYA: Mr. Chairman, the inclusion of this new sub-clause is meant to give somebody the right to be heard, and I strongly believe that we do not have to restrict this person to the High Court, because you could even appeal to the same Commission depending on the facts that you have on the ground. We should not really restrict it; we should give that right and then leave it take the course that would be necessary. So, I would wish to agree with the Committee that we include a new clause and stop at the right to appeal.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, there is a right from Administrative Tribunals, to the High Court, in circularly and prohibition. You do not need to specifically provide it here, that there will be an appeal from an Administrative Tribunal to the High Court. I think it is already provided for under our common law and it would complicate here, because you will be mixing rights from the Administrative Tribunals and the Statute here.

I think what we should do is to go along what the Minister of Justice said, that if new evidence is available, then the aggrieved party can re-apply to the Commission to reconsider. Now if he/she is not satisfied with that, he can still seek an order of circularly from the High Court without appealing. From Administrative Tribunals there is no right of appeal; it is only through review by the High Court – through orders of circularly and through orders of prohibition.

So, I think we should really do away with this. It is going to complicate the rights of appeal from the Administrative Tribunals. In summary, you should not provide for an appeal from an Administrative Tribunal to the High Court; it is already embedded in our law.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Commission has a right to apply to the Commission to review his or her case. That is what the Minister said.  Do you want to add on the ground you were reading?  Otherwise is that it?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I agree except that I would see where new grounds have emerged or are available.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it implied Hon. Ogalo?  When you apply to an administrative tribunal to review your case, is it implied that you are doing so because new matters have now come up, which were not availed to the commission at the time you considered your case?  Is that implied so that we do not have to go into it?

MR. OGALO: I think Mr. Chairman, ordinarily when you present your matter before a court and the court makes a decision or in this case a tribunal makes a decision without benefit of some evidence, which you do not have at the time then ordinarily you will be allowed to adduce it. I do not think you should imply it. It does no harm in specifically providing that right; that if you get the new evidence then you can re-apply for review.

THE CHAIRMAN: To review his or her case on the ground - (Interruption).

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman, I was getting worried about saying that you only apply for a review on adducing new evidence. If you come up with something and they say this is not new, then you are stuck Mr. Chairman. I think we should just have the right to apply for a review. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Ogalo.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman that would mean that you actually, you can go back to the same commission on the same grounds without any new information.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Dick Nyai let me give you this information. That this kind of thing obtains in the courts, which are not necessarily administrative courts.  The High Court for example can conduct a review but that will be restricted on some of those matters, which were not availed to the High Court when it first heard your matter; it is normal to restrict it to those matters, which were then not available. Otherwise, as he says you will be harping on the same issues and so on. I do not know until when?

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman you will forgive me. My worry is this commission's time to become subjective and personalised. There was one alternative which was proposed by the Minister of State for Local Government hon. Dr. Byaruhanga, which I thought we could benefit by saying that if a person is not satisfied with the Health Service Commission decision, then he can apply for a review by the Public Service Commission which is much more in form about administrative and Governmental service matters. So that he does not necessary need to go to the same commission, which initially may already have taken a prejudice position.

THE CHAIRMAN: But one commission appealing to another commission?  We are trying to get this person to have a right of review to the same tribunal and we are saying that he/she can ask the commission to pronounce itself on matters, which it had not pronounced itself on the same evidence.  The argument is that we should restrict it to a situation where new evidence which was not available to the commission has now come up and that should be the ground which should read like 'to review his/her case on the ground that new evidence which was not available to the commission at the time it makes a decision is now available' something like that.  That is the area we are trying to cover - (Interjection) - yes clarification then hon. Okulo Epak - (Interjection) - hon. Mayanja Nkangi why do not move a formal amendment so that we - (Interruption).

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: After me Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: What I am apprehensive of Mr. Chairman is making a provision here, which might be different from the provision that we might have made in case of the public service commission. For example, if the Public Service Commission makes a decision and I want to appeal; have we looked at what provision was made there because it should be the same route. I asked the Minister of Public Service and he seems to be saying that a decision of the Public Service Commission could be appealed against in the Courts of Law.  I would like us to relate the two so that we do not make different provisions. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay we stand it over until you consult on this point. We are standing over clause 19. If your amendment relates to your clause then, you can hold your gun until we come back. Is that okay hon. Malinga? 

Clause 20.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 20 stand part of the Bill

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 21 agreed to)

(Clause 22 agreed to)

(Clause 23 agreed to)

(Clause 24 agreed to) 

(Clause 25 agreed to)

Clause 26. 

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman I propose an amendment to insert a new sub-clause 3 on clause 26 to read as follows: "The Public Service Commission shall in consultation with the health service commission hear the grievances of health professionals at the districts".  Mr. Chairman according to the Local Government Act which we passed, the health service commission sets guidelines for recruitment of health professionals at the districts.  In the same Act when they want to appeal against decisions of the district service commissions, they appeal to the Public Service Commission but not to the health service commission.  This one, we did not attend to when we were addressing the Local Government Act but we had the health service commission Act Bill running which was responsible for the recruitment of all health professionals.  

Since health professional guidelines have been written by the health service commission, and since according to the constitution article 169 and 170, the review of terms of conditions of service of the health professional were put under the health service commission; but the law in place gave the appeal of the health professionals at the districts to be recruited by the district service commission, and their appeal through the Local Government Act is to the Public Service Commission, we feel the professional commission at the centre which gave the guidelines for recruitment and terms of service of the health personnel at the district, should come in when the health professionals at the districts their cases are being urged in the public health service commission.  

The health service commission gives guidelines to the district service commission when they are recruiting and promoting the health professionals. According to the Local Government Act, it is the district service commission, which recruits the health professional at the districts with the guidelines from the health service commission. According to the Local Government Act, when there is an appeal by the staff at the districts their appeals go to the Public Service Commission. Since this is a specialised cadre of staff at the districts, and their guidelines are drawn up by the relevant professional commission at the centre; we felt that they will be very well protected and catered for and well listened to when their appeals to the centre are being attended to by the Public Service Commission by the presence of the health service commission at the hearings.   

THE CHAIRMAN: Is the appeals the same as grievances?  It is procedural really; appeals, grievances.  You said when the professionals appeal; their appeals are channelled to the Public Service Commission. 

DR. MUTESASIRA:  Public Service Commission, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is the Public Service Commission, which hears and determines those appeals.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Yes, Mr. Chairman.    

THE CHAIRMAN: But then here you are saying grievances, why do you not maintain appeals?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I will take your proposal to include, to hear the appeals of the health professionals.

THE CHAIRMAN: Because I do not know the other thing you are referring to; but I am just offering my immediate reaction.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I just wanted the clarification, especially from the learned family.  Now, there is this Local Government Act, which governs local Governments and their Public Service and so on. Now it is provided that a person aggrieved by decision of the district service commission may appeal to the Public Service Commission provided that, the ruling of the district service commission shall remain and so on and so forth. Now, what I am wondering is whether the provision- we are putting another law governing the public health commission yes, health service commission can affect the local Government functioning which is governed by a different law. I just want to know, I entirely agree with what you are saying.  

It is only unfortunate that we did not include it in the amendments; otherwise, we would have put it in the amendments. But we have to put it in the law. Does it have a legal effect on the Local Governments, which are governed by the Local Government Act to put it in this particular law we are discussing? I just wanted a clarification. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think to a certain extent if you put in that provision in the Public Service Commission law, it will reduce the empire of the Public Service Commission, in taking decisions on those appeals. Because this one is saying that when the Public Service Commission is handling the appeals from those professionals, it has to do so, it shall do so by law in consultation with the health service commission.

To a certain extent yes, when you have this law here, it will reduce the empire of the Public Service commission to that extent. But I think your question is whether that is allowed in legislative practice, that you amend another Act via another one.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi): Thank you Mr. Chairman. There is also article 166, which gives the Public Service Commission the right to hear and determine grievances from persons appointed by the district service commissions. So in fact, if they pass that one would it not violet article 166 clause 1 (e), because you see the Public Service Commission is already empowered to hear those grievances without any additional requirement. But now you put an additional requirement that health service commission or personnel from this health service commission must be there.  Are you not likely to violet article 166 clause 1 (e)?  

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know whether this is relevant, hon. Prime Minister. “In exercise all its functions, the Public Service Commission shall be independent and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority except that it shall take into account Government policy relating to Public Service”. But I do not know.

THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Amanya Mushega):  Thank you Mr. Chairman. I do not think this amendment will be in conformity with the general trend of the Constitution. Actually this matter was raised up in the Constituent Assembly and I was one of those who supported that these commissions should have had different commissions at the districts. But the Constitution, which was passed, actually establishes one general district service commission, which covers all other commissions.

And if you look at article 198(5) it says, “In the performance of its functions, the District Service Commission shall conform to the standards established by the Public Service Commission for the public service generally. ” And further down,200(2) “The terms and conditions of service of the Local Government staff shall conform to those prescribed by the Public Service Commission for the public service generally”. 

So while these commissions exist at the centre, they actually do not exist at the district and the district service commission makes its appeals, it has its directions, it has its guidelines from the Public Service Commission. Probably that is why I presume that when the Public Service Commission is hearing these appeals, obviously it will consult with the other service commissions. But it will be odd once we pass it in this law and it may be challenged and secondly it means we have to repeat it in all the other service commissions which will be I think in violation of the provision of the Constitution; because this was raised in the Constituent Assembly and it was rejected and only one commission was established and it was put under the control of the Public Service Commission. 

Unfortunately, then I was in charge of Education, now I am in Public Service and the law is there. So I would advise my colleague to read article 199 and 200. The only thing you could argue is, they may consult the other commission but you cannot take away those powers by subsidiary law. I do not think it is possible. Thank you.

DR. MUTESASIRA: I am proposing Mr. Chairman, that we stand over this one because according to what the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister has read, according to what the hon. Minister of Public Service has read, according to article 171(a) which reads, “…advise the President in performing in relation to the health service, his or her functions” under article 172 and then you read (b), “…have power to appoint… confirm, exercise disciplinary control over those persons”.  This is the Health Service and the District Health Service is a health service as defined by the Constitution. 

And when you go down, the commission may by writing delegate any of its functions to a district service commission or any other authority or officer. When we combine all these three, Mr. Chairman, I want to suggest that we stand over this one and make further consultations with the office of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Public Service and we come out with a harmonised version.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is so decided. I now put the question that clause 27 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 28.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose an amendment to clause 28 relating to health between policy and in so, that the new clause reads, the commission shall from time to time consult with the Minister on matters of policy relating to health in carrying out of its functions. Why we are putting this amendment is that, it is a Constitutional provision that they have to consult the Minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: Minister, is that all right?

DR. WABUDEYA: I have no objection Mr. Chairman.

MR. KUTESA: I want to be clarified. What is the meaning of that expression from time to time? Why not consult on matter of policy? Why from time to time?  What is the significance of from time to time?

THE CHAIRMAN: That will be really a matter for the draftsman. He will put it right.

MR. NYAI: I think Mr. Chairman that was my same complaint. From time to time is unnecessary. They shall consult the Minister on matters of policy.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, this was in the parent Bill, but we can delete from time to time.  

(Clause 28, as amended, agreed to)

Clause 29.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we delete ‘the second this’, on the first line and insert ‘the’ between of and Act, to correct the grammar.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are deleting ‘this’ and replacing it with ‘the’ to read this part of the Act?

(Clause 29, as amended, agreed to)

Clause 30.  

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, sub-clause 4, clause 30 line 7, I beg to propose that we add ‘or guardian’ at the end of the paragraph, so that it reads that “incompetent patient’s consent shall be obtained from a parent or a relative or a guardian”.  This is because some minors may neither have a relative or parent when they are brought into a health centre.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 30, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 31 agreed to)

(Clause 32 agreed to)

Clause 33.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we wish to propose an amendment in sub-clause 2, clause 33 to put on the third line a ‘full stop’ after services and create a new sentence to read as follows: “A health worker shall expose without fear or favour all those engaged in illegal and unethical conduct and practice.” This is to enforce discipline in the health profession. 

DR.WABUDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, I have no objection except that after illegal we should say ‘or’ not and ‘or unethical conduct’, in fact. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, after illegal there is ‘and’ instead of ‘or’.  Any workers shall expose without fear or favour – is that the one?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I am informed that I pronounced instead of illegal or unethical, I said illegal and.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Chairman, could that not be improved by saying illegal and/or unethical. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, I think that one is – I think there it would be illegal – a person may engage in illegal and unethical, or he or she may engage in illegal or.  Do you have a serious quarrel with that?  Hon. Dick Nyai is saying, like you assaulted this consultation from time to time, he seems to be doing the opposite. He is saying that this sentence which reads; ‘a health worker shall expose without fear or favour all those engaged in illegal   - the text says illegal or unethical conduct and practice.  He would like to say engaging in illegal and/or – you know, that kind of drafting. 

MR. KUTESA: I think the text is okay as it stands; hon. Nyai is wasting our time

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman, it is very nice for latecomers to talk about time.

THE CHAIRMAN: I take it that since you did not give a formal motion for amendment you are –

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman, I have no serious objection. 

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose an amendment on sub-clause 4, clause 33, so that we, at the end of sub-clause 4, we add ‘through continuing professional education and proof must be given by a method as the commission shall from time to time prescribe’; so that the whole text reads as follows: ‘A health worker shall keep abreast of professional knowledge in order to maintain a high standard of professional competence through continuing professional education and proof must be given by a method as the commission shall from time to time prescribe’. Because, Mr. Chairman, many people after they have qualified they do not keep abreast in their professions, yet they continue practising. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now, I think, this ‘from time to time’ is correct.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, on clause 33, sub-clause 6 line two, we want to propose an amendment to put a full stop after 'alcohol'; so that it reads as follows:  ‘A health worker shall not perform his or her duties under the influence of alcohol.’ And we delete the rest because when you include drugs many people are hypertenthis, some are diabetic, others have got anxiety states and other disorders, and they really now work under the influence of drugs, but they have character, somehow, affected by drugs. Therefore, if you put drugs it is very difficult to implement.  

It was the view of the Committee and the recommendation of the Ministry that under the regulations, they can prescribe the type of drugs, which can be talked about. Otherwise, if we went in to include the list of drugs it would be so long that it would be difficult to monitor.

MR. RWAKOOJO: Mr. Chairman, I thought when we talk about drugs; there are specific prohibited and illegal drugs, narcotics in particular. I thought when we talk about drugs and alcohol, I thought those are the drugs we are talking about; and it should not only be alcohol but those particular drugs, marijuana – the list is long, but I thought those drugs were known and we do not want them to be used by the health workers.

DR. MUTESASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, if you read 7, we talk about drugs and those dangerous drugs specifically mentioned in 7 and it reads:  “A health worker should not indulge in dangerous life styles such as alcoholism, drug addiction or such other behaviour that can bring his or her personal profession in disrepute”.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman, if I rely on what the chairperson of the Committee has read at the end, then the last amendment he is moving becomes superfluous; because it is taken care of already!

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, you can be under the influence of alcohol but you may not be an alcoholic.  Once you become an alcoholic then it has brought a behavioural disorder. Once you are under the influence of alcohol, that is transient and we are talking about these transient conditions, when you are picked up from a pub to go and do some work, we are saying no, you should not.  

But we are saying that health professionals should not indulge in lifestyles- Alcoholism is a long-term thing and somebody becomes dependent like drug addiction. So the two, hon. Dick Nyai, are not the same. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 33, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 34, agreed to)

(Clause 35, agreed to)

(Clause 36, agreed to)

(Clause 37, agreed to)

(Clause 38, agreed to)

(Clause 39, agreed to)

(The First Schedule, agreed to)

The Second Schedule

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to propose an amendment to the Second Schedule 4(b) to delete “Assistant Entomology Officers” and re-designate them as “Assistant Vector Control Officers.”  These are trained as Assistant Entomology Officers and they are also appointed as Assistant Entomology Officers in the Public Service. Mr. Chairman, I also wish to propose that we add: “Nursing Assistants, Assistant Anaesthetic Officers and Laboratory Assistants” because these had just been omitted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Wait a minute, we are dealing with part two, 4(b), “Assistant Entomology Officers.”  You are saying we include “Assistant Vector Control Officers.”

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we delete “Assistant Entomology Officers” and call them “Assistant Vector Control Officers” and then we add “Nursing Assistants, Assistant Anaesthetic Officers and Laboratory Assistants.”  These had been left out.

THE CHAIRMAN: Same on the line, under 4(b) because you are saying you add.  Where do you add?

DR. MUTESASIRA: We add after (o), we add (p), (q) and (r).

THE CHAIRMAN: After (o), you add what?

DR. MUTESASIRA: (p), Nursing Assistants.  We add (q), Assistant Anaesthetic Officers and we add (r), Laboratory Assistants.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to)

(The Third Schedule, agreed to)

(The Title, agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr. Wabudeya): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr. Wabudeya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, The Health Service Commission Bill, 1999 and stood over clauses 9 and 26 and passed the rest of the clauses with some amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Minister, you reported, now you are moving a motion for adoption.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr. Wabudeya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Public Service?  Well, I think it is a convenient time to adjourn.  Remember that we have stood over two clauses and we shall deal with those clauses tomorrow. Accordingly, we adjourn until 2.00 O’clock tomorrow but before I rise, why can you not do as you did today? What is the problem?  Today, the front bench is full to the brim and I would like to congratulate the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs for having lobbied her colleagues to be here on time and in such large numbers, which means that we should not have a problem of quorum.  

There is no reason why we should have a problem of quorum with more 60 or more Ministers, but what is interesting; these are your matters. You bring your Bills and you should come and support your colleagues. Do not leave them to fight it alone. Anyway, the long and short of it is that I was pleasantly surprised by today’s turn-up and I thought it was with some least effort from the hon. Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. I would like to encourage her to continue to do that. The House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.48 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19th April 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)


