Thursday 12th April, 2001

Parliament met at 2.29 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I wish to draw your attention to the last two paragraphs on the Order Paper, which refer to business to follow.  Now, these are two motions by private Members and they have been with me for quite some time and I would like to draw the attention of both the Movers and those who are concerned that next week I intend to dispose off those two motions. Next week I intend to ensure that we dispose off these two motions.  One is the motion to be moved by the hon. Dick Nyai and the other is a motion to be moved by the hon. Dr. Okulo Epak. 

Secondly, I wish also to draw the attention of hon. Members to the impending launch of the initiative to assess the needs of persons with disability who occupy this House. As you know the Constitution, Article 35 highlights the need to cater for the needs of people with disabilities and to take appropriate measures to enable them to realise their full potential. By conducting a survey of all persons who occupy this House, it will be possible for us to assess the impact disability may have on hon. Members in daily life as well as to gain a better insight into the perception some people have towards disability. There are people who still are not really forthcoming when it comes to issues of disability. 

This initiative will compose of two main elements. The first is, there will be a survey questionnaire.  All hon. Members will receive a copy and they can - I will give you a moratorium of three minutes to deposit your set outside the chamber. Hon. Members can either opt to complete that form or even attend an interview to be conducted by the interns. I am sure hon. Members are aware that we have interns who are working with us and they will undertake the interview with you, should you opt to be interviewed. Secondly, there will be a disability exhibition that will coincide with the launch of the survey, an exhibition which will be conducted by our Public Relations office and it will be here so it will not need any extra effort from you to walk distances, say, from here to the Conference Centre. It will be around here. 

So, this information from the survey will be collated and analysed to ensure that the House becomes more disability-friendly in its attitude towards persons with disability, because it is hoped that the survey exercise will serve as I said earlier on, to generate useful information about the impact of disability on an individual. I think we should not allow these provisions I have just referred to remain on paper. We should actually see that there is affirmative action and we monitor whatever affirmative actions we have taken to make sure that we really do understand what the disability movement is all about.  I, therefore, commend these initiatives to the House as worthy of your wholehearted support like I myself do support. Thank you very much.  

We have been requested to effect an amendment on the Order Paper by the Minister for Finance to include a motion for a resolution to borrow. So, you will hear it from the Minister of Finance because I do not have the motion but I think it is along the lines that we are used to and I think this is the appropriate time for the Minister to come in. Before the Minister does come, we will proceed with the next item.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE SPEAKER: The amendment will refer to item five.  

MR. KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have been waiting for an answer for this question for quite some time, so I am delighted that I am getting an answer in this August House. Two Asians by the names of Amito Gadensha and Manubhai Madhvani have reportedly and recently taken over the management of the East African General Insurance Company, with a claim that they have been jointly issued a certificate of repossession.  

Would the Minister inform this House:
(a) When and why he issued such a certificate and basing it on what grounds? 

(b) Is the Minister aware that of the 1099 shareholders in the said insurance company about 500 of them were indigenous Ugandans? 

(c) Was the East African General Insurance Company one of the companies ex-appropriated by the Amin regime in 1972?
  
(d) If so, on what basis and grounds did the Minister act to get it repossessed by the two Asians without the consent of the rest of the shareholders?  

(e) Was a general meeting of the shareholders held to approve the repossession of the East African General Insurance and subsequently another general meeting held allowing the two Asians to manage the same on the other shareholders behalf?
  
(f) Is the Minister above Uganda’s company laws?   

(g) Why is the Government usurping the interests and property rights of Ugandans in favour of Asians?

(h) Since it is common knowledge that the repossession exercise has officially ended, much as Government continues returning some properties privately to a few rich Asians, can the Minister inform the House, when the exercise shall come to a complete stop? I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Ssendawula): Mr. Speaker, I am in my position as a Minister of Finance to answer all that has been put across by the hon. Member for Lubaga South.  However, as we speak now the matter is before the High Court of Uganda under civil application number 12 and it is due to be heard on the 20th of April, so I consider the matter to be subjudice, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The first question is when and why the Minister issued a certificate and basing it on what grounds is that a subject of a court ruling?  That is what I would like to understand so that I can make the ruling accordingly. If that is also being questioned in court then the Minister will explain that, I think he needs to give us further information on that. Then is the Minister aware that out of 10,99 shareholders of the said Insurance Company about 500 of them are indigenous Ugandans, is it also a subject to dispute you need to give some light on that one.  And then the next question is asking the basis on which a decision was taken to cause a repossession and so on and so forth.  If you can explain that then it will help us to take appropriate decision.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Speaker, starting from part A of the question certainly what is under question is was the Minister empowered to issue the certificate that is being questioned. And as you can see from the question, it is very obvious that when you answer it here that I had the powers and so forth you are certainly tempering with the case which is before the law. Because among other things the people who are appealing are demanding to know did the Minister have the powers to issue the certificate? 

When you go to the next one, is the Minister aware that out of so many shareholders, there were so many Ugandans this is also something, which is under question. When you have confirmed whether the company was appropriated or not, that is where you have got to then find out how many shareholders were there before the Asians were expelled.  And how many joined later who would then be entitled to continue to be shareholders, this is also something which is being questioned because even me who signed the certificate, I am one of the shareholders who bought 19 shares in 1974. 

Then was East African General Insurance Company one of the companies ex-appropriated? This is a central question, because when you look at the opinion of the Attorney General under which he recommended to me to return the company, he does dwell on this point at large and so do the lawyers of the complainants.  So, naturally if I give my views here I will be tempering with the case before the courts law.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister was referring to rule 54 of our Rules of Produce which reads as follows; “ reference shall not be made to any matter on which judicial decision is pending in such a way as may in the opinion of the Speaker prejudice the interest of any party to the action.” That is the very reason why I asked the Minister to say exactly what the dispute is like before the law courts. And if we go by his explanation the issues which the hon. Lukyamuzi has premised his questions, I think appeared to be the issues which are going to be adjudicated upon in the court.  And I think it is better we steer off clear and wait until this matter is disposed of.  When the Chair is speaking all other people should remain seated and therefore, I think it is better we steer off safe and allow this matter to be dealt with the law courts.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, with due respect to your ruling and I do not intend to overrun it, but certainly what the Minister has attempted to reply is –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: That is my decision. You see, I have to be persuaded and the Minister has persuaded me; you may not agree but I have been persuaded.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Yes, but can I say something, Mr. Speaker as the mover of the questions?

THE SPEAKER: How is it going to help you?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Yeah, it will.

THE SPEAKER: How?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I am not opposing your ruling, but the point I wanted to make was clearly illustrated by your earlier remarks.  The task put before the hon. Minister is not necessarily to reveal the details pertaining to the case.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I read out the rule, and according to the rule, I am persuaded that we should not discuss this matter here.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, can I ask for guidance on this rule of subjudice because it may also affect further questions, which may arise in this House in future?  Mr. Speaker, while I agree with you and the rule of course is obvious, that once a matter is subjudice, this House should not be seen to be doing anything that may prejudice the decision of the court. That one is an obvious fact. But Mr. Speaker, I think the point before us is based on the facts, which have been presented by the Minister. Is the issue really subjudice, because in this case -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omara Atubo, I think you should take it from me.  I have said I am persuaded now. If you want to challenge that, there is a procedure for it. I am persuaded that we should not discuss this matter here; that is my ruling.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I said I am not challenging your ruling. I only want you to assist me.

THE SPEAKER: I think you are challenging my ruling.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: No, I am not. I would only be too happy, Mr. Speaker, if you could assist me, so that in future I do not ask. The base is that the Minister has taken some action, and I think what the question of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is premised on what the Minister has taken action on and not what is before court.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omara Atubo, I have been persuaded that that is the position. You may have a different view.  Hon. Omara Atubo, you are entitled to your view but we must follow the Rules of the Procedure. Otherwise, all of us would start arguing here at random.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  I want to conclude this matter as a Mover of the question in good spirit. What we wanted is for the Minister to tell us the law he used in making that judgement and what is wrong as representatives of the people?  He is a shareholder in the company.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I have made my ruling. That is a question before the court, he says.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING APPORVAL FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS 19.6 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK FOR THE THIRD STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT PROGRAMME.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. G. Opio):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move the motion for a Resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow SDR 19.6 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank, supplemental credit for the Structural Adjustment Programme.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.
 
Whereas a credit agreement Special Drawing Rights 19.600,000= if to be concluded between the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank and the Government of Republic of Uganda, for purposes of supplementing the financing to the 3rdh Structural Adjustment Programme; and

Whereas under Article 159(1), of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; and

Whereas under Article 159 (2) of the said constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an act of Parliament; and

Whereas in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorisation;

Now therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is here by authorised to secure the said credit from International Development Association of the World Bank, upon the terms and conditions stated.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba):  Mr. Speaker, this request for Parliamentary approval to permit Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights 19.6 million was brought to this House and then referred to the Committee on National Economy -(Interruption).

MR. MWANDHA: Can I raise a matter of procedure, Mr. Speaker?  Well, the Minister read out the motion, but I thought that he had to justify the reasons for borrowing this money. And I thought he was going to debate it, persuade this House and then we would hear from our Committee.

THE SPEAKER:  No, no, that is not the procedure, you want to turn things the other way round? I thought you have been used to hearing the Mover of the motion, then hearing what your chairman of the Committee says, and then you express your views accordingly.

MR. MWANDHA:  I think it is usual for the Minister in addition to reading out the motion, to debate his motion and support it, and persuade the House.

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is a discretion. A Minister comes here to move a motion with a view to persuading you to support it and the manner and the style of going about it is really entirely his own. He read out the motion and that is the motion he would like you to debate, I agree with you that he would sound more persuasive if he added something, if he spoke on to his motion, I agree with you.  And maybe he thinks that all he would have said is already contained in the text of the motion. Hon. Minister it is entirely up to you.

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Speaker, I can make a few statements on the motion. As hon. Members may be aware, the International Development Association (IDA) provided concessional credit under the 3rd Structural Adjustment Credit to the tune of USA $ 125 million.  Mr. Speaker, the situation has now changed and it has contributed to the Ministry and Government to request for extra US $25.3 million to supplement this credit and there are many reasons, which have led us to have this deficit. I therefore request leaders to request for extra US $25.3 million. 

The first Mr. Speaker, has been, a fall in the price of coffee, which has fallen from over one dollar per kilogram to now almost 50 cents per kilogram. Therefore, our expected revenue from the coffee has come down.  Also Mr. Speaker, the volume of coffee has fallen by 19 per cent from what we had anticipated because of the coffee wilt. This has also made it harder for us to attain the amount of money we had expected from coffee sales.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we have had also a problem with regard to the other sources of revenue like tourism, because of the Bwindi incident, like fish because of the ban on our fish and from other activities in the National Parks and other areas, which have made revenue come down. On the demand side, we have had the problem of the price of fuel rising from 17 dollars per barrel to now around 32 dollars per barrel. This has made our expenditure on fuel go up and therefore, creating demand on our revenue. 

So, because of these reasons and others which the chairman will give, I would like therefore, Members of Parliament to know that the deficit has come, not because we have failed to do what we were supposed to do, but because of the worsening terms of trade which we cannot control. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba): Mr. Speaker, the Minister has said the majority of the things contained in this report, because this report was written after listening to what he had to say to this House any way in support of this motion.  So, if I read the report as it is now, it would be reproducing what he has said.  

I will however, invite you to go to page 2, item 4.0, where we did make some concerns as Members of Parliament about the economic situation in this country. Members of the Committee were concerned about this trend of events as explained by the Minister; the trend of events being a down trend in the earnings from coffee which fell by 19 per cent, a down ward trend from the earnings of fish, an increase in the price of fuel and a continuing depreciation of the shilling and it indeed depreciated by 10 per cent against the dollar.  

So, the question we asked was; what is Government doing about these things to ensure that we do not have as a country, to continuously borrow from IDA in order to support our expenditure?  We did raise the following questions and the Minister informed us that there is an undertaking to improve the quality of coffee for export. He said that the issue of adding value to coffee by processing is seriously addressed, that very soon we should be able to have enhanced earnings from coffee as a result of adding value, as against selling the beans that we have been selling. This measure will help in ensuring that the increased revenues in flows by way of foreign exchange are made into this economy, hence lessening the need to borrow from the World Bank, for financing of our needs as a country.  

There was also an undertaking that the fishing industry is being strengthened and efforts are being made in this direction so that we can, as a country capture the likely boom of fish that is currently existing in the European market, as a result of the outbreak of foot and Mouth disease; that is now in Europe.  So, most people are now feeding on fish and we would want to put as a country, our foot in the door way firmly to ensure that once we capture this market, it will be sustainable and it will increase our dollar in flows. We were also informed that other efforts Government is making to ensure that we have an improved in-flow of foreign exchange, is taking advantage of the AGOWA, which is the American law that gives economic opportunity to African Economies to sell into the American Economy among other things textiles.  

So, the cotton sub-sector will be revamped to ensure that we take benefit of this as a country and this will help generate additional revenue. It was also stated that Government is also ensuring that increased foreign exchange earnings are made in the area of tea by encouraging tea growers to grow coloned tea, a new type of tea. For example, that Mukwano is already doing this, he has some tea estates in Fort Portal and Government has gone into encouraging or to give incentives to those who import these cloned seedlings. This in its totality would improve the amount of revenue; the amount of earnings in foreign exchange coming into the country and thereby lessening the need for this country to get additional loans to finance its expenditure.  

Another source of revenue that is being looked at is electricity exports. Government is putting in place, mechanism to ensure that we increase our electricity exports to neighbouring countries like Kenya, Tanzania and hopefully Rwanda and this increase will hopefully increase our in-flows. This is in addition to general efforts Government is making to encourage investors make direct investments in this country and general export to the PTA and COMESA regions.

Well, as a Committee, we did appreciate these Government efforts. We also said if possible, Government should look at not just the earnings, but whether it can discipline some of its expenditure to ensure that we lessen the need to borrow dollars in order to finance our needs as a country in dollars. That being the case Mr. Speaker, we looked at the terms which were a standard IDA terms of 40 years including 10 years of grace and the 0.7 per cent on the disbursed amounts and as a consequence of that, we realised that there is an economic problem that has to be addressed and these are some of the problems of a poor economy and we do recommend that this House approves the resolution for Government to borrow equivalent to 19.5 million special drawing rights from IDA.  I thank you. 

MR.LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion on a very rare occasion. However, I would like to make a few remarks, which are intended to streamline the production aspect especially in regard to the fish export. I would like to propose that, Uganda before it embarks on the improvement of the quality of fish exports, it should check the steps it has used in the past in the sector of fishery. For example, the decline in fish exports in Uganda has a lot to do with Government. At one time Government was the main establishment in support of the application of toxic chemicals in fighting the water hyacinth and this caused a lot of problems in as far as each production in Uganda is concerned. 

We should know very well that at one time in the recent past, fish production was so useful to our people that it nearly at one point exceeded what we expected out of the coffee market. So it is important that the Government of Uganda speeds up the aspect of public advocacy for fishermen and women to know that fish production is something on which we can depend. I want to give one example, which is also very, very discouraging. Much as we are advocating qualitative fish production, the Uganda Government because of its laxity in promoting industrialisation, has gone to the extent of encouraging bogus industrialists to come here, invest in fish production. And when we look at their quality of production, let alone the way they deal with the residue and the garbage, the standards of effluence, which eventually return to Lake Victoria are terrible.  

MR. LWANGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way. You seem to be talking about a topic that probably you do not quite understand very well. I want to give you information, when you are talking about quantity of fish and you are talking about garbage, the two are not related. The problem with fishing in this country is the methods of fishing.  The methods being used are wrong methods.  As a result, young fish is killed off.  And when young fish is being killed off, the production goes down. It is not because of the garbage that these industrialists whom you call bogus, knowing very well that fish factories have increased from one to 13 in the last couple of years, that actually have anything to do with the actual fishing in the lake or in the lakes Uganda. That is the information I thought you should know.  Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I doubt whether hon. Tim Lwanga knows what I was articulating, because essentially what I was articulating was related to the qualitative production of fish. The European marketers do not simply buy fish.  They have to send their emissaries here to investigate the productive methodologies we are using. And I am reporting negatively that according to recent experiences especially following the problems we had in the spray of the water hyacinth, it was discovered that a good number of industrialists who invest in fish production, their standards of dealing with effluence which eventually returns to the lake is terrible.  And I do not see any reason why anybody would make noise on that. Certainly we must improve the standards of production to encourage the buyers of the fish. 

THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs. Mukwaya):  I want to be clarified by hon. Lukyamuzi, because I do not think that much as he is an environmental activist he has ever lived on the lake.  Have I heard you correctly as saying that Government sprayed the water hyacinth and that is what caused the problem?  Because according to me, the tests were done in ponds in Kajjansi and not on the lake.  So, have I heard you correctly?

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIVATISATION)(Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am afraid hon. Lukyamuzi is kind of going astray in his analysis of what is happening in the fish industry. We all know that we had a small problem on the export of fish sometime ago.  But it is also evident that, EU sent here emissaries, we discussed with them, they checked the quality; and that is why we have been able to go back on the world market to export fish because we have attained and we are keeping and maintaining the world standards of fish and that is why our fish is now going back on the main market. It is therefore, not true that the producers of fish and processors of fish are producing sub-standard fish, because otherwise, it could have been rejected on the world market.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker to answer the hon. Janet Mukwaya, I did not say that officially the Uganda Government sprayed the lake. I was saying that as a result of the attempted spray in terms of research, the buyers of fish got worried about the repercussions the poison would cause to the consumers of fish.  And I am on record to have prepared a paper to that effect, which was published publicly. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in regard to what hon. Manzi is saying, let us call a spade a spade. It is common knowledge that Europe refrained at one time from buying our fish because of the scare related to the waterweed. This is open information.  Otherwise, there is no sound reason for the decline of the market for fish apart from that particular dilemma.

MRS. MUKWAYA: I want to give you friendly information hon. Lukyamuzi. I represent the sub-county of Koome in this House and the problem was artificial poisoning in order to quickly harvest enough fish, it was not the water hyacinth.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: And if you had information proper and I would like to quote an experience of our Committee - Natural Resources, went to Kajjansi to see for itself the tests which had been carried out by the experts and what we found was terrible. So the point I wanted to make is, if we are going to improve the fish market, let us refrain from the earlier method we had anticipated that would work. Namely, the application of the toxic chemicals in fighting the water hyacinth.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I am also getting confused about your argument. I would like to follow.  You are being informed that the problem you are talking about had nothing to do with putting chemicals in the lake or water hyacinth on the lake.  That this was an experiment in Kajjansi in some ponds. And you are saying that, notwithstanding that, that experiment has some relationship with some problem on water hyacinth on the lake.  Is that a…

MR. LUKYAMUZI: As I conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, let me clarify what I wanted to say.  For example, the tests, which were carried out at Wazimenya Bay and Kajansi, those areas, have some linkages with Lake Victoria. So you could not convince the consumers of fish that they were free because the tests were carried in Kajansi and because of those linkages –(Interruption).

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, we are discussing a very sensitive subject that affects the international community and Uganda’s standing before that international community. The information, the correct information that was given before this House earlier has been given to the hon. Member to the effect that there has never been spraying of the water hyacinth. There has never been Government policy of poisoning our own fish, but that there was this isolated incidences of greedy fishermen who used poison to get fish. That information was given before this House and it has also being given today.  

Is the hon. Lukyamuzi in order to continue misinforming this House, to continue hammering on a point that does not exist, to continue wasting the time of this House on a matter that can easily bring us, as a country into disrepute, is he in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think you should refrain from turning this debate into a discussion of environment. We are really focussing on a specific resolution and if you are not happy with that resolution, which in fact you are because you said you were happy from the beginning that you support the motion. Can you therefore, refrain from harping on a matter about which you have been given sufficient information as to the correctness of the situation?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr. Speaker. So in conclusion, I would like to say that Uganda still hopes very high in fish production. A good number of Ugandans earn their living from the fish production industry. I therefore, recommend that these concerns should be taken into consideration.  

One; the bureau of standards should be on alert to check on fish production points everywhere in Uganda.

Two; the test chemical – there were chemicals which were brought in laboratory in Entebbe to test, to experiment and it is alleged that some are still kept somewhere.  They should be disposed of to ally the fears of fish consumers in Europe, Japan extra; and much more so, it is important for the Uganda Government to strengthen the public advocacy areas, so that people get more awareness about fish.  Many people feed on fish but they do not know what is in the industry. Thank you very much.

CAPT. GUMA (Ibanda North, Mbarara) Mr. Speaker, I wanted us to look again on page 4 of the Committee’s report. Page two rather 4.0, Government efforts to address the current economic progress.  Mr. Speaker, it is true that, for Government to borrow money, Parliament has to approve and we have approved so many loans since 1996 but we would want to see a very serious machinery, economic planning machinery in place, not to come here and really try to convince us for purposes of passing loans. Because if you look on page two, 4.0 and I want the hon. Minister to listen very carefully, the Minister of Finance; we have had problems of a shilling depreciating, problems of exchange incoming – the inflows of the country because of fish because of - which hon. Manzi called a small matter.  It was not a small matter. It was a big one. It caused a lot trim on the Economy, coffee and so on.

When you look throughout the whole economic planning machinery of Government, there seems to be no seriously researched and well sought out planning effort. The whole focus is on coffee, it is on fish and when there is a trauma in the world and some of these Europeans no longer take our coffee then here we really start running all over. So even if you add value Government promises to improve on the quality of coffee, this is not diversification. 

The Committee is raising a diversification problem. A number of items, in a package, exported outside the country which have got different demands - but for them they are talking about - even if you improve the coffee I am afraid it is not easy that we shall earn more out of this improved coffee. So the question of diversification, I think, is still a big problem as far as our revenue earnings are concerned and when you look at the year after year Budget of the Minister of Finance, and who are essentially our planners, you just see their focus that our diversification package does not have many areas where we can earn different dollars in order to really maintain a stable exchange position in our country; Coffee, fish, now they are talking tea.  

Mr. Speaker, if you move in the countryside, you will see a big variance between what the Ministry of Finance officials are talking and the reality on the ground. If the Minister of Finance can convince me, to tell me the practical steps they have taken in respect to tea – hon. Musumba is talking of revamping the cotton sub-sector encourage tea grower. Where? In which part of the country has cotton sub-sector been revamped?  We passed a loan here sometime four months ago but we also know that a number of those loans really do not end up on the ground to stimulate growers. In Toro, in Mwenge where has Government taken a serious keen interest to revamp the out grower tea growers. What is the government’s short-term economic policy to address imbalances in the foreign earnings? 

The Electricity in 2004, which hon. Musumba is citing. Of course, that is a statement he got from the Ministry of Finance. Power production, this AES is not going to realise anything until 2004/5 at least that is what hon. Bumba is telling us here. So which excess power export?  Are you going to earn reasonable dollars in order to address imbalances here that we are experiencing in the economic system?  What are the short-term efforts to address the loopholes and the long term?  Electricity is a long term as far as I am concerned. So what are the short-term economic measures to address the problems that are really pinching the country in respect to more earnings from outside the dollars, which we require?  Our Economy is pegged on a dollar.

So the point of diversification is very crucial and the answers hon. Musumba was citing that they got from the Ministry of Finance officials, do not address the diversification policy. They do not. If I went to Toro and other parts of the country that essentially are for tea growing and I saw serious activity and the mobilisation authority of Government to ensure support its policy of tea growers, of cotton sub-sector and other things. In 1986 there was a policy which – (Interruption).

Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee: Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Guma for giving way and I would like to inform hon. Guma that as a matter of fact, Government has made every effort to support the tea sector particularly the Smallholder tea sector.  

In 1989-90, Government secured nearly 30 million dollars for the support of the Smallholder tea sub-sector and that has revamped production from about 10 million kilograms of export tea to over 30 million kilograms of export tea from the Smallholder sub-sector alone.  I thought I should give you that information. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr. Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you very much hon. colleague for giving way. I would like to give this information to this August House that the number of sugarcane Out-growers in the two districts of Masindi and Hoima, has over the last two years increased from 10 to 180 Small Sugarcane Out-growers, and these are benefiting from the expansion and rehabilitation of Kinyara Sugar Works in Masindi district. And this has been deliberate.  Government deliberately injected funds into the expansion of Kinyara Sugar Works to enable the Out-growers capacity to increase in order to benefit from this investment.  I thank you.

CAPT. GUMA: Hon. Speaker, I value information.  Barclays Bank has got its advert that, “ a Big world requires a Big Bank”.  Mzee Museveni has got big plans.  I heard during the campaigns that he wants to increase the Government sponsored students in University to 4,000.  This Government with bigger plans is to require big resources. So. Hon. Migereko there has been some effort – I agree but it is just small effort that is supposed to generate the required massive funds that we require for accelerated economic development and addressing of various economic problems. 

I am sure you must have seen in your various constituencies the noise out of these unemployed youth.  You notice that a big section of the age segment we referred to as youth; you listen to what they are raising. They are raising issues that really corner on the Economy – survival.  So when you talk of Tea leaves after Mabira, I think that is what hon. Migereko is talking about.  That is a small thing.  How much dollars are you going to generate?  Mabira here here!  How much revenue are you going to generate here in Kinyara in terms of revenue that is required for huge Government Economic Programmes and addressing socio-economic issues?  How much revenue are you going to generate from these small examples you are citing all over the place?

You have to start somewhere. We have been in Government for 15 years. We are not beginners, hon. Byaruhanga.  We are not starters. I thought we started sometime ago and we should be moving.  So my view is that for me I am not impressed by Economic Planners. That is why we get instantaneous traumas in the Economy, then Bank of Uganda, then all over the place; may be Mr. Hon. Kweronda Ruhemba can really explain, the one who has the Monitor of the Economic performance - the one who is supposed to be following the Monitor to tell us. But these small quotations of tea after Mabira, in Mwenge about cotton, in Kinyara those hon. Speaker with due respect to members, in my view those are not going to generate sufficient dollar component that we require to address various demands of our society and also to address the programme as I read it of the present President.  I do not see generation of revenue – (Interruption).

MR. TUMUBWEINEE:  I have listened very carefully to my colleague hon. Guma and I do agree with him that we have not really made heavy jumps in the economy. I also know that it is not very easy to make heavy jumps in an Economy in a period that this Government has been in power. And he also knows as an Economist that actually you cannot have jumped from negative growth of 2 per cent per annum, which was cumulative of 25 per cent minus 25 per cent the growth in 1986 get to zero and then jump and make a very huge big jump internationally.

It is very easy to stand here and say Government has not done much. But as an Economist himself, what proposal is he talking about in terms of the big kick if you can talk of Restov theory?  What are you proposing as something that you can bring up in a short time that this Government should be able to borrow for or invest in and make things move?  Because once you propose something and we fail to implement, then you will come up and say, “I said this and you did not do it”.  I thank you.

CAPT.  GUMA: Mr. Speaker, let me really wind up. I do not want to bore some hon. Members – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: I think I will give you a few minutes to wind up.

CAPT. GUMA: Now if hon. Manzi Tumubweinee, if you want me to do your job I can do it hon. Manzi – you know that I am capable – (Laughter and Applause). I can ably do your job or anybody’s job. Yes – what I have in mind – I have a lot of things in my head about the economy and I can. So just invite me and we discuss these things and we can have also our input. But otherwise, I am not saying the Government has not done anything and I am aware that there was negative growth. 

This is an economy by 1986, which was not producing literally anything – mention it anything. There was nothing being produced here. In 1982, when I left Makerere, I lined up for a crate of Soda to go for graduation before the late Norman Kayonga died. On Portbell Road a crate of Soda – I lined for a whole day and I could not get it. So this was an Economy that literally did not produce anything. So, I know we have moved from negative growth to – I am only saying that the dictates of our situation do require that we really must be doing far better than we are doing, and we have said so that you have to do it. Out there in the public the expectations, of our people who vote us into power are very high. So, the moment –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Guma, I think you better wind up!  You have been on the Floor for too long!

CAPT. GUMA: So, my point, Mr. Speaker, is clear that the diversification export base is still narrow and some of us are available – we can discuss how we can broaden it. This is not going to be the forum really for discussing how to broaden the export items, so that we can have more shillings (the inflows) than we are having so that we can cope up with the demands of our situations and the expectations of our people. Thank you.

MR. PINTO (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I will support this motion but I have a few questions for the hon. Chairman and maybe the Minister.  First of all, on page 2, the second paragraph – “the above situation has created another problem, which is depreciation of the shilling by about 24 per cent”. I know that from time to time, Bank of Uganda pumps money into the Economy to stabilise the shilling.  Do we have an idea how much has been pumped since 1997?  Do we have an indication as to who has purchased what? 

What I remember is that, Mr. Chairman of the National Economy stood here at one time and questioned whether these dollars, when they are purchased go into productive activity or they are just sucked out, for example, by service providers like MTN or others. I would like that indication because the question has never been answered; it still lingers.

Now, as regards the diversification of exports, I think we have to agree with hon. Guma, we have to do more and this is the only way we can increase our resource base – in the area of mining and in the area of agriculture. I can see the Minister for Economic Monitoring; he knows that we in Rakai are waiting very eagerly for him to assist us in the oil palm production in the Sango Bay areas. I knew there were attempts to produce cashew nuts in the Soroti areas but I do not know how far that has gone!  But there are countries like Kenya and Tanzania, which depend heavily on cashew nuts. So, with our agricultural endowment, indeed there is a lot that we can do to benefit our country in increasing revenue sources.

As regards the Fish Industry, first identifying land sites, which are clean and improving on them. Not only identifying and improve on them, but also assist fishermen so that they can actually produce more, be safe in the water and sell more.  First is a question of security.  You have heard on radio regarding security on our lakes several times, the fish landing sites. The landing in my area – there have been subject of attacks several times, people have lost their lives, they have lost their fishing engines, we have had no capacity; the Police does not have the capacity to follow them.  Some engines have been known to be found with our neighbours and the Police has not been able to follow up although the culprits were apprehended in our neighbouring country. The engines have not been returned; it is over a year.  

I think Government here has got to do a little more, because the thieves were apprehended, may be they were put in jail, the equipment is there, it has got to be returned with the help of Government. But it is the fishermen who are running up and down, trying to get their equipment back. I think these people should be assisted.

As regards the landing site, there was an opportunity by the Chinese to assist Uganda to improve on the landing sites. You remember this deal, instead of helping to upgrade the landing site a businessman took an advantage and bought Jie Fung lorries. That story is very well known in the corridors of Ministry of Finance. Please explain – I would wish that this matter is explained because we were told initially by the Minister in charge of Fisheries that this Grant from the Chinese was meant for fishing and was later switched to Jie Fung; and some Ministers with whom we interacted actually confirmed, although now I could see that they possibly would like to shift positions.  

To fish well and fish more, you need motorised equipment – out board engines. As we speak now, they still have heavy taxes on them, fishnets are heavily taxed, live vests may also be taxed -(Interruptions).

MR. LWANGA: Thank you for giving way. I would like to inform the hon. Member that during the last debate on the Budget, it was debated and passed that there will be no tax on fishing nets for fishermen, that all the taxes were going to be suspended for at least two years.  It was also agreed similarly for boats, so that people can afford to buy boats for fishing, it was also passed for boat engines to bear no taxes.  

Unfortunately, although the Budget was passed in September, the Finance Bill did not come out of print until February 2001. So, really Uganda Revenue Authority could not implement whatever we passed, and even when it came out in February, some of the taxes which we agreed in this House to be deducted or reduced were actually not implemented.  That is the information I wanted to give him.

MR. PINTO: Well, Mr. Speaker, let us use that as a measure. The Budget having been passed last year September, and the Finance Bill is not printed until February. All that time the benefits that were provided as a matter of modification by our budget Provisions cannot be applied because you do not have the instruments; the Finance Bill has not been published. We think that you cannot make proper inroads until you identify these basics.

Now, Mr. Speaker, let us turn to the other item. The President’s campaign message was, Unity, Peace, and Modernisation. How can he modernise this Country without electricity, without rural electrification? My colleagues yesterday, the Minister of Energy was here to answer questions. Clearly only 12 per cent of our population and those living in Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe are the ones who are enjoying electricity and 4 per cent in the rural areas yet, we are told that the Ministry commissioned a Consultant from France, who informed the Ministry that Uganda’s production line with the two generators on Nalubale and the Owen Falls would almost satisfy the demand to the extent that bringing on board AES, they would even produce excess capacity that Uganda may even have to be penalised up to 97,000,000 dollars per year because our arrangement with them is produce and sell.  

If there is any excess capacity we still have got to pay for it. That this consultant had to be re-asked to re-examine the report, although they had determined that we had enough - I know that several Members yesterday brought this message up - that Uganda at her 500 mega watts will not have enough power and therefore, we should go slow on other power supplies coming on stream. 

In the rural areas where we talked about production and improving on adding value in the Agricultural sector even in the fishing sector, electricity is a necessity. The World Bank provided 1.75 million dollars to the Ministry of Energy in 1997 to popularise solar energy. Yesterday it was reported that 60 percent of that money has been spent most of it at head quarters. There are only two demonstration units and 882 units that have been provided. 60 percent of the money is gone, some 600,000 dollars is what is remaining only.  And since 1997 as the Ministry was telling us, they are going now to look for ways of granting credit to the people who are trading in solar panels in order for this facility to reach the countryside.  

You can see how depressing it must be, that from 1997 with the World Bank support of 1,750,000 dollars available to the Government of Uganda, given to the Ministry of Energy, not much has been achieved in solar energy. Now, a church group and I do not know how much they have put in - I would like to know from the Minister if they have an idea - has put up 1,200 units in a period of two years, they have been working in this country with the support of the First Lady. 

We had an opportunity to meet that group but their complaint was the heavy taxation, they would have liked to give solar units without taxation as they ask for donations from America. They bring the solar units through the church, they would like to help schools, they would like to help community centres and they would like to improve rural production. When the units come here, they become prohibitive to provide free because there is so much taxation. How are we going to transform this Nation, to modernise it if we stand in the way of modernisation?

We are talking about sugar-cane out-growers and the hon. Minister of State for Local Government was referring to Kinyara.  Indeed there is a representative from a constituency in which kakira is situated. The hon. Member representing Butembe in which Kakira is a constituency please excuse me. The out-growers are suffering because if there is so much production of sugarcane the companies will not be able to take it because it would produce so much bagass and this bagass becomes an expense for them to burn to waste instead they could co-generate electricity. 

The Investors have been applying to the Ministry of Energy for the last three years for permission. It is only yesterday when our Committee met with the Minister that we were able to receive some positive response that, finally they can proceed but instead of using their capacity to produce 36 Mega Watts they have been allowed to produce only 15 mega watts out of the waste sugarcane.  How can you ask your out-growers to increase production if there are restrictions where you have comparative advantage?

I think it is important that I close with a remark about the people's treasure and that is the Uganda Commercial Bank. The Uganda Commercial Bank can assist and still assists Ugandans in saving their money and getting into productive enterprise. But you know that as we speak today the Minister of Finance cannot say that he has got authority to deal with the solvent bank, because it is vested with Bank of Uganda.  Bank of Uganda wants to sell it although, according to the law, it cannot sell it when it is solvent and therefore, wants to go backwards to deal with the bank when it was insolvent three years ago and then want to sell it at a price which is well below the market value, which have been referred to as 11,000,000 dollars. 

This bank annually can produce profits of 40,000,000 dollars, so if you allow it to be sold under value, somebody will be siphoning away 40,000,000 dollars annually. There are examples our colleagues in Kenya - (Interjection) - I will get your information in a minute - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: No hon. Member I think you should consider coming to your conclusion.

MR. PINTO: I said I am concluding Mr. Speaker and these are my concluding remarks. I will take the information when I have finished my statement. What I am saying in Kenya they privatised Kenya Commercial Bank, but they did so by taking it to the stock exchange. We are told that in the arrangements for UCB if it ever comes back under the Ministry of Finance, 51 percent will be reserved for Ugandans.  Why can you not decide now to let the Ugandans buy that 51 percent on the stock exchange? Let them have a stake in it. Then go and invite the foreigner who can come and take the core 49 percent; so that the Ugandans know they own their treasure. I can now take his information.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate the concern of hon. Pinto.  But hon. Pinto also knows that when we moved the motion here it was decided that UCB shall not be sold until a report is presented to Parliament. The report was laid on the Table in Parliament and it is before the Committee on Finance; the Committee on Finance is going to meet the Ministry of Finance to discuss this issue. I can assure you that nobody has so far sold the bank behind the back of Parliament and I want also to state categorically that the Uganda Commercial Bank is solvent.  Nobody is saying it is insolvent. The bank is solvent, it is sound and it is making profits.  I thank you.

BRIG. MUHWEZI (Bujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I support the motion - (Interruption).

MR. PINTO: I was receiving information, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You told me you were concluding.

MR. PINTO: But the information has come from the Minister, it is really my humble duty to appreciate the comfort coming from the words of the Minister of Finance, that this bank will not be sold until it is sold transparently - can I receive this information with your permission?

THE SPEAKER: Have you concluded or you are still receiving information?  I want to know.

MR. PINTO: My colleague is the chairman on the Committee on Finance and I am guided by this Mr.Speaker - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Yes I know but have you concluded or you are still receiving information?

MR. PINTO: But after this information I will say good-bye, if you allow me humbly Mr.Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEEE ON FINANCE (MS. KIRASO): Mr. Speaker it was not very critical but I thought Members should know that next week on Thursday, we shall hold a discussion together with the Committee on National Economy with the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda. The purpose of this information was to inform the Members, so that whoever has got ideas or is interested in discussing this subject like hon. Pinto seems to have very strong views about the bank, they could use this chance to come to the Committee. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, with these few remarks, I support the motion.          

BRIG. MUHWEZI (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri):  I support the motion, Mr. Speaker. However, I would like to request the Minister for Finance to consider the private sector when they discover that there are problems in the Economy. I was happy to note that the Minister knows that there has been a drop in the number of tourists coming to Uganda; and that among the causes of this are problems like the one of Bwindi and so on.  However, the private sector never gets any relief from Government when these problems occur. For instance, borrowers of loans from bank of Uganda when there are such problems the loan repayment schedule continues, as if the situation is normal; I wonder where Government expects the investor to get the money to repay these loans.

So, just like the Minister gave a reason that we should allow borrowing because there have been problems in coffee, the fish, the flowers and tourism, the Government I think should also look into the private sector to see how they can assist them to make money. Because, when they do not make money they do not pay taxes and when they do not pay taxes of course, Government does not have the money, and then it comes and borrows.  Probably some of this money borrowed should be given to the private investors as some relief.

MS. KIRASO: I wanted to inform hon. Jim Muhwezi that when private investors do not make money they do not pay interest, but they also do not pay back the loans, so we end up with none performing loans over and over the years; it is a very big problem.

BRIG. MUHWEZI:  Thank you very much for that information.  The other problem, Mr. Speaker is that, as if what I have already said is not enough, the tourists industry and the hotels they call it hospitality industry, the hotels are taxed VAT when they are foreign exchange earners. Other exporters are not taxed because they bring to the country foreign exchange but hotels too, bring foreign exchange. Why should they be taxed?  And when they are taxed their rates go up and their charges will go up; and when a tourist is coming from German he will look at Tanzania, he will look at Kenya he will look at Uganda because we all have the same animals; and when they look at the hotel rates in Uganda, they are high so of course, no tourist will come here. So I think the Minister should look into this as well. I think they should abolish VAT on hotels.  

Then as regards what hon. Guma was talking about a big leap in the Economy, I really do not see a short cut apart from making Uganda an investment friendly country. We must change the environment and this is not only by Government, but by all of us, by Ugandans, by Members of Parliament, because when you go outside you are a Member of Parliament. When you go outside and you start undermining Government, you are actually undermining your country. You are bad mouthing you are accusing Uganda to be a terrorist country when you are a political terrorist yourself, I think you are not doing a service to this country.  We must create an environment; we must work as partners with Government and this Parliament to attract investment.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the last will be Dr. Okulo Epak, who I would like to remind that when I made a statement for my communication from the Chair, I told hon. Members that next week we shall devote our time to disposing over two motions by private Members one of which is by the hon. Dr. Okulo Epak. I thought I should let him know because he was not around. Notwithstanding that, I will give him an opportunity to speak after the hon. Mwandha.

DR.MUTESASIRA (Busiro East, Wakiso): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I stand to support the Government to borrow as per Minister’s motion. However, I would like to make the following comments. Mr. Speaker, this money I suppose is for budget support but when the Minister for Finance is giving out money to the Ministries, they many times make arbitrary cuts in allocations. Sometimes they make these cuts in very, very essential sectors like health and education, other programmes in others Ministries without due consideration that these are very sensitive areas. 

As we get this money, I hope hon. Minister is taking note, the Minister for Finance when you are making cuts across the board you should prioritise. When you cut money for drugs I do not know whether you think about the effect that has.  When you cut money arbitrarily and you say there has been a cut in Government spending, I do not know whether you consider what tutors in institutions, what they will feed the children.

So, I want to request that these areas be considered; and I hope hon. Minister given the Presidential pronouncements that there is abolition of cost sharing in health institutions and training institutions, I hope when this money comes you will address the gaps, which were created by these measures immediately because the training colleges are now stranded; they have no money to keep these institutions running and the health units are also soon to get stranded.  

We are talking about earning exchange but giving it out with the other hand. Hon. Pinto alluded lightly about the method of sell of the dollars from Bank of Uganda. Word has it that when they announce that they are injecting 10 million to the market, there is one major beneficiary and then the other banks are told when they go they say the money has already gone and it always goes to one place. There is a bank near City Square; there are two banks around there but one of them; and Mr. Speaker, when we talk about export diversification- (Interruption). 

MR. OPIO: Mr. Speaker, this is a serious allegation it could tantamount to actually sabotaging the economy of this country.  I would like therefore the Member holding the Floor to give us statistics, so that we follow up this matter; because as far as we know we have heard of these rumours and we have investigated and we have found out that participating banks actually all of them buy.  So if the Member has more information, which is very crucial, I want him to clarify so as to make us move because this could be very dangerous to the Economy. I thank you.

DR MUTESASIRA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Minister for raising that clarification, but I think he has all the information and I think the onus is on him to bring the allocation of the foreign exchange, put to the House and say prove me wrong. But I know 60 percent of the money from that bank goes to that place near City Square and there are two banks around there.  

The chairman of the Committee on National Economy has talked about diversification of our exports.  I agree Government is making efforts, but the chairman of National Economy has not talked about the flower industry. Government attracted Ugandans, encouraged them to go into flower growing, it flourished, but because of the reasons which hon. Muhwezi talked about, these people became insolvent. Government did not come up to stand up with these Ugandans to say come, we shall support you; they invested a lot of money, many sold their properties, many sold their assets and they went into this flower industry. When the foreigners who have bought these flower firms came, they bought them at give away price because they were under liquidation. 

This is where Government should have come in to say look, these were Ugandans who invested a lot of their money and one of the Ugandans it is alleged committed suicide because of the debts related to the flower industry. He appealed to Government to help but they could not help.  I want to appeal that this is a very lucrative industry, and the money that was needed to save these Ugandans is not much by Government standards. Can I appeal that the Minister of Finance comes to these ailing firms. I am sure they are about three, which will soon be under receivership. But the money they need is not big money to these Ugandans. 

Can the Government not guarantee money and save these Ugandans who sold all their property to go into the flower industry? But because of factors beyond their own control- It was only after these problems had cropped up that Bank of Uganda commissioned a consultancy to see what the problem could have been. Government should have come in immediately when the problem started. Mr. Speaker, we are talking about exports but I am appealing to Government, let us come in materially to help the small growers. 

I have been calculating that if Government gave 10,000 coffee seedlings to each constituency, just 10,000, because the majority of our people, we do not have big coffee commercial farmers like it is in Kenya. It is the small farmers who make the bulk of our exports. If we gave only 10,000 coffee seedlings to each constituency, it will come up to about five million per constituency, it would come up to one billion. But after two years, you will have addressed the issue of poverty, you will have boosted our exports and we shall have a reliable base.  

THE SPEAKER: Can you wind up please?

DR MUTESASIRA: I am about to wind up Mr. Speaker. We are talking about diversification. We have got gold in this country but our planners will tell us that it is not economically viable. But at the same time, they put a desk in Bank of Uganda for individuals to exploit and come and sell their gold.  Now if it is not economically viable, but you let individuals to come and you earn foreign exchange from it, can you finance these individuals to bring in more gold and then you tax them eventually?  

Can I also request that we give incentives to the people who produce what we export?  We cannot say we are going to modernise when the tractors, which we need to modernise with have got a lot of tax on them, the fertilisers a lot of tax, agricultural chemicals a lot of tax.  When you want to take industries to the villages to process – in my constituency, we grow a lot of tomatoes, vegetables and so on. We cannot process. Why do we not take electricity to where it should be?  We are talking about exporting it. Most of the areas, which have received electricity had to wait for the visit of the President and he says I will bring you electricity.  Then the Ministry of Power is on the run UEB is on the run, to ensure that electricity goes there. Now will the President be going to all the villages in this country to promise electricity so that they can get electricity?  Can we not get people in that Ministry and in UEB to do the needful?  People have applied and applied. People want power.  

As I wind up, people want to have a feel, to have a share of these budget support loans we are getting, and one of the things I want to request Government to do, is to take electricity to these people before the President goes to visit there, because it is very difficult for the President to visit the 50,000 or so LC 1s in the five years he has now for us to get power. Some of us are so near the city but electricity is a dream. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Now incidentally, is there somebody who is against this motion? There is nobody against the motion.  So many have spoken and all of them for.  

MR. MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities):  Mr. Speaker, I am also supporting the motion, but I wish only to make a few comments. The Committee says that Government promised to improve the quality of coffee for export and it is considering the issue of processing the coffee before it is exported.  Mr. Speaker, we have heard this many, many times and I do not know whether the Committee were able to know exactly when this is going to be put in place? So that we process coffee they were talking about- exporting instant coffee and I know that the coffee processing plant in Bugolobi is rotting away.  

There was the idea that this will be transformed into an instant coffee roasting plant. I do not know whether the Committee went far enough to find out to what extent Government was committed to the particular matter.  Mr. Speaker, the Committee reports that Government is to improve the quality of coffee. When you go down about fishing, the fishing industry is going to be strengthened. Then when you go to cotton, the cotton sub-sector is going to be revamped. Then when you go to tea, Government is also hoping to raise more revenue from tea by importing improved tea seedlings from Kenya.  These are general statements. 

I do not know whether the Committee took the trouble to analyse what is the timeframe of all these general statements, what measures the Government is really taking to do all these things? These general statements are the kind of statements, which we gave at a rally, which I would not expect that the Committee would really –I am prepared to accept any comment of the chairman. 

MR. MUSUMBA:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, and hon. Mwandha for giving way. Hon. Mwandha, I was to give you information and this House, that actually, the Committee took the bother, in your own words, the Committee took the bother to go into the details of all these. The debate has always been how much of these technical figures and calculations, how much of it should come to the House when it leaves the Committee!  It is here I can lay it on the Table. I can go through it one by one for you outside here, but I thought that after we looked at all these, the assurances that Government gave us are the assurances we can pass on to you to support the motion!  

The issue is how much of the technical information that is given in the Committee – how much of it should come here? Because we thought that as a Committee our work is to go through this technical information and summarise for the Members here to make a decision. So, I am giving information, that the information is here and ready, how much of it you needs just ask. 

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, it depends on the presentation; honestly in spite of the fact that the Committee has gone through this information and it has it, it would only be reasonable if the Committee came up with a time frame and the figures. To simply say that it is going to strengthen or they are going to improve, or they are hoping to do this, it is nothing; it is not something that Parliament –(Interruption).

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, the time frame alone will also not satisfy. For example, in the budget for rural electrification, Government even budgeted 12 billion to be released for the rural electrification fund starting this year. Nine months down the road of the Budget year not a cent has been released!  So, the time frame if in indicative figures is not enough until action is actually put on the ground.  No cent has come from Government for the rural electrification fund, although there was a Budget provision of Shs.12 billion this year.  

MR. MWANDHA: So, Mr. Speaker, my concern is that this report lacks specific concrete information; there are no figures, there is no time frame; there is no evidence that  -(Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: He said this information could be made available; he said the Committee on your behalf received all that information, analysed it and took a position, and they did all this on behalf of the House. But that if anyone wants these figures, the tables and all the lot, they can be laid on the Floor; that is the information. 

MR. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, I also want to add that in terms of the statement here, there are difficulties in putting time frame to some of these activities; because Minister has said we will work towards increasing the in-flows by ensuring that the cotton sub sector is revamped, by encouraging investors to the textile industries – how can you put a time frame?  In six months time, in what!  So, we can see that some of these are difficult to put exact figures; on the 30th of June we will have encouraged another 20 investors – some of these would not be possible. 

MR. MWANDHA:  Yes, I want to conclude, but Mr. Speaker, I think it is not adequate for the Committee to say we have all the figures without really indicating any concrete ideas of how Government is intending to do what they are setting out to do. I think when we are making a decision to allow Government to borrow so much money, it is not enough to get two, three pages with no information of any kind and say because the figures and some tables are in some other documents. Well, all the same I support the borrowing. Thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me start by seeking clarification on page 3, under six, conclusion; the third paragraph, thereof, says that,” Government should, however, implement the promised strategies to revamp the economy in order to avoid the fourth structural adjustment programme credit of such a magnitude”. The clarification I am seeking is; is fourth structural adjustment programme credit inevitable; must we have it? Is it something that we must have and, therefore, we are only working towards making the quantum smaller?  Because the battle here seems that we will get the fourth credit, but we are aiming at getting the amount less than what we have got in the first, second and third. 

In fact, the situation is terrible because the third we are getting now is a supplementary to the initial part.  So, even if we get the initial low of the fourth, we cannot always escape the supplementary, it would appear.  So, I am not quite convinced whether this structural adjustment, third, fourth is really necessary or it is something, which is endless. Can I get clarification on that?  

The second point I am raising really is similar to that my OB, hon. Mwandha, was talking about, and I am surprised that the chairman of the Committee could tell us that they had the details!  In section 4 on page 2 the Committee could not have details when the opening paragraph states that the Committee was concerned and raised concern; it was only a response from Government that listed these strategies. So, they could not have had it in detail anywhere and then expressed concern.  Because these five strategies listed on page 2 are actually a very quick response by the Government as to what they intend to do. 

My main comment here, Mr. Speaker, is the cotton sub-sector. I think we should be aiming at two things in the cotton sub-sector, to assist my hon. Friend Manzi who is seeking for solution from people whose responsibility is not to do so.  But let me try to offer my own view; in the cotton sub-sector we should be aiming at two things simultaneously or concurrently and in such a way that they will re-enforce each other. While we are aiming at generating export in order to generate foreign exchange earning, we should also not forget to generate income to the farmers! I am not convinced that by going to the textile industry, we are necessarily going to improve the income of the cotton growers. 

Unfortunately, in most of these agricultural sector if you increase the production the slump follows. I am really aiming at the situation in the cotton sub-sector to increase the income of the farmers, which aims at stabilisation of the price. Secondly, if farmers of coffee can be given free seedlings – you know it takes much more money and much more time to raise seedlings, than it does to produce dressed seeds! Why really can we not give free seeds to cotton farmers?

You know I was hearing the other day that Uganda Coffee Development Authority has been distributing hundreds and thousands of coffee seedlings to farmers in some parts of this country free; and the cotton sector cannot benefit from a mere dressing of seeds and giving it to farmers free. You know it takes twelve months to raise seedlings, which are distributed free and it is more costly. There must be a problem why the people who produce cotton, which is even labour intensive, it is an annual crop and really people who produce it sacrifice a lot to do it that they cannot be given this preferential benefit to receive free seeds.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, the information I wanted to give to hon. Okulo Epak is that currently as we speak, companies like Mosanto have been accused in courts of law for introducing seeds in fresh environments or new environments, outside a given country and those seeds have been found to have certain viruses, which are dangerous to man, a case in point is South Africa.  There is a company associated to Mosanto presently producing those seeds connected to the virus production and Uganda would not like to fall victim of the same practice. so I am amazed that in the report there was mention of praise that we import such seedlings from different countries, which could accommodate that disaster.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Well, I am also an environmentalist but I do not see the impact of the information really. I think it is sad that we should import those kinds of seeds and probably those who intend to import the seedlings of tea should take that point in view. But the most important thing, and I am really stressing this, that we should assist the cotton growers. As far as I am concerned, cotton has far higher and greater value than coffee because of its forward and backward linkages. The only value we have locally here for coffee is its coffee husks, which we use as mulch in the banana plantations.  Other than that you produce it to sell to those who consume it, hardly any Ugandans even drink coffee. 

So, I think we must treat these crops with the concern of their local benefit as well as in their forward and backward linkages and stop thinking too extensively and intensively for foreign exchange earning, rather think in terms of increasing income to our own farmers.  

Thirdly, Mr. Chairman, hon. Jim Muhwezi did say what I had wanted to say. I think we have comparative advantages in some sectors of the tourist industry and we must exploit it. If we can employ thousands of soldiers to supervise elections, why can we not deploy thousands of them to take care of security in the tourist areas, so that at least we can bring tourists here? 

Apart from attracting tourists and since tourism is a foreign exchange earning industry, those local industries, which encourage tourism, and I want to say this, should also be given tax exemptions in the same way as those whose exports are given tax exemptions. You see, this is now exemption from import of money rather than for export of our commodities and I think it would go a long way to help them to increase the quality of the tourist facilities in the country, because if we overtax them they cannot provide quality service and the service, which is of low standard, will not be attractive to tourists who have a relatively higher demand of good treatment and our climate is perfect, Mr. Speaker.

If we also increase the facilities for conferences and improve our conference facilities, so that most people would want to have their conferences in this country that would be another way in which we can attract foreign exchange other than relying on mere export. I think we should look into that one seriously. I do not know why the Ministry under the strategies could not have brought out that one also; but I think it is worth contemplating and dealing seriously with the problem of tourism and the benefit of tourism. It used to be a great foreign exchange earner and I think we can still have it to resume that status.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, in the introduction the chairman of the Committee says this application for loan was Tabled in the House and it was referred to the Committee.  Unfortunately, we were not given the time frame. I do not recall this but the way this report is presented and the facts are presented would appear that it was done very hurriedly. In fact we could have done with one page and approved the loan all the same instead of all these figures, which jump here and there and they look completely uncoordinated. I presume the Committee had sufficient time to do a more thorough work.  In fact it would have assisted a great deal to answer some of the issues, which hon. Mwandha was raising. 

I recall a time when the Committee did a very serious work when analysing loans and concerned with economic problems. They did a very serious work and it was worth their effort. This particular one looks like it was just a roughshod affair. I am sorry to my hon. colleague, the Chairman of the Committee and the hon. Minister responsible for this. Surely if I was going to deal in details to question the relationship between these figures and this borrowing, there would hardly be any.  They were just put there simply to tell us this thing is there and you do not know what this SDR is going to do to resolve those problems. At least there is no clear indication of how this borrowing is going to resolve all the problems identified in the report. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okulo Epak, on the issue of improving conferencing facilities here, maybe I should give you this information, not that the conference facilities are being improved but I think they will have to be improved because next year, this Parliament will be playing host to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Africa Region and it is not a small conference. It is a big conference bringing all the Commonwealth countries from Africa with large delegations and I think the point you have made should also be viewed in that context. How are we going to deal with that conference? I am sure the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs will at an appropriate time brief you about the arrangements that have been going on.

MR. WAMBEDE: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to continue really giving this information particularly on facilities that could be available here for us to hold conferences. I think if Parliament continues to support the expansion of hotel networks, like now the hotel being built in what used to be the Golf Club, that is the way forward and I think if you support others, it might be very helpful.  Thank you.

 THE SPEAKER: I want to give this information also, the Golf Club has never been replaced by any hotel, it is there and it will continue to be there.  Hon. Members, I will ask the Chairman or the Minister both to wind up.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio): Mr. Speaker, there were so many issues raised, they would need more time but I will just make a few reference to some of the questions. Hon. Lukyamuzi was supportive of the motion but most of the areas he raised were answered by my colleague, so I do not have much to add to that. However, hon. Guma raised fundamental issues; the first one was diversification as a policy. I would like to state here Mr. Speaker that Government has a policy to diversify our exports that is why we have what you call traditional exports and non-traditional exports. Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to assure this House that, it is the policy of Government to make sure that we diversify our exports; we do not want to have a few eggs in one basket. 

Mr. Speaker, hon. Guma also raised the issue of how we are providing incentives in some of these areas we have stated here. I would like to just give one example of Government waving VAT on colonal tea imports; when Mukwano and others wanted to import colonal tea into this country. So, Government in general is providing incentives for those private people or companies, which would like to embark on activities, which will result into, export earnings.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to assure this House again that this Government has performed wonders, our GDP has grown by 5 times from 1990 and therefore, it is not just a question of lip service.  That is exemplary, the standard of living –(Interjection)- yes, if you compare 1990 and 2000 now we have grown up by other 5 times. 

Therefore, if you look at the level of poverty in this country, we had the percentage of people living below poverty line in 1992, as 56 percent; it came down to 44 percent in 1997; now it is 34 percent. This is a sign that this Government is serious, it is tackling problems, which are facing the country and we are doing it successful.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Pinto when he said that the Government diverted money got from Japan, which was meant for building landing sites; I would like to state categorically that this is untrue.  The money, which came for building landsite, which was used for other purposes, was money from China and we have replaced it. And the money, which came from Japan was to be used for building landing sites and this money is available and we are using this money for building landing sites; it is not true that this money was diverted. This is very serious because if the donor or the source of funding like Japan hears that actually we have diverted the money, which is not true it will raise the issue; good enough they are here and they know that we have not used this money for buying lorries or tippers, it is not true.  

Also hon. Pinto questioned the process of buying and selling foreign exchange. This is the economic mechanism for making sure that our foreign exchange rate is moving smoothly. When we have speculations coming in and value goes up or goes down, the Bank of Uganda comes in and smoothens the trend. We are not here to change the trend of our foreign exchange that is why we have got what we call flexible exchange rate. So, it is important for hon. Pinto to realise that what he was actually address is not what we are doing in Bank of Uganda; Bank of Uganda is only looking at areas of speculation and stamping out areas of speculation.  And this money belongs to Bank of Uganda; it does not belong to our budget so that we can use it for doing other things.

Mr. Speaker, hon. Muhwezi was right to say that when we have disaster in private sector Government has not put mechanism for giving relief, but also we have businesses where we have insurance. Private sectors in different areas should be aware that there are methods of insuring against such disasters. Those which cannot be insured, can be discussed but every business should know that there are measures of mitigating against disaster through insurance. 

His suggestion that because tourism is part of the export I agree, but what is being done in developed countries like United States, if you are a foreigner and you go to a hotel you pay the actual bill; when you are going you fill forms and you get a refund, because you are not a citizen of United States; you have gone there and you have stayed in a hotel and you are not therefore subjected to domestic taxes, therefore you fill a form and you get a refund. But, it is not possible to say that the hotels should be exempted from taxes.

What is true, Mr. Speaker, is that VAT which is charged in the hotel is part and parcel of the arrangement all over the world that, when you have a service and instead of having other types of taxes you have a VAT. So, we would like to think in terms of either of refunding those foreigners, who come and stay in hotel on their way when they get out and that will be treating it as exports.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister how much time do you need?

MR. OPIO: Just one comment, Mr. Speaker. The last comment I would like to say is that hon. Mutesasira, made a comment here which I think is very serious, I am committing myself to bring the sales and purchases of foreign exchange for the last period; I will lay it on the Table and I would like also to request hon. Mutesasira to bring here information because his statement is very serious for the banking institution in this country. I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank all the Members who have supported this motion.

MR. MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Members for the overwhelming support given to this motion. I just want to clarify on the issue raised by hon. Muhwezi that, yes, our Committee is also concerned with the relief to be given to those that deserve and we have invited the Ministers of Finance and that of Trade for a Meeting on the 18th, which is Wednesday do discuss this matter; he can come as an interested party. I thank you, Mr. Speaker and the Members for the support given to this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we cannot pronounce ourselves on the motion because we do not have the necessary quorum. Now, let me say this, now we have three matters which are pending on which we have to take decisions namely; the Local Government (amendment) Bill, secondly, the Health Service Commission Bill- I think that is how it is called -and now this particular issue. I am inclined to think that next Tuesday when we resume we should proceed this way, that we shall structure the Order Paper in such a way that after the Communication from the Chair, we shall proceed to deal with these matters; and I will come here whether you are here or not, I will come here.  

Those Ministers, those hon. Members who are concerned with these three matters, it is up to you to be here or not to be here. After Communications from the Chair we are going straight to deal with those matters where we have to take decision. There will be no questions, there will be no other peripheral issues to occupy us; we shall go straight to the major businesses, the three I have just mentioned. Thereafter, we will be in a position to proceed to deal with the two motions by Private Members, which have been pending for quite sometimes. That is for next week.

THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs. Mukwaya): Mr. Speaker, I want to request you that we come on Wednesday because being Easter, and I know you would want to enjoy Easter with your people in the Constituency. Would you really have come back on Tuesday?  I want to plead with you that.

THE SPEAKER:  Easter Monday is for travelling back to the metropolitan for business.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am seeking guidance from you as you know the life of this House is due to expire on 2nd of July, and I am wondering whether or not there is a specific time frame for conducting business in the House, so that it may also guide Members; because it is rather a shame to have a House of 278 Members and you cannot raise 100 Members in any given Sitting.  It is a big shame, but something could be done about it. I am seeking guidance, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: My only advice is come here, make a quorum, attend to business, dispose of business as scheduled, then we shall be able to decide the way forward and in particular the programme, which will carry us towards the end of the life of this Parliament. But if people do not come, business is delayed on the Order Paper and nobody can - we shall limp like that, and I will not be in position to advise on the programme, which you should really know in anticipation of the closure of life of this Parliament. If you come here and we dispose of business on time as scheduled, then we shall be in position to advise you. The hon. Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, are you serious about what you are suggesting?

MRS. MUKWAYA: I am serious and I thought somebody would second me but it appears -(Interruption)- then you second.

THE SPEAKER: It is not a motion. Now you see, let us make a deal. We have fewer days and if those fewer days are declared, you know holidays; and when hon. Members, do come on those days when they are supposed to come, they are just a handful in the House. What is the use?  Surely, you should let me know, you should persuade me that it is deserving to give you a holiday.

MRS. MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker, I wanted to ask through my sister hon. Rebecca to go and mobilise the executive. I would really plead with you that we bring the Executive here on Wednesday, while the Backbenchers also travel on Tuesday to be here; so that we are here as full House and we discharge the work.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mukwaya, Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, do you undertake to mobilise the Executive to be here on Wednesday on the spot at 2.00 O'clock - there is Cabinet? I am waiting for your answer.  Do you undertake to mobilise the executive to be here by 2.00 O'clock? 

MRS. MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker, because the work that is before the House is the work of the Executive, I want to pledge that I will make everything possible that the Executive are here.

THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Miss Kadaga): Mr. Speaker, I would like to apologise on behalf of the Government, because we have not discussed this matter.  But secondly, it is the Government which has business pending before this House. A lot of business, which we would like to finish before we go on recess. So, we shall abide by your ruling, Mr. Speaker, we shall be here on Tuesday.  
 
THE SPEAKER: Right, the House is adjourned until Tuesday next week, 2.00 O'clock

(The House rose at 4.47 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 17th April, 2001 at 2.00 p.m)

