Thursday, 16 April 2009

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I have two items to communicate. The first one is to remind the House about your responsibility under the Budget Act. You are required under Section 7(1)(a) and (b) of the Budget Act to evaluate the National Budget Framework and report by the 25th of April and thereafter present the recommendations to the Budget Committee by 15 May 2009. 

With effect from Monday, therefore, we shall expect the sessional committees to sit to do this business until the 25th April. After that the Budget Committee will convene to review your comments on the National Budget Framework. I want to remind you about that.

Secondly, in the gallery we have students from Ndejje Senior Secondary School in Katikamu South, represented by hon. Makubuya, our Attorney-General. Please join me in welcoming them to this House. They are here with one of their patrons. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 31st March when the Minister of Finance laid the National Framework Paper on Table, I made a request to the effect that Parliament needed to be furnished with reports in regard to sections 15 and 17 of the Budget Act. I made specific reference to what was required under sections 15 and 17 because these reports are required by law and in particular by the Budget Act. 

I still want to state that these reports are very important to the sessional committees that are reviewing the national framework paper. We need to have the three reports, which have to be laid on the Table on a quarterly basis in accordance with section 15. These are the reports on exemption of tax and then the reports which should have been laid in accordance with Section 17, on the Appropriation-in-Aid. So I appeal to the Ministry of Finance to make a pronouncement here on when Parliament will receive these reports. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe I should draw the attention of Ministry of Finance to Section 15. You are required to have laid the reports on exemptions before the 31st day of September, the 31st day of October, the 31st day of March and the 31st day of April. I do not know if the minister wishes to say something. Under Section 17, the reports are also quarterly. 

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, MICRO-FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I wish to make an undertaking to present the report in two weeks’ time. We discussed this yesterday in our top management meeting and we were concerned that we had this obligation, which we have not executed. So I beg to be given two weeks to present the reports. 

3.02
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to remind the House and the concerned committee that on 12 March 2008, I presented a petition from the Banakazadde ba Uganda. In that petition, the petitioners were urging government to build a structure for the Sickle Cell Anaemia sufferers. 

We have only one unit in Mulago Hospital and there are no others elsewhere. So they were saying that government should build for us a structure to house these people both in wards and in their offices. They do their work in the clinic; that is where you find the doctors and the sicklers.

We are also urging government to come up with a policy that gives attention to Sickle Cell Anaemia and let us have enough drugs for the patients. If you go to hospital, you may not even find aspirin or folic acid to relieve the pain of these patients. 

We are also requesting government to come up with a policy for every referral hospital to have a unit where Sickle Cell sufferers can be looked after by the right people who know how to care for them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Health explain the one year’s delay in coming back to this House? What are you doing bout the sickle cell patients?

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are doing research on that and within a few days, we will issue a report. 

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. When you go through the Budget Framework Paper, there are so many unanswered questions and recommendations which this House needs answered. They would require our ministers who are here to confront the problem and particularly the Minister of Finance should answer those issues. I request the Minister of Finance to be available to at least appear in every committee to have some of these issues put right. There was a certain amount of money for a certain activity, and we all know the activity never took place but the money is still hanging. We would want some of those questions answered in our committees so that we would have a better budget this financial year. 

There is an example of the Parliament chamber; they said the money was available but it was not put to use. We would like these people to come and answer these questions. There are so many unanswered questions within the Budget Framework Paper. 

The trips abroad for the ministers of Finance should be minimised so that they can be available to the committees and answer the questions so that we can have a better budget this year. Thank you.

3.04
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national concern. Some time last year when I was going through my constituency, the eastern region, I came across two companies, TEEM Co. Ltd and Dutch International. They were collecting money from the people and at the end of the day, our people were fleeced. I brought this concern to the Office of the Speaker who advised me to write to the Minister of Internal Affairs for intervention. I wrote, on the 23rd October last year, but to date I have not received any response. 

What perturbed me most is the report from Uganda Bureau of Statistics concerning poverty indicators in Uganda. Busoga was on top, followed by other districts in the eastern region. They forget that at the time this was being done, people were being fleeced. Taking Shs 30 billion out of a population is not something small. However, up to now we have not received any report concerning the proprietors of these companies and how this money can be recovered. What I want to know from the minister is the steps he has taken to have this issue solved. Thank you.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, MICRO-FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me begin by responding to hon. Nathan Byanyima. When we are invited, it is our obligation to attend these committees. We only need co-ordination so that we do not end up being invited to so many meets at the some time yet we are few. I do not see how the ministers in the Ministry of Finance can refuse to come when we are invited by committees to answer certain questions. So, I urge my colleagues to invite us any time they feel we are of importance.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. Hon. Nathan Byanyima talked of the Ministry of Finance minimising trips; the experience that we have been having is that during the time we are considering budgetary issues, the Minister of Finance would say, “Well, I have gone to New York to attend a meeting with IMF or World Bank”. That is the concern. 

What he is saying is that let the ministers be there. I agree with you on the need for coordination so that you do not get invited to too many meetings at a go. However, could the ministers minimise the trips – particularly the substantive minister - during the time of considering the budget?

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we have greatly minimised trips because we cannot afford to find the logistics for them. The ministry is invited too much, both internally and externally. In my portfolio, for example, the invitations come from you colleagues, and they come not only on weekends but even on parliamentary days. I have to interact with the people to enable them internalise the policy for Prosperity-for-All and micro-finance. However, we try to minimise. It is one minister who goes to Washington; actually hon. Syda Bbumba is preparing to go and hon. Fred Omach takes over the responsibility of the portfolio. Today, my other colleagues are outside and I am here to stand in for them. 

What is important is co-ordination; once you are co-ordinated, you cannot fail to execute the work. That is why I requested you to forward to us the invitations. Our ministry headquarters are just next door. We may not pass by Parliament to check in our pigeonholes but at least pick a phone and say, “Where are you minister, we expect you to be in this meeting?”

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, in the previous budget, the Budget Committee with all the chairpersons wanted to look at the report and interact with the Minister of Finance so that they could consider the recommendations and reallocations but we could not get any minister at all. Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa might be a different breed, but the person who was in the chair was very arrogant and could not even say sorry. 

What we want is for you to be part of us. As for the co-ordination, do it yourselves; coordinate yourselves. We want these Members of Parliament to pass the budget and the Budget Act gives us a chance to do this; we no longer get the budget as a confidential report. So we want you people to work with us. If you have made any reallocations, approve so that we can have a harmonised budget. After all, we want something tangible out of the budget, not expenditure that has no effect on the ground. Thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I have taken note and I do still confirm to you that if you invite us, we will be there. You are talking about history of which I am not privy. So I have taken note and I promise we shall try to do our best.

Hon. Balyejjusa talked about people who fleece others of their money. We have had a problem of absence of a regulatory framework to monitor the groups of people because they fall under Tier IV, which is not monitored and regulated by the Central Bank. The Central Bank stops at Tier III. As I speak now, the final draft of the regulatory framework is complete and the last stakeholder we consulted was the Governor of the Central Bank. 

The Central Bank is going to be given the responsibility to regulate under a new micro-finance regulatory authority, which is going to be created under this regulation I am talking about. So I want to promise my colleagues that the gap that has been missing in our legal framework is going to be bridged. We shall not go through the experience that the Governor of the Central Bank went through when he sued COWE and he ended up losing the case and had to compensate COWE, which had already stolen peoples’ money. It was because of that gap. So, we shall try as much as possible to expedite the process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, the problem of lack a regulatory framework has been a common problem here every year. I really hope that you are not going to treat this like any other law. The population has suffered. I went to Kapchorwa and I found the same people had taken Shs 4 million. I went to Kumi, I found the same thing. Of course the Basoga were completely fleeced. So it is very urgent. 

MR TOSKIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When this matter came to this House some time last year, government was tasked to go and find out what exactly had happened and then report to the House. There was an outcry from every part of this country. We wanted government to use its machinery to go out there and come out with a report and inform Parliament what had happened and why things happened that way. Even before they come up with regulatory laws, we need that information. We want to know exactly how much damage was done to the population. This is a serious matter. Thank you. 

3.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to supplement the information which has been provided by the Minister of Micro-finance. It is true that in eastern Uganda there are groups that have swindled large sums of money. Reports have been provided by different offices, RDCs and the Police in the districts where these groups have been operating. 

What I know is that some people who have been operating in the TEEM and Dutch International offices in Eastern Uganda had been arrested and have appeared in court. It is true that the Inspector General of Police has been contacted by Ministry of Finance to pursue investigations so that the entire network can be taken control of. 

As I speak, the Prime Minister’s Office has requested both the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to take up this matter so that a comprehensive report is provided to this House with regard to the activities of these organisations – Dutch International and TEEM. This is so that we can be in a position to reassure the populace that there are sufficient measures that are being taken to contain this vice, and to ensure that this kind of thing does not continue happening in the countryside. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As mentioned by hon. Toskin, it is not the first time we are talking about these kinds of organisations. A commitment was made last year when the issue came up in Parliament. I think the right thing to do now is for us to get a timeframe as to when we shall get these reports. 

It was last year when this issue came up, it has come up again and we have not yet got the report that we were promised last year about Dutch International and TEEM, and the amount of money people have lost in the various districts in regard to this issue. So, maybe the Executive can give us a timeframe within which we shall get this report. 

3.18
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to talk about lack of electricity in Arua District. For three months, Arua District has been in total darkness. We know that electricity runs a lot of activities; all the business people, hospitals and other activities are at a standstill in Arua. 

When I went home, many people came to my house and asked me what happened to electricity and what WENRECO was doing. We have a company called WENRECO which is supposed to supply electricity to Arua District, but these people have totally failed to avail electricity to the people. 

Our biggest problem is that we were informed that there is Nyagak Hydro Electricity Power Station being built but up to now, there is no information to the people of Arua District about it and the people are desperately in need of electricity. They were planning to demonstrate but I told them to wait because I was taking the matter to Parliament where the minister responsible for energy will be able to give us ample information about electricity. The people are desperate for electricity. Work has come to a standstill. So, the minister responsible, please act because the people are desperate. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the outgoing minister can answer on both the other one and this one. I am sure he knows what has happened to Nyagak. 

3.20 
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start with the issue of the MDIs, the groups that have been fleecing our people in eastern Uganda - TEEM, ACID, Dutch International, and so on. 

This matter came up on the Floor on 18th November and as I clearly indicated, the Office of the Prime Minister has requested both the Ministry of Finance and the Minister of Internal Affairs to pursue this matter seriously. One, we want to contain the vice but also to make sure that they come here to the Floor of the House and apprise Parliament on what has exactly happened and what collective measures are being taken to ensure that we do not have a repeat of this because it has serious political ramifications. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give an undertaking. I am saying it does not have to be two weeks; it may be next week but we have these new instructions we have issued to attend to the budget in committees. If it were not for that, I would try to make sure that next week we have a comprehensive statement on this matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, it is important for us to adjourn those committees and come and discuss this. If you are ready, just let us know and we shall adjourn the sessional committees.  

MR MIGEREKO: I will be in constant touch with your office, Madam Speaker. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The only way to curb this vice is to have in place a regulatory framework. Members will want to know that during the current year’s financial budgeting process, the Ministry of Finance undertook at that time to present two pieces of legislation. One of them was the SACCO Act that was meant to have come to this House in the form of a SACCO Bill by the end of September 2008. There was also an undertaking that a Bill for the regulatory authority for all those Tier IVs would be in this House and actually be passed and enacted by the end of December 2008. 

Those were very serious undertakings and funds were allocated for those activities. So, if you talk about two weeks from today, then what are we talking about? How can we know now it is two weeks when September was not met and December was not met too? I thank you. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the two weeks are not for bringing a regulatory framework. This is what I understood. I wanted to begin by correcting that. Within two weeks, Parliament needs a report on Dutch International, TEEM and other groups that have been fleecing people. 

I was only informing Parliament, before my colleagues rose on points of information, about how far we have gone in the establishment of the regulatory framework. I had informed you that we made the last consultation with the Governor Bank of Uganda. Probably what I had not told you is that we took in consideration the advice from the Members of Parliament, I think on the Budget Committee, who said that we should bring the whole regulator regulating Tier IVs instead of bringing only the SACCO specific regulator. So, we have combined all that and we are bringing a document, which will be followed as usual by regulations that will enable the implementation of this regulator. 

I am not in a position to attach a timeframe but I will say that we are trying to handle this expeditiously because it is curtailing our movement in the formation of SACCOs throughout the country. 

3.25
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity, and yesterday I was in your office to that effect. 

I rise on a very important issue of national concern, that is, the recently published report by Human Rights Watch, an international organisation –(Interruption) 

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, hon. Migereko was still giving us information on how he is going to handle the issues we raised here on the Floor. He had just finished with the issue of micro-finance institutions and we were expecting the second response on electricity, WENRECO, raised by the hon. Member of Parliament from West Nile. So, maybe he could finish and then hon. Otto will come in with his issue. Thank you. 

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to thank hon. Akol for her intervention. 

The issue of electricity supply in the West Nile region is a very serious matter which we have been trying to grapple with for quite some time. I was here some two weeks ago and I tried to provide a response to the concerns raised by hon. Arumadri. He had raised the issue of lack of electricity supply from the WENRECO, HFO power station in Arua. It is true we have been having some problems with WENRECO which holds the concession for power supply to the West Nile region. 

As I speak, there is an advert running in the papers issued by the Electricity Regulatory Authority indicating that they may have to withdraw the licence issued to WENRECO on account of failure to perform. WENRECO was issued with a licence to start generating electricity using a heavy fuel oil plant as they await construction and completion of the Nyagak Hydro Power Station. 

As I indicated at that time, there were essentially two issues that were causing problems. One was funding; WENRECO was having problems financing the procurement of heavy fuel oil to continue supplying power to the West Nile region. The other one was the delay in the completion of construction of Nyagak Hydro Power Station. This can be attributed to the contractor who was given the contract to do the construction. Our view in government is that the contractor was not doing a good job and there was need to terminate the contract. 

The independent power producer, WENRECO, was of the view that the contractor would be in a position to complete construction provided a more competent sub-contractor was brought on board. Our view in government was that government should step in and take over this concession. We had to approach the Attorney-General for advice on how to handle the legal implications of government stepping in. I am sure the Attorney-General has now advised the Ministry of Energy on the appropriate arrangements to pursue in order to step in without any serious ramifications. 

I had promised at that time that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development would come here and issue a statement on the state of affairs of the WENRECO concession. I have formally written to the minister and I am sure fairly soon, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development will come here and authoritatively apprise the House on what is happening to the WENRECO concession. I thank you. (Mr Arumadri rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t we wait for the Minister of Energy to tell us what has happened to WENRECO?

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, while you were not in the Chair yesterday, I raised this matter because the Ministry of Finance brought a request to borrow money to provide electricity to areas which already have electricity. Today, I am seeing another piece of paper to ask for more money in the line of providing electricity to the neighbours. Now these loans will also be paid by those of us in West Nile who are in darkness. It is morally wrong! It is unethical to request me to repay a loan to provide power to somebody who already has power when I am in darkness. 

I wanted these papers to be withdrawn so that the element of connecting West Nile to the national grid is also included. If the Minister is coming here to make a statement short of us being connected to the national grid, we do not want that statement. I also did advise Ugandans that our eyes are wide open; we shall not be allowed to be pushed politically against the wall. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I can fully understand the sentiments of hon. Arumadri on this matter. I would however like to assure hon. Arumadri and the people of West Nile that the requisite funding - the funds that are required to address the problems of power supply in West Nile – is in place. The funding to ensure that there is a steady flow of electricity in West Nile region has been procured; it is just a question of sorting out the requisite financial and legal arrangements. I am sure we should be in a position to commence on work in that region. 

3.34
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I was talking about an issue of national concern that a reputable international organisation called Human Rights Watch has published in relation to Uganda. My good friend, hon. Amama Mbabazi, should be having a copy.  

This report is very disturbing. I will later lay it on Table so that they can produce it for all Members of Parliament to read. It states that there are safe houses being run in Uganda specifically at Kololo Hill Drive. The report has documented 106 cases of illegal detention and instances of torture using electric shock in those government facilities. Interestingly, the report also states those who are still in detention in that particular safe house in Kololo. There are very many names here like Higenyi, Sadala, Hamza, and Mwebaze. And in a greater instance you will see Col Mugira also admitting in a letter, I think the producers of this report blackmailed him and published it, admitting that actually, there are people in those detention centres who have been kept from 2002 and others from 2008 to date. 

For those of us who want to –(Interruption) 

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, hon. Odonga Otto, for giving way. Madam Speaker, as he is presenting the report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not presenting any report. There is no request to present a report. 

MR SEBULIBA: No, that information. The information I wanted to give is that in my constituency there is a person who has been tortured badly by JATT (the Joint Anti Terrorism Taskforce). So, I think it is a welcome move for such reports to be laid on Table such that we can find a remedy. That man cannot walk. They gave me this information yesterday and I think it is savages that worked on that man, and they can work on anybody because the kind of treatment they gave him; at the joints he cannot bend. It is terrible! Somebody just told those people that he had a gun when actually he did not have it. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, my concern is not in any way to jeopardise how security is run in this country. We all note that this country hosted CHOGM and we appreciate the role the different security organisations played to ensure that CHOGM was a success. But honestly speaking, this Parliament has an obligation to ensure that all those who are arrested in Uganda are detained in gazetted places. So, what I want to understand from the minister in charge are two concerns: 

One, is that safe house in Kololo gazetted? 

Two, the methods of torture being administered in that safe house, like electric shock, hon. Aggrey Awori knows how we used to oppose those safe houses those days before he had gone to the other side. (Laughter) 

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, while I am familiar with the honourable person on the Floor, while I am also familiar with the utterances, at the same time I am familiar with my own history and this august House is aware of my democratic background –(Laughter)- is he in order to imply that I have been, at some stage in my history, associated with atrocities and illegal detention of persons?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I think you want to raise issues about that report; you want to know whether the government is aware. Do not insinuate anything against other Members. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much but what I was saying is that, those days we used to work together with hon. Aggrey Awori in opposing safe houses. So, I am just giving him compliments and I hope now that you are on the other side you can also be of help. 

My concern is –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Otto. I got up to give you information and the information I want to give hon. Otto is that on the 28 of this month, the Mayor of Hoima, Mr Atugonza, was kidnapped by people we did not know. And we have been following him because he is from the Forum for Democratic Change. We have followed up this matter and yesterday evening we actually were able to get individuals who had kidnapped Atugonza and brought him to the same safe houses you are referring to in Kololo Hill and then later in the day they dumped him in a police station and this afternoon he is being produced in court. So, hon. Otto, these safe houses are alive and well and government is aware about them. I think it is in the interest of government that people are kidnapped and kept in those safe houses. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you say what you want the government to do because this matter was not on the Order Paper?

MR ODONGA OTTO: I want the minister to tell this house: is that detention centre in Kololo a gazetted place for detaining people. 

Two, can the minister tell us whether the Uganda Police Force is not competent to do the noble job of arresting people, like the case is with the Mayor of Hoima? Why would you take gun-wielding men in civilian clothes? 

Thirdly, the minister should come and give a statement to Parliament in response to the entire Human Rights Watch report because it would be very good for the image of government. 

Lastly, the minister should tell us whether Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) still exists because all those who were arrested, in the admission by Col Mugira, are members of the ADF, so that we know the security status of this country. Or ADF is being used as a scapegoat to arrest politicians like opposition and FDC supporters. Can the minister respond? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you need to really lay that document on Table. I do not know its contents; I do not know the heading.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I want to lay on the Table a publication by Human Rights Watch, a report on Uganda entitled, “Open Secret”, on the theme, “Illegal Detention and Torture by the Joint Anti Terrorism Task Force in Uganda,” published in 2009. I beg to lay it on the Table. 

3.42
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I think that this is a matter that ought to be asked formally for an oral answer and I think maybe the Attorney-General would be the appropriate minister to handle these questions. (Interjections) The hon. Leader of the Opposition thinks I am still the Attorney-General. (Laughter)

3.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank my honourable colleague for making an allegation that allowed me to say something. I was not at any one time thinking that he was still the Attorney-General, although the newspapers report as if the President wrote to him to advise on the status of the IGG. But that was not the matter on the Floor. (Laughter)

I was actually going to rise at an appropriate time to raise the matter that my secretary-general raised. I have a handwritten letter by Maj. John Kazoora (Rtd) to the Inspector General of Police, on the issue of Atugonza that he surfaced at Old Kampala Police Station. But I also have a copy of today’s The Daily Monitor newspaper where it was alleged that this same Atugonza was reported in a meeting, where the hon. Amama Mbabazi accompanied the President on the patriotism mobilisation tour in Hoima, to be frustrating NRM mobilisation in Hoima and also frustrating government programmes and yet he is the Mayor of Hoima Municipality to the extent that he has been working and even government has come up with a proposal to elevate Hoima to a city. This suggests that the man is actually working very well. Otherwise, there would be no basis for bringing a request for Hoima to be elevated.

So, it is important that you my honourable brother, as Minister for Security, really say these things so that we hear from the horse’s mouth not from the mouth of the donkey.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I know that today is Thursday and the Members’ issues take precedence but some issues are so serious that they should be formalised so that we can get proper answers.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, Madam Speaker, that is all I was suggesting. Obviously, even if the question is directed to the Attorney-General because the Attorney–General handles issues of human rights in government, the Attorney-General would naturally consult those ministries that are directly connected with whatever allegations are contained in that report. 

So it is not to duck our responsibilities but simply to say, let the formal question come up and you will have a complete answer.

Let me briefly say that there are no safe houses, for purposes of illegal detention of Ugandans, known to me. There are no safe houses in the whole of the Republic of Uganda, for purposes of illegal detention of Ugandans or other people, known to me -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, hon. Members, I think let us have the matter formalised so that we can –

MR FRANCIS KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. There have been a lot of stories brought on this matter. There are a number of Ugandans who have suffered in these safe houses. So, for the Minister for Security to just say that he does not know, I think is really a very big insult to some of us who have this information. It would be prudent or even courteous and in respect of this House to say, “Let me go and find out about this House in Kololo.” But for you to say that these safe houses do not exist- is he in order to deny what he knows that exists? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is difficult for me to know what is inside the minister’s head. I find it difficult to decide whether he knows.

MR MBABAZI: Well, I must tender my sincere apologies to hon. Kiyonga for obviously not understanding the point I was making. I will repeat that there is no safe house in the whole of Uganda, to my knowledge, set up or in place, for purposes of illegally detaining people. And that is a very clear statement on which -(Interruptions)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This country and this government have got a Human Rights Commission. Every year, the Human Rights Commission issues reports that are forwarded to this House and referred to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on which I sit. It is detailed in each and every report and there are instances of safe houses where people are being detained illegally and tortured. This is a government agency. The reports are with us as Parliament.

Is the minister in order to come with a straight face and lie to this House that he does not know yet it is documented in the Human Rights Commission’s reports and the reports are in this House? When you tell a lie, knowing very well that it is a lie and the lie is not believed by the one to whom you are telling it, you do not look so good.

Is the minister, therefore, in order to lie to us when it is very clear in that human rights report? In fact, Madam Speaker, I wish we had known this was coming; we would have carried those reports and given instances of illegal safe houses and illegal detentions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not think you need to carry those reports because I think the Business Committee has asked the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee to write the reports quickly so that they can be debated. Perhaps I can ask hon. Tashobya to tell us where they stand.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Certainly this is not the appropriate time to discuss the details of the reports, which we have concluded and in a short time shall be producing to this House.
 
I just wanted to set the record straight that in the course of the hearings from different institutions, including the Human Rights Commission, we got information and it is on record that for the last two years, for 2007, 2008 and 2009, there are no reports of safe houses -(Interjections)- yes, there are no matters of safe houses reported in those reports. It is on record! And may I also add, now that the Shadow Attorney-General -
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you want me to rule on a report which I have not read? Please, the reports are going to come to this House and we shall debate all of them. I will create time for all of them.

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker I have, as always, no problem. Whether it is information or whatever -
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR MBABAZI: I will give it.

MR KAWANGA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. In light of what is taking place on the Floor of this House this afternoon, it is absolutely important that all Members of Parliament get a copy of what has been presented here because it has generated debate and yet people do not know the contents of the document. I do not know how quickly we can get hold of that report.

Secondly, it appears it is important that we immediately debate the issue of safe houses after getting the human rights reports. It is not a matter which we should rush over or cower away from suddenly. It generates a lot of ill feelings. It gives a bad image of this country and I pray that we get an early date on which to debate that report together with the human rights reports regarding safe houses. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I am sure the reports of the Human Rights Commission do not only touch on safe houses; they touch on many things. I think what we should do is to ask the committee to hasten the process and bring the reports here and we debate them in full. There may be other aspects we want to touch on. So, hon. Tashobya when will you be ready?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to say that the committee has fully discussed the reports from 1999 up to 2007 and in two weeks time we should be able to submit these reports to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, I undertake to give it time on the Order Paper for these reports.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the minister. He says that he does not know of any safe house in the Republic of Uganda which is illegally detaining Ugandans or other people. The clarification I am seeking is, may he therefore know of a safe house in Uganda which can legally –(Laughter)- detain Ugandans or other people? Is it also possible that if there are any safe houses illegally detaining people, we can take it that he is not aware but that those safe houses may be there? (Laughter) Because when I heard the minister make that statement, I thought it was very interesting. One, if they are there he is not aware. Two, they may be there but legally. Can he clarify?

MR KAWUMA: Thank you. The further clarification I would also seek from the minister is whether the ungazetted illegal detention houses have another name other than “safe houses”.

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, all detention centres are gazetted. I am not responding to this report. We will respond to it formally. I was just assuring Members of this Parliament and the country at large that there are no safe houses which - and I repeat this in spite of what my honourable friend Abdu Katuntu stated using words obviously I know to be un-parliamentary language, because to say that I am telling a lie, he ought to substantiate that. Otherwise, it is a very serious allegation. There are no safe houses which have been put up in Uganda and are in place for purposes of illegal detention or torture of people. 

Having said that, it does not imply that there are unsafe houses maybe which are used for illegal detention. I had occasion, many years ago, to say that the question of safe houses has nothing to do with the detention of people or torture. “Safe house” is a term used literally to mean a place where you carry out your work safely. There may be many places where there is work that is being carried out safely but not for any of the purposes mentioned here. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are in breach of rule 60 as we are speculating what the report will contain and on so many other matters. Let us await the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and we shall debate the contents of those reports. This is because I cannot guess what is in there. Please, let us abide by their time frame. Bring them quickly as the country wants to know what is happening.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, MICROFINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the request of government to borrow UA 7,590,000 from the African Development Fund (AfDB) of the ADB Group to finance the interconnection of electric grids of the five Nile Equatorial Lake countries. The information about the whole project is entailed in this report. I beg to lay on the Table –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are assaulting the microphone.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I apologise. You know we from the mountains always shake things a bit. 

It is true that this loan request is going to the Committee of National Economy but at times I don’t think it is necessary for us to burden our committees with some of the requests, which are not good. In Uganda, you cannot go and feed your neighbour’s children when yours are not yet satisfied. West Nile is complaining, Bugisu is complaining - we feel that this thing should not go -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we don’t have enough information until our committee has perused and reported back. This House has rejected loans before. We have - when we are not satisfied - it is committed to the Committee of National Economy. They will report back and we can dismiss it if you don’t want it. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE AFFAIRS OF THE NATIONAL DRUG AUTHORITY

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I am just rising on a procedural matter because I got a copy of what should have been today’s Order Paper and in that copy, the next item should have been ministerial statements. This is because yesterday the Speaker directed that government comes up with ministerial statements first on the issue of patriotism that was on the Order Paper last week and that disappeared and also on the issue of what the President said when he was in West Nile. 

A commitment was made - and I have just sent for a copy of the Order Paper. I came very relaxed and I didn’t alert the chairperson of the committee responsible because the indicative item on that Order Paper did not include this. I know that the prerogative to publish the final Order Paper lies with the Office of the Speaker through the Clerk but I am not so sure whether we should not stick to things that we had agreed to do on record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had issued a draft Order Paper in the morning containing all those items but at 12.30 p.m. I was informed that all those three ministers are not available; so I saw no point in putting them on the Order Paper.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true I also got the Order Paper, which our Leader of the Opposition is talking about. Despite the fact that there are changes in the Order Paper, I seek your indulgence that I also lay this report on the Table because it seems that any minute these Order Papers can be -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they can only be changed if you come to the Speaker and request for a change. You cannot do so on the Floor of this House.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

4.08
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS, & ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2008” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, once again. The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2008 was read for the first time in this Parliament on 2 April 2008. The object of the Bill is to amend the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 to provide for the use of government or public resources for political party organisation activities. 

We are in the era of multi-party democracy, which is still young in Uganda. Therefore, there is need for a provision which should enable the political parties to be funded in one way or another so that they can strengthen their bases to contribute to good governance.

Political parties and organisations are public institutions which are accountable to the people of Uganda. The state is therefore under obligation to facilitate the parties and organisations in their activities.

It is difficult to find other viable means of supporting political parties and organisations other than by funding from the state; the state has a duty to nurture and develop political parties and organisations more so in a young democracy like Uganda.

The non provision of state funding to political parties and organisations would expose them to solicit for donor aid which may compromise national interest, integrity and their independence. Funding or facilitating the activities of the political parties is not entirely unique to Uganda – we have examples of peace as a good practice from other developing countries and developed countries.

I note that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has studied the proposed amendments and understood the basic mission of this Bill. I thank them for the good work they have done. I beg to move.
 
4.14 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the committee on the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2008. 

Introduction

The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2008 was read for the first time on 2 April 2008 and it was referred to the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The committee considered the Bill in accordance with rule 133(a) and rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Methodology

The committee discussed the Bill with the following:
1. 	The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
2. 	The Electoral Commission
3. 	The Democratic Party
4. 	The Forum for Democratic Change
5. 	The Uganda People’s Congress
6. 	People’s Progressive Party
7. 	Justice Forum
8. 	People’s Development Party
9. 	Movement for Democratic Change
10. 	Inter-Political Parties Forum 
12. 	Congress Service Volunteers
13. 	National People’s Organisation
14. 	National Resistance Movement Organisation

The committee also received a memorandum from the National Convention for Democracy Party. 

The committee also made reference to:
1. 	The 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda
2. 	The Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005
3. 	The Presidential Elections Act, 2005
4. 	The National Audit Act, 2008
5. 	The Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003

The committee also had a comparative study of similar laws in other jurisdictions such as South Africa and Kenya that have existing legislations in the planning of political parties.

Objective of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to amend the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 to provide for the use of government or public resources for political party organisation activities. 

The multi-party democracy is still developing and there is need for a provision which should enable the political parties to be funded in one way or the other so that they can strengthen their bases to provide good governance. The Bill also states that there are no other viable means of supporting political parties and organisations other than the state funding.

The state has a duty to nurture and develop political parties and organisations more so in a young democracy like Uganda to safeguard against total dependence on donor funding.

Observations

The committee observed that political parties/organisations are public institutions set up to serve the common good of the people. The parties or organisations are accountable to the people. The state like in other democracies has an obligation to support them. 

Provision of state funding to political parties/organisations gives them the opportunity and ability to maintain national interests and integrity. Non provision of state funding exposes political parties or organisations to solicit and depend on donor aid which may compromise their national interest, integrity and independence. 

Whereas the object of the Bill states that there are no other viable means of supporting political parties or organisations other than the state funding, the committee observed that there are other lawful sources of funding available to political parties or organisations. 

Political parties/organisations provide the pool of talent from which candidates are drawn and they mobilise for electorates at the registration and election stage.

Whereas an election serves as the final process in the recruitment to office, it was observed that political parties/organisations shape the nature of the electoral decisions through selection and nomination of candidates at the primary level.

Funding is to be extended to registered political parties/organisations represented in Parliament in order to eliminate political parties that may be formed for the sole purpose of obtaining the funds from government without any agenda of influencing the political process or sponsoring any political agenda.

The Bill does not provide for sanctions against political parties/organisations that fail to comply with the provisions on accountability of the funds contributed to them by the government. 

The committee also observed that the Presidential Elections Act, 2005 provides for a contribution of a sum of one thousand currency points to the presidential candidates to be used solely for elections.

The Bill does not specifically spell out which elections shall be financed by the government on equal basis.

The committee recommends that the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2008 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum members of the committee, you are free to debate.

4.22
MR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do remember hon. Tashobya presenting his minority report; I have two clarifications to seek from him. I have seen here that a number of other Members especially on the Opposition Side have not signed this report. I would like to know whether we shall not have another minority report on this matter and whether these Members did participate in the proceedings of this committee. Thank you.

4.23
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for this report. I want to make some general observations and I have shared this previously with the Attorney-General. I am concerned that the amendments to the Political Parties and Organisations Act and other electoral laws are coming in piecemeal. 

I am also concerned that since its first passing in 2005, there are issues that the Attorney-General should have handled by now. For instance, the code of conduct for the political parties is not yet here, the parties consultative forum is not yet operational as provided in that same law and as you recall, the President attempted at one time to take over this role and he invited us for as few cups of tea until the process finally died out.

I am concerned that this piece meal review of these laws is going to impact heavily on the democratisation process and indeed the upcoming elections. By now this House would be handling electoral reforms and I am worried that the amendments to the relevant laws will come too late and we will not have the opportunity to internalise them.

Those are the general observations I would like the Attorney-General to note and I am hoping that the government will concern itself with the immediate review of the relevant laws so that we as political parties are strengthened in the processes that concern governance in this country.

I note that the committee talks about other sources of funding for the parties and I want to tell this House that speaking as the Secretary-General of the Forum for Democratic Change, we have tried to explore, for instance, the sale of party cards. Unfortunately, there is a big difference between the government presenting these proposals for funding and the government that mans the institutions that we meet when we try to sell party cards; we are tear-gassed; we are harassed; we are hounded and locked up even when we just want to sell party cards to raise our own money. 

Government should harmonise its position that political parties should be strong enough to raise their own money - the government that is represented in the House now by the Attorney-General and the one that presides over the police force that scatters political party members when they go to various places to sell their party cards. I would like to insist that the operating environment has been very harsh. If you tried to raise money as a political party in this country - if you go to traders, they fear to identify with you because in the next minutes after you leave, they will be harassed by state operatives. I would like to insist that we have been tear-gassed and arrested while trying to raise money as a political party. 

Madam Speaker, if the operating environment does not change, even the little money that is being provided for in this amendment will not be helpful. I presume that it is going to be little money.

Having said that; let me get to the specifics. I would like to - as suggested by the committee that public funding be extended to political parties - see political parties being accountable to the taxpayers of this country. Already, in the Political Parties and Organisations Act, there are provisions that demand that all parties submit their audited accounts, a statement of liabilities and assets to the Electoral Commission. 

I would like anybody to get up and tell me that the NRM has done it. Up to now the NRM, the party governing this country; has not submitted audited accounts –(Interjections)– you can lay them on Table if you have them! I know that my counterpart, the Secretary-General of the NRM Party, knows that he only accounted for Shs 20 million that was given for the presidential elections. If we are going to use taxpayers’ money, parties must account for it. They must behave in a transparent way. If up to now the ruling party itself cannot present these statements of accounts, and they are going to preside over a process where such money is going to be advanced to political parties, I fear we will not be doing the right thing to the taxpayers of this country. We would like to see audited accounts!

I would like to pride that in the FDC I do it very regularly. If you go to the Electoral Commission now, you find everything up to date. If you asked me to bring them here, I can do so to demonstrate that political parties must account for every coin that they use.

I also would like to insist that the formula – because it is not provided for – for dispatching this money should be discussed. It should be an issue for the stakeholders to know. The reason is: we do not want the minister to sit alone and say that, “Let FDC get US $30,000 and the NRM gets 100,000”. That would not be fair. We should be made to know what the formula for giving out this taxpayers’ money is going to be. 

I entirely agree that there are briefcase organisations – in this country we have over 30 registered political parties some of which have never vied for even an LC III by-election. They just do not have their addresses anywhere; you cannot locate them anywhere in this country. So I would like to agree with the committee that it would be wrong to advance taxpayers’ money to such entities unless they have a proven existence. All in all, let us have the formula clearly stipulated to let each of us know what each political party is going to get.

Finally, I had thought –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, please protect me from my colleague hon. Dorothy Hyuha who has not accounted for monies to the Electoral Commission. (Laughter) I would like to observe that the committee needs to –(Interjections)– I do not know why I am being harassed by my colleagues. Maybe let them first tell the House if they have accounted because they haven’t. The Secretary-General of the NRM and his deputy are harassing me seriously. Can you prove yourselves worth the money? They haven’t! Madam Speaker, please protect me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I can see is that they are all smiling at you. (Laughter)

MRS HYUHA: I am just being excited that she delivered a baby. I last saw her when she was full; I am not excited about her contribution and I would like to congratulate her. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you. I would like to say that I appreciate the diversion as presented by hon. Dorothy Hyuha. As you noticed, these days I come late and leave early because this Parliament has not addressed the issue of those children that we produce as legislators; we have nowhere to keep the children. That is why we come here, attend the meeting half the time – that is why hon. Dorothy, you do not see me; I offloaded long ago. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my Secretary-General for giving way. I would like to say that I am the Deputy Treasurer-General of the party called the Forum for Democratic Change. Under the Political Parties and Organisations Act, all political parties should account for their monies to the Electoral Commission within three months after the end their financial year. Failure to do that such a party is supposed to be deregistered. And the documents regarding your accounts are public documents.

The information I would like to give is that it is true our Secretary-General delivered; it is true that hon. Hyuha delivered many years ago; she cannot deliver now, but it is also true that NRM-O has not presented their accounts to the Electoral Commission and yet they have never been deregistered. That selective application of the law is not right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I see that there are provisions for sanctions here. I am hoping that when we finally pass the Bill, the sanctions stipulated by hon. Tashobya’s committee will catch up with hon. Dorothy Hyuha and not with us.

I want to state one thing: the spirit of the report simply talks about political parties, the recruitment of candidates and vying for elections. I should think that if we are going to put money into political parties, there should be, first of all, an admission on our part that for a healthy democratic process in the country, we need strong viable parties as stakeholders. If you are talking about good governance, nurturing and accountability, you need strong and viable political parties and not the type of political parties that are harassed. 

So this question of funding is just a small component. We would like to see government do more than just say, “We are giving you funding.” We want to be treated as stakeholders in the governance and in the democracy processes in the country. I believe that will give us a healthy way forward. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.35
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report.

I have seen two words, “government” and “state” being used interchangeably. The two are not the same. The funding we are talking about will be provided by the state and not by government because government is also a political party and will be funded by the state. So, I would like to see the word “state” used where we are talking about funding political parties and not “government” because it is not government money. It is state money.

I also support the committee’s recommendation that the funds should be deposited with the Electoral Commission but definitely not the current Electoral Commission. This one is unacceptable; it is a partisan one. And I think the next thing before funds are disbursed should be to bring a Bill here to reform the Electoral Commission. We cannot continue having the type of Electoral Commission we have and giving public funds to that body to disburse. It is a partisan body and it will not be useful to this country.

So, Attorney-General, I hope you are listening. The next Bill you bring here should be about the reform of the Electoral Commission. 

Political parties and political organisations made presentations to the committee particularly about the formula for sharing these funds. My party, Uganda People’s Congress, made a presentation but I am surprised that even in the observations here, the committee is not making reference to these presentations. What happened? 

Our view in UPC is that 40 percent of these funds should be shared equally by parties in Parliament which have got at least two percent of the votes. We do not support the idea of using numerical strength in Parliament to share these funds.

I know in this country there is a tendency to give more to those who have -(Laughter)- but this time let us use public funds properly and give more to those who do not have so that we really build the weaker political parties to compete with this thing we have on the other side. That was our proposal. That 40 percent should be equally shared and the remainder shared out proportionately, not basing on the number of MPs in Parliament but on the number of votes obtained in the last elections by political parties. This should be both parliamentary votes and presidential votes so that we look at the voters instead of looking at the strength in Parliament. I would urge the committee to come out clearly on the formula for sharing the funds. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.40
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was not here when this Bill was presented for the first time but as the Democratic Party, we had observations. 

I share with hon. Okello-Okello that the views of the Democratic Party, which were expressed by our president, do not seem to be represented in the observations which have been written here and of which I was one of the authors. For instance, the language which is being used in the observation is a conning language and it derives from the apparent vulnerability in the sense of bankruptcy of the political organisations currently, in order to lure them to think that it is very prudent for them to get state funding. For instance, it is not true or necessarily true that non-funding of political organisations may make them vulnerable as to get funding from donors who can impart in them their values and not those they think. 

Political parties, especially the pre-existing political parties, not these new ones, have got ideological families to which they belong globally, and they have got global values they follow. Even without state funding, these values are global and we follow them and even with state funding we still contribute and can get contributions from the global ideological foundations to which we belong. This makes this one an observation on a wrong footing.

The second observation, which is the third observation here reads, “Whereas the object of the Bill states that there are no other viable means of supporting political parties…” and I think this one is also a sweeping statement. There could be other viable means as long as the ground is leveled. So I question the language, which is being used, which is a conning one. 

Let me go to the other important aspect within this Bill, which does not seem to be captured here and I relate it to another Bill that we passed here; the Road Fund Bill, which became an Act. We were promised a formula of sharing money between the national roads and the community roads. Since then, a formula has never been brought to Parliament. In the same way and reflecting on what hon. Okello-Okello has said, it seems as if we want to pass a Bill and bring a formula later. If that is done, we are going to see unfairness and lopsidedness as evidenced in other countries such as Tanzania. 

In our proposals, for instance, we suggested that if we are to fund political organisations, we needed to specify the areas in which political organisations across the board needed to be funded. However, I can see us going to fluke a provision, which was passed in the Parliament of Tanzania where Chama Chama Mpinduzi with numerical strength ended up getting the larger share of the money that was proposed by that Parliament. This is continuously strengthening the strong party and weakening the weaker party thereby making them more vulnerable and this is not the object of the Bill. I can see this because of the over enthusiasm and zealousness of the NRM members as they rise to support the Bill as it is. I thank you.

4.45
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for bringing this report, which is actually part of the democratic process in Uganda where parties are funded and given freedom to operate and reach out to communities. 

I am happy with this report because it has closed out briefcase parties, strategic parties and instances where the ruling party can create more parties in order to get money from the Consolidated Fund. I am also happy that you are going to – it is not my imagination but just what is happening. You remember in our referendum there were so many interesting activities that took place and you know what happened.

Madam Speaker, the issue of funding political parties is a good thing but we should also be clear in this House and set up guidelines as to the formula that we are going to use to fund these parties without discrimination.

I was privileged to be in Tanzania and I looked at how they are funding political parties. In most cases, you find that the formula used by Tanzania is benefiting the ruling party. They were using numerical strength in Parliament because they are the majority. However, they decided to set a minimum figure, which we can also do in Uganda. They did this for purposes of strengthening the young parties who have one or two representatives in the House. This helped in that if you have few members of Parliament, you can still get that minimum figure for operation.

For the case of Uganda, having large numbers is not given because tomorrow those numbers will not be there. As such, let us make this law without the thought of NRM numbers. We suggest that – I am independent and you know it - I was trying to do some calculations using the 2006 presidential elections. When I looked at the presidential results and computed them by a certain figure, you find that it is not fair to use presidential results. It is better to use the numerical strength in Parliament and after that set a standard figure for the young parties who have entered this House such that if one party has one representative here, they can say, “He or she gets US $10,000 and those with bigger numbers get according to the ratio”.

As regards democracy, a Member of Parliament who wins elections on an independent ticket also has operations to carry out in his or her constituency. This Bill should therefore consider funding independents so that - yes, this is democracy. For example, we are 42 independents here and that is a big numerical figure. We should be supported and that will be the beginning of democracy in this country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.49
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the committee for the report. Having read through the report, I find some areas that are wanting. First of all, there were 14 political parties that were consulted but from this report, you can see that most of the key recommendations of the political parties that were consulted were not considered. For instance, within UPC we had very serious debate concerning the criteria of funding political parties and especially regarding representation in Parliament.

You are aware that we have a young democracy and we want to build democracy in this country. Building democracy, in my view, is not in Parliament but is where the electorate can appreciate representation at all levels. If we consider numerical strength in Parliament as the basis for funding political parties, it could clearly manifest that bigger political parties are trying to suffocate and undermine democracy. Why do I say this? We want to have the growth of democracy in this country. The question of whether you are in Parliament or not does not arise when you are talking about practicing democracy. If we were able to allow our 30 political parties to be registered, why should we then focus ourselves, especially as Members of Parliament here, on the few that have had this chance for the first time to join this Parliament?

You may know that in future we shall even have over 10 political parties here. That is where we shall be faced with more challenges when we adopt these provisions in the Bill before us. I still think that the committee should have taken recommendations from these political parties seriously, if we are talking of empowering political parties and developing democracy.

Secondly, you are aware that in this Parliament we have about 38 Members of Parliament who represent the various constituencies as independents. I think they are part of democracy. We have provided for it; we have not actually thought of eliminating independents from this Parliament. Now, how do we now cater for them in our laws? They are equally represented in this Parliament. In any case, why should they be debating this Bill? They do not belong to these other political parties and this Bill does not consider them in any way. 

Unless some of the key recommendations are considered in this Bill, I do not support the motion. In addition, I have seen the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are these recommendations you are talking about?

MR ISHAA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I disagree with the idea of the funding of political parties being based on numerical strength in Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So what do you suggest? I wish you could propose something so that members can discuss and the minister can think about it.

MR ISHAA OTTO: Madam Speaker, as we have provided for in our Constitution, we agree that political parties can register themselves. Parties that have fully registered and we agree to as a country as existing political parties should all be considered and funded. This is for fair play in politics. To me, that would be the basis of developing democracy.

On the idea of saying some political parties are briefcase political parties, it is the duty and mandate of government to regulate whether they are briefcase or not. However, once we register them and we appreciate that they should participate in active politics or political activities, then we should be able to facilitate them equally. 

In this Parliament and in this country, we have been arguing that we do not have a good playing field for competition. This is really one area within the law. If I have one person in Parliament, this means the source of money that will be available to me to help me source for one or two others to join me in Parliament is limited. How will that political party grow? So, the party with the highest numerical strength, which has had the opportunity to benefit from the environment, will continue to be stronger and those with lower numbers in the House will continue to be weaker. In any case, the other political parties will be suffocated and blocked from politics.

There has been a very serious argument about the Electoral Commission, and I want to advance my points on the Electoral Commission. The committee recommended that the Electoral Commission will be the accounting institution for the funds given to political parties. 

You know that we had a very serious debate in this Parliament about suffocating the Electoral Commission with limited funds that they do desire, that they need to carry out their own work. You know that the Electoral Commission came to this Parliament crying about limited funds given to them. You also know that several political parties have not been accounting for the little money that is given to them. In the event that the Electoral Commission is not provided with these funds, how sure are we that with the limited power they have, which is actually fused directly by the state, they are going to manage these funds correctly?

Lastly, I think this Parliament has got a duty not only to protect the interests of those who are represented here but even those who are not yet represented in this Parliament but in future will be represented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerks, you are not observing the five minutes. Please, use that timer. Ring the bell at four minutes. 

4.58
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I hope my minutes have not been cheated. If we went by votes, we know our colleagues in the NRM would take their side -(Interjections)- yes! That is the order of the day. Listen to me if you went to school.

On page 2, the object is very clear; in 3.0, the last paragraph says that the state has a duty to nurture and develop political parties and organisations more so in a young democracy like Uganda. That is the object. We want the Attorney-General and our colleagues from the NRM to understand the object. If you are supposed to nurture democracy, you must pay for it. That is why we are calling on you; if you are going to fund political parties, we should not use it to fund the well-to-do parties and leave out the others. 

There are those basic needs that enable parties operate. There must be offices for everybody, there must be computers for everybody because they operate everywhere - those are basics, which we do not question.

Secondly, when you come to numerical strength in Parliament, I think that is where democracy is violated again; you have violated it from day one. Supposing a party went to contest elections and got 40 percent but never got any Member of Parliament? They got 40 percent, so what happens? Should they not be funded? 

The day to day activities we are talking about are not for Members of Parliament. The day to day activities are for the population. The moment you are talking about day to day activities, we should use the numbers outside, not the numbers in Parliament. This is because you are not applying the day to day activities to Members of Parliament.

If all of you have read the Budget Framework Paper, there is a provision of Shs 11.2 billion to cater for 80 deputy RDCs for youth, patriotism clubs for 5,000 secondary schools, patriotism secretariat - what are these? Is this another way of getting public money for the ruling party? If we are talking of democracy, how can we go for patriotism? There is no university or secondary school which teaches patriotism. This is something you see and you must live by example, and that is what we should practice. It does not take us 25 years after the bush where we fought to know that there is need for patriotism. 

We need to scrutinise that budget seriously. You come here and you have already got Shs 11.2 billion, now you want to use the numbers in Parliament. Surely, is that democracy? This budget is not funded by NRM; it is funded by the people of Uganda who are both from the Opposition and from the ruling party. It is very important that when we come to sharing, you do not use Parliament but we have to use the numbers outside, maybe like the numbers during presidential elections.

The Electoral Commission, I think, has no teeth. As our Secretary-General mentioned, the ruling party has never submitted accounts, no action has been taken on them -(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, we are just debating the law to allow government to fund political parties and organisations. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to allude to the fact that within the budget, which we have not even debated, there is a provision for funding the NRM, the ruling party? Is he in order to say that the money is put under patriotic clubs and the secretariat? Is he in order? Have we already debated the budget here? We are just debating the law to enable the state to provide funds for political parties and organisations. 

May I draw the attention of the hon. Member to our Constitution on the duties of a citizen; it says: “The exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms is inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations, and accordingly, it shall be the duty of every citizen -
(a) To be patriotic and loyal to Uganda and to promote its wellbeing ….”

Is the honourable member saying that patriotism belongs only to NRM? Why can’t you love your country? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us focus on the Bill. I have not seen that budget and I have said I am going to give you time to look at it until the 25th. Let us focus on this Bill. Let us do what is available now.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that I am a very bad student; I sometimes read ahead. These are books they gave us here and I read. I thought I would bring it up to Members for their information and understanding.

Coming to the Electoral Commission, there are always by-elections and the Secretary General and his deputy are always going to campaign for candidates using government resources. They go with red car number plates -(Interjections)- I have seen them! When they go there, they campaign and the Electoral Commission has never come up to stop those people from using government resources during campaigns, and you say that is the Electoral Commission to serve all of us! 

Having said that -(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to exhibit absolute ignorance of the law? As you know of course, and others I am sure know, the Parliamentary Elections Act, the Presidential Elections Act and the Local Governments Act prohibit candidates who hold positions in government from using government facilities at their disposal. Is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to introduce a law here which does not exist?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, please focus on the Bill. Leave the issues of the by-elections. That is not what we are dealing with. We are dealing with the funding of political parties. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker -(Ms Kiryapawo rose_) Is it information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you were donating your time. You were inviting somebody to speak. Please, hon. Kiryapawo.

5.08
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to thank the committee for the report. I have a few points to make. 

Like hon. Nandala was saying, the state has a duty to nurture and develop political parties. I support this very strongly because our political parties need nurturing and developing. Why am I saying this? During elections, even when organising by-elections in new districts and in areas where there has been death, you find people of the same party contesting, one as a flag bearer and another one standing as an independent. All of them use the same slogan of the party and the same colours. This means that we are still behind and we need to develop our parties.

That takes me to another point – whoever pays the piper chooses the tune. If the state does not fund our political parties, those who will fund them will choose the tune for us. The interests of our country will be lost and there will be no independence for our nation. That is why I support the idea that funding political parties should be for only those parties which are represented in Parliament and on numerical strength. 

Even when you contest, the person who gets the majority is the winner. Even the CDF which we get from here, we do not share it with those who contested with us because it is development for the whole constituency. Just as we are not sharing with those, we cannot also share with those who have the minority. It should be numerical strength.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague about the formula that should be adopted. Look at our side and on my left. Yes, numerically they are considered more than those here but there are people who ought not to belong to any political party yet you have added numbers to increase your strength numerically. I am talking about the Army. What are you going to do about representatives for the Army?

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Thank you for that information. We are saying that we even want to avoid briefcase parties. If we fund everybody, then we shall have those briefcase parties also being funded. 

Right now, there are parties which do not have a physical address; are those parties you think we can also fund? I am sure if we use numerical strength, it will make people who have the minority work hard so that they gain more. It is another way of encouraging you to work harder and God willing you may add. For us, it means we have to strengthen ourselves to maintain our numerical strength in this Parliament. I thank you.

5.13
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues to thank the committee for this report and at the same time thank government for initiating these amendments, which are geared towards strengthening democracy in our country. 

I would like to agree with the committee, particularly on recommendation six. Registering a political party alone is not enough. Sometime back, you remember one of our patriotic Ugandans called Mr Herman Ssemujju competed here in the presidential elections. This is a man who did not even have a registered office. When he went into self exile, upon his return he was claiming taxpayers’ money because he had qualified to be a presidential candidate. So the committee is correct to say that we eliminate political speculators who want to exploit the public because they have just registered a party. 

I am glad that the Political Parties and Organisations Act, which we passed here, emphasised that a political party must have a national character. I believe that this is the party that qualifies to be funded. Our history has shown that it was difficult for some people or a group of politicians to come and mobilise the population without using sectarian tendencies. This was detrimental to the country. Therefore, if we are coming as a State to fund political parties, they should be the right political parties.

The contentious issue that has been raised by our colleagues on the Opposition is funding depending on either numerical strength or any other factors. This is not a question of either over funding or under funding; it is proportional funding. 

When Members of Parliament are elected, they represent the voices of the people of Uganda. Members of Parliament or the institution of Parliament is a cardinal institution that represents the voices of the people of Uganda. The question of numerical strength is a clear manifestation that the voices of the people are actually appreciating the manifesto that that party presented to them during the election. So, it would not be fair, as my colleagues in the Opposition are suggesting, to say that parties that do not have majority mandate of the people get equal funding with the party that has majority mandate from the population. Is that fair?

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, our colleague holding the Floor would like to insinuate that whereas the majority party is largely represented in Parliament, the other political organisations do not have a national representation. Is he in order to insinuate so when he knows that political organisations that have been registered have a pre-qualification of having a national character?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know how you can define national character just by registration. Please, wind up.

MR KATURAMU: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. There is an issue I would like to point out which the committee kept silent about. This report, I agree, is emphasising funding. I also agree with the committee that if the State cannot come out to fund its own political parties, then other interest groups will come and fund them, and definitely we may not avoid politics of patronage. As I conclude on this matter –(Member timed out_)

5.20
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for the presentation. My concern is on number six, which is about funding. Funding political parties is a mature way of proving that our country is becoming democratic. I want to say that political parties, if not funded, can look out for any means that may not promote our country in terms of democracy.

However, I would like to emphasise that only those parties that are registered should be funded. I am saying this because, Madam Speaker, you are aware that when it is time for elections, there are many groups that mushroom as political parties. If they are registered and have a good following at the grassroots that is provable, they should be funded.

The Bill, we are told, does not provide for sanctions. However, I would like to say that sanctions should be provided for because we have seen individuals who have registered for presidential elections and after they have been given the money, they disappear in thin air. Later on they fail to provide accountability for the money they are given. That is why I am emphasizing that whoever is given this money does his accountability to the Electoral Commission. I thank you.

5.23
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to welcome you from the Easter holiday. I also would like to welcome back all the Members of this House.

I have three points to talk about. One is that I cannot see a better formula of sharing this money other than the bigger the party, the bigger the share. (Applause) I hope that will help other political parties to become big in future so they can also take a bigger share of this money. I do not see any other rationale and better formula other than that one.

Secondly, some Members may be worried about dependency on donor funding. I am also worried about a possibility of having a millionaire in your political party who can fund your party and dictate. So while you may be worried about money coming from outside, you should also think about the future. You could get a very rich person to put a lot of money into your political party but he will give you orders on whom to elect, how to behave, how to greet and so on. So at the end of the day, your democracy may not actually work internally in your own political party. I think we should think about that also. 

Lastly, funding may help young brilliant politicians who are upcountry. They may not have the funds to campaign but if a party has funds and it has identified a brilliant young politician, it can fund him or her to get elected to leadership. So, I really support this Bill and thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.25
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise in support of the motion although I would like to highlight a few issues. 

When you look at observation No. 4, it implies that political parties are mostly mobilised when we are going for registration and elections hence we are not able to mobilise our people so that they can participate in the democratic process right from the beginning. So, by having state funding, I think it will help political parties to do grass root mobilisation, not only during or towards elections, but throughout the entire period, a thing which I think has been lacking.

Also when you look at the issue of sharing this money, like hon. Okello-Okello has said, that 40 percent can be shared equally basing on the presidential candidates’ results. However, I can see that there are some parties like CP and JEEMA which are represented but did not field presidential candidates. So if you say that we go by that formula then those parties which did not field candidates, but actually have Members of Parliament in this House, might not be able to have a share of this fund. 

On the issue of other sources of funding, it might be a bit difficult especially when it comes to selling party cards. I will give an example. It might be hard for the National Resistance Movement Party to go and sell their cards, or our cards, in a constituency represented by someone on the Opposition. I cannot go to Bukedea and sell NRM cards; it might be hard for me -(Interruptions)- yes. I know what I am talking about because I know some Members of Parliament in this House who represent NRM but they cannot talk about NRM in their constituencies -(Interruptions)- yes! And there are those on the other side who cannot talk about their party in the constituencies. So it turns out to be a game of survival for the fittest. As such, it may also be hard to look at other sources.

I am a researcher and so I am talking from a knowledgeable point. When you look at the issue of registered parties, we are bound to have problems if we pass this law and say that all registered parties must have a share of this money. This is because out of the 30 registered parties, about nine are represented in this House. So why should you waste the taxpayer’s money on parties, which cannot even win an election and bring a Member of Parliament to this House? 

I think we should focus on strengthening our democracy but also look at the cost benefit analysis of the whole Bill. With that I beg that Members do accept and we pass this Bill with those amendments.

5.29
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Without claming to be an Obama, and yet if I may use his words, if anyone had any doubt about this government’s commitment towards the democratisation process of this country, today this Bill is your answer. 

I want to thank government for finally bringing this Bill -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I have been listening to hon. Bahati very carefully. I know that he is the treasurer of the NRM caucus. He has been saying that if we had any doubts about government’s commitment to democratisation, this is the proof that the NRM Government is committed. 

I stood here and put my case across about the difficult operating environment which parties in this country find themselves in - the lack of commitment to political and electoral reforms in this country which provide a very harsh environment and a challenge to preparation of elections in this country. Is he, therefore, in order to assume that just by giving some token money, that will demonstrate commitment to supporting political parties in this country when there is a bigger issue that must be addressed for the well-being of the political parties and to help them perform better? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think he was saying that now that the money is going to come, things will work better. I think that is what he was saying.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. I want to thank the committee for its report and to say that in my opinion, in order to be committed to the object of this Bill, I think we should probably, as we enter the Committee Stage, include in this Bill a clause that will say that at an appropriate time, a minister will bring guidelines on how this money and what it is going to do will be done and then it will be debated and passed by Parliament. 

Because while I agree that we have provided for money to do elections and day-to-day activities, I have concerns about the things that the parties are going to be allowed to fund. We need to specifically look at issues that are going to build and nurture these parties.

We need to specify, for example that this money is going to fund conferences, and other things that we know are going to build and nurture young political parties. If we leave things the way they are, they will also complicate issues for the Auditor- General. However, if we specify what activities the parties are going to be involved in, it will be very easy for the Auditor-General to audit.

I want to thank the committee for specifically expanding the clause that talks about auditing these funds. I hope that in future the Auditor-General will also bring here a Bill that talks about campaign financing because this has also been a source of corruption in this country.

Many people have talked about the kind of things that we can fund and numerical strength. I want to inform members that we are living in a world of reality and everything has minimum qualifications. For example, to come to Parliament you must attain senior six; to get married you must be above 18 years; to die you must have been born. So to have minimum representation in Parliament, I think, is not asking too much. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.34
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to give my views on this motion, which I support. I want to thank the NRM Government for allowing this Bill to come. In fact, this Bill should have come from the Opposition or from minority parties. This is because for a long time, many parties have failed to do what they want because they don’t have the funds. 

I want to say that this has not come by accident. NRM already had a plan to do this. After being in the no-party or individual merit system, it was necessary that the country’s political growth be marked by introducing multi-party politics and this is what we have now. 

Therefore, the next step is to enable parties to organise themselves and grow. There is no way we shall develop this country and improve on governance until parties are well organised. I am happy that we are at that point now. Parties, which were having problems regarding developing themselves with a national character can do so now.

Perhaps what we should be thinking about, apart from direct funding of parties, is enabling them to get ways of generating funds so that they are strong. There should be a deliberate way of government enabling parties to generate funds. 

A Member has just alluded to the issue of campaign funding where there is still a big problem. Parties should reach a point where they are able to sponsor their candidates. This would help eliminate the problem of commercialisation of elections, which has caused many problems.

I want to say that this is a very important Bill, which all of us must support. I also want to add that the culture of accountability should be instituted. We should include, during the committee stage, ways of punishing those parties, which fail to account for the funds because these are our funds. This is a noble Bill and one for all of us and I support it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.37
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank government for this Bill. I am a bit uncomfortable with the way the Bill focuses on only amending the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 and providing for the use of government or public resources for political parties or organisation activities. 

The objective of the Bill only looks at funding yet operationalising political parties goes beyond mere funding. Nurturing does not necessarily have to be with funding and that is why I would suggest that in tandem with this amendment, we should not only make reference, in passing, to the 1995 Constitution, the Political Parties and Organisations Act, the Presidential Elections Act or the Parliamentary Elections Act but also look at other solid ingredients that can nurture political parties.

Let us also look at the midwife of the democratisation process in this country, which is the Electoral Commission as well as the Police Act and those restrictions that are unnecessary under a multi-party political setting. 

Let us look at all those factors that inhibit the proper functioning of nursing political parties. That is why I would urge Members that passing this should not be the end result. Let us look at the broader spectrum of how parties can be nurtured and groomed into responsible organisations that are ready to handle the challenges in this country.

I would also like to look at what would be the cut off point. Does the Bill intend to make sure that parties endlessly sponge on government? Isn’t there a limit after which parties should outgrow state funding so that once they have acquired the necessary capacity, they can be weaned off like other parties elsewhere? Should they constantly be a burden to the taxpayers when they have their own agenda?

Lastly, Members have suggested numerical strength as a formula. I have a problem with this because once upon a time, there was a perceived party called UPM. It was perceived then because most members forsook it later. The big shots today who abandoned it include Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere who went to DP, Yona Kanyomozi who went to UPC and Akena p’Ojok who joined UPC. None of the Front Bench members, as I see them, appeared then. So I really think that we should be honest with these parties as some of them are really nationalistic and just emerging -(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member holding the floor in order to insinuate that all the Front Bench members have ever belonged to a political party before 1980 when, Madam Speaker, you know very well I have been a consulting engineer and I have never joined any political party since I was born until I joined NRM? Is he in order to insinuate and peg people to parties in the past when actually many of us have never actually even participated in any politics at all? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the point I wanted to make is that the so-called insignificant parties of today might be the strong parties of tomorrow and I would not wish to speak when some Members are not here but I would have mentioned that even those who molested the young party the UPM -(Laughter)- -(Member timed out_)

5.44
MS ANNE AURU (Independent, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I certainly support the motion but with some reservations. Among the references, the committee used is the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and this Constitution really mandates Independent Members of Parliament. But now when we talk of the support for political parties and organisations the Independent Members are left out.

Today, I am an Independent Member of Parliament but tomorrow it is going to be somebody else. Therefore, my suggestion to the Attorney-General is that he should come up with Independent Members Bill. (Laughter) This is very serious. We are 38 Members in this Parliament and there are Independent members all along in the lower councils. So the support the state is going to give should not only go for political parties and organisations.

A question might arise how the Independent Members are going to account for the funds they say it may give them. But I think this can easily be addressed if the Attorney-General can come up with this Independent Members Bill, where it should be really streamlined how they will account for the money and how it will be disbursed, because these are representatives of people. 

Ignoring them and not supporting them means not supporting the activities. As Independents they have activities that they also want to carry out. They have people whom they are representing. So that is my suggestion. No. 9 in the report says, “The Bill does not specifically spell out which elections shall be financed by government on equal basis.” 

My suggestion is the elections that should be supported should be the national elections. Primaries for parties should be sponsored by the individual parties. We should have concern for the taxpayers’ money and it should not only go for the national elections. I thank you, madam speaker.

5.46
MR JOWALI KYEYAGO (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I thank the committee chairperson for presenting the report. 

I wish to begin with the objective of the Bill. Paragraph 2 of the object of the Bill says, “The multiparty democracy is still developing and there is need for a provision which should enable the political parties to be funded in one way or the other so that they can strengthen their bases to provide good governance.”

When I read that followed by, “The memorandum to the Bill also states that there are no other viable means of supporting political parties other than states funding.” 

Those two coupled with observation No. 2 that, “Provision of state funding political parties and organisations gives them the opportunity and ability to maintain national interest and integrity.”  I fail to harmonise the three. 

I wish to suggest that the objective of the Bill paragraph two instead of saying that “political parties should be funded in one way or the other” let there be a defined manner in which we fund political parties so that these political parties have the integrity and the interest of national character.

Madam Speaker, observation No .4, I have got some reservation because it is talking about funding political parties which have got a representation in Parliament. 

When you are talking about strengthening political parties, I think you are missing a point because by the time you are tabling this Bill, there are some political parties, which never knew that there would be a Bill that would support political parties and they were formed.

I think let all registered parties and organisations access state funding up to a certain level. If they are not in Parliament, then if the spirit of strengthening political parties is to be upheld, then the criteria of registering new political parties should be strengthened to ensure that all the viable and serious political parties are registered.

You cannot talk about funding only political parties, which have come to Parliament when even those small parties which have not made it to parliament have got political interests. 

Let us give them some little token to help them sustain their programme. At the same time when they come to Parliament, let there be a formula that we enable them access further funding. Thank you so much.

5.49
MR HARUUNA SSALABAYA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I strongly support the motion. This is a simple calculation. Today we are talking about ratio; we talk about statistics; we are talking about democracy and percentage. 

Our friends there they are few, they are enjoying similar seats when we are being squeezed here. Each of us has many people behind - that is why we are 240. So when you are rationing this money, you must put into consideration that we have been there and we have to be there. 

When you talk about the future, it is not easy going. You have to struggle and make your way through. I give an example of the CDF, each one goes back to his people and the same happened with the vehicles. Why do you want to interfere now when you cannot manage? 

I can take an example of the one CP Member, one JEEMA Member, the chairman –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am getting problems with the way Members are debating. They are debating as if it is the Opposition, which desperately needs this Bill. No! We in the Opposition have maintained our offices when the ruling party is being evicted everyday. Is it in order for Members to debate that we are the people who desperately need this Bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Judging from the fact that all the parties participated in determining the process of the Bill; it was an issue of public demand. So he is right.

MR SSALABAYA: I am giving the last example. When we came here in the Eighth Parliament, we were given offices. We got 240 offices and they got their few offices. Why didn’t they come for more offices if they had the capability?

5.52
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the report and I commend the committee and government for the timely presentation of this motion. 

Funding of the political parties as all of us are aware has been an issue in the public domain and it is at this juncture that as hon. Ssalabaya said, that I anticipated full support from my colleagues in the Opposition because there has been a lot of outcry that the government is not really funding the activities of political parties. 

For that matter, the government has in good faith brought this report and Bill to ensure that political parties are funded and are on the same footing with the NRM party. I anticipated seeing a very big smile from my friends in the Opposition to move together for the good of this nation and the political parties.

My other issue is shaping and nurturing political parties. Of late, we have seen most of the political parties having internal problems, weaknesses and shaping these parties would address issues such as political intrigue and help parties to build cohesion and move together. 

Shaping and nurturing these political parties will check on individuals who come here belonging to a certain political party but on arrival they claim they have their individual independent minds – a thing which has made others call them “rebels” within the party. But once this political nurturing is in place, all members will move together. 

There are cases of MPs who used to belong to a certain party but then they come as Independents and because of not having the strength of nurturing the party, they sign memoranda of understanding without returning their original party cards and this continues to weaken the party. Therefore, political nurturing and shaping will build the parties.

If this Bill is passed, it will help on the issue of Independents. I think most of the parties have suffered from this very issue. It is a constitutional right but again if the parties can strengthen their own constitutions, they can address this issue where independents emerge out of the political parties because of the differences and tend to fight the parties from within. It is my submission –(Interjection)- with due respect, I shall receive that information outside here.

It is the issue of Independents that has brought big problems within most of the parties where you find in-fighting and on that note -(Interjections)- I shall also receive that information outside this Parliament. 

I wish to wind up with the issue of funding. I agree with the committee report that funding should be extended to registered political parties because -(Member timed out)

5.58
MR SERUNJOGI KATENDE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. It is true indeed that the multi-party dispensation is still in its infancy after some hard periods in the past and indeed upcoming parties needed nurturing in terms of public funding. If we are to leave these parties on their own, they will fall prey to undesirable forces, which will offer funding with expectations of achieving their ill destinies. 

These forces could include terrorist groups. They could be perversion groups, as we heard yesterday about the scourge of homosexuals. They could be drug traffickers or donors who may want us to dance to their tunes. I hope this sort of funding will do away with such forces. 

However, in addition to accountability, I would like to suggest – I do not know if it has been provided for, but there would be need for the parties that may have received public funding to also declare their additional sources of funding. This will cater for the undesirable forces that I have talked about above.

On the issue of supporting only registered parties, I would like to say that I support it. Otherwise, we will loose the objective of financing the organised political agenda and fall prey to personal gains. With that I stand to support the motion.

6.00
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I have looked at the content of this Bill. When you study it carefully, you realise that the main intent is to find a way of funding political parties. The other one is about how to share the money. 

However, when you look at the way the objective of the Bill has been crafted – for insistence, let me read a section of it, which reads: “To provide for the use of Government or other public resources for political parties activities.” 

In my interpretation, this is not limited to financing. Other public resources may mean other things. I think there is something hidden about the intent of this Bill. 

I think the Attorney-General should help us to define what these other public resources are. That will help to open the Bill to include those other public resources. Otherwise, the objective is different from the intent of this Bill.

Two, I would like to disagree with observation No. 2 by the committee which says that non-provision of state funding exposes political parties or organisations to soliciting and depending on donor aid, which may compromise their national interests, integrity and independence. 

I would like to say that the party in power is already demonstrating this to us. I have a pile of order papers that indicate that the biggest activity in our order of business is for Government to borrow money. So, does this imply that the Government of Uganda has compromised our national interests, integrity and independence? I am saying this because we are ever borrowing.

I think political parties should be allowed to borrow money to support their activities. My thinking is that even the Government of Uganda has also been getting help from UNICEF. And if UNICEF has been identified as one of the organisations promoting homosexuality in this country, then what happens?

Finally, I am not very clear about the timing of the funding of political parties activities. I am saying this because the Bill only talks about provision of funds. When are we providing these funds for the parties to start operating? Will it be just before elections? Will it be after the elections? When will be the time? 

If you have to entrench democracy here, I think political parties should be provided with the funds much earlier and before the time of elections. When you look at the Bill, it seems like the funding is only targeting the time of elections.

While it is good to give money to political parties, they should also be allowed to source their own funding to run their activities. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.06
MS AGNES EGUNYU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for presenting this report. However, I have got one reservation. 

When you look at the objective of the Bill the last sentence of paragraph three, you realise that it talks about nurturing and developing political parties and organisations in our country. However, when we begin talking about the use of numerical strength, I do not think this Parliament will have the will to nurture political parties. 

I am saying this because the ruling party will have a better leverage over the small political parties that we should be developing. This just beats the objective and purpose of the Bill.

Therefore, I would like to inform the honourable members on the government side that when it comes to nurturing democracy in the country, we should give selfless services to it. Because whereas today you might be on that side with us on this side, tomorrow when things change, you will also need these funds to run the activities of your party. 

Lastly, we always talk about prosperity for all and democracy. But if we really have to fight poverty then we have to advance democracy. And if we have to nurture democracy in this country we should give it selfless services. What I am saying is that if we use this numerical strength of the Movement, we shall not go far. Rather, we would fund more –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform especially those who are advocating for numerical strength that when we talk about activities – if there are ten activities to be supported, those activities should not be based on numerical strength. The activities for UPC can be ten, but NRM could also be having the same number. So when you talk about numerical strength, then you are looking at individuals; activities are not about individuals. When we support rent for offices or when we support – we can say maybe communication - it is an activity for all the parties. It is not about numerical strength. It is an activity as an activity. Thank you.

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, my colleague for that information. I would like to appeal to the party that has numerical strength to give selfless leadership to this country and perhaps support the view that the parties that have the least numbers here should be funded more so that we build their capacity in order to develop a democracy.

Lastly, we have been talking about 30 political parties and Members have said that some of them are actually briefcase parties. But I think the onus is on Government to scrutinise these parties and then all those parties that have substance and have a political agenda for this country, whether they have members in Parliament or not, should be funded bearing in mind that the last elections in this country were very hostile and perhaps that is why some parties failed to make it here. So if we are now trying to make it more democratic we should look at all those factors. Thank you very much.

6.09
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA-LATIGO (FDC, Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the committee for their report which definitely improves the Bill as presented to Parliament.

I would like to start by expressing a wish and saying that if I had been the Minister of Justice and entrusted with bringing a Bill on this matter, I would have brought a Bill on the funding of political parties; a Bill that would have been comprehensive and would have allowed us to have elements that are related to funding that exist rather than an amendment to the Political Parties Act. A separate Bill that allows us to deal with all the issues related to funding the political parties. As it is now, we missed an opportunity to critically examine the issues of funding of parties and therefore some of the things that we will debate will just be for general purpose.

I would like to reiterate what my Secretary-General said and it is very important for us to appreciate, that our biggest challenge in this country is not money. Most of us have been debating about this as if money was everything. The functioning of political parties is a totality of many things including attitudes that we, as a country, hold on the existence of political parties and their rights to operate.

During the last elections we had some of the most difficult challenges. I can tell you for example that you would get people who would call you, because they genuinely thought you had a good cause and that you needed to be supported, but they knew that if they were known to have funded you, their businesses would even suffer. And so they would call you and on some occasions you would even meet on the streets. It was like you were spies. The person would exchange an envelope with you. This is something that he would have had a right to genuinely support but out of fear it becomes a big problem. 

Even when we were talking today, we talked about the issue that we raised about Mr Francis Atugonza. The man was arrested and while we even said we did not have safe houses, he was taken to Kololo. He just came out because he was granted bail, and he was beaten and had injuries on his head. 

The challenge was that the man, being an FDC member, was a political nuisance to the NRM in Hoima and this is normal. That is the essence of political parties: that you re going to compete for the hearts and minds of the population. If you cannot even allow me to do that, no matter how much money you give me, it is useless to the extent that when I sat down and listened to this debate, I even had the feeling that perhaps we are better off with each party sorting itself out without any of the funding.

There is a matter and we could prove this to hon. Kawoya that we will vote against this to show that we can do without the money provided we have the freedom to operate in this country. (Applause) No amount of money will help us. 

Also, this government money is token money; the real money is the money that people in power get from the business people and from other countries. We hear stories of Gadaffi giving money. That is the real story of funding parties. 

There is something that hon. Okello-Okello said and it was alluded to when you look at the memorandum. Hon. Malinga also said so. Honestly, what is “Government or other public resources”? If you look at the first paragraph of the object and you also look at the long title of the Bill and you look at 14(a) as provided for, you are making reference to “Government or public resources”. Are there any public resources, which are separate from government resources? Are there any public resources that are separate from state resources?

And what do you mean when you say “government and other public resources” when the object and the long title clearly say we are funding? Why don’t we talk about funding rather than resources so that nobody goes to court and debates? You end up in a situation where the Electoral Commission can say, “Under this Act we are allowing ministers to use their vehicles because it is still funding of public resources.” How do you stop that?

So we really need to go back and remove, first the issue of “government” and “public” because “government” and “public” is about the state and it is well stated in the subsequent paragraphs in the memorandum. Let us use “state” and let us talk about funding and not any “other resources” because it is about money.

Lastly, let us define numerical strength in this Bill. There could be serious debate about numerical strength and I would have preferred to redefine numerical strength to avoid special interest groups whose nature of elections now are such that they are supposed to represent everybody. For example, the people with disabilities represent everybody just like the women and the workers. You will get challenged. If you talk about numerical constituency strength, that would make a lot more sense. In that regard, the honourable gentleman up there, I haven’t got his name but he talked about our strength here. Let me say this: parties go to national elections with their party manifesto led by the President and that is where support for parties is strongest. 

Outside that, you will find that support is based on individual merit and local factors as you go down, to the extent that while my party president got more than 80 percent of the votes in my constituency, when it came to LC III chairperson elections and at a time of conflict in my constituency, the women said, “This man has always been mobilising soldiers for us,” and the person was elected. This was not because he was NRM but because for the women, he is the guy who mobilises soldiers to escort them to get firewood. So as you move out of the presidential elections, the issue of local merit comes in. 

Therefore, I would wish to see the sharing of funding combining both the presidential and parliamentary elections. You would then say that 40 or 50 percent of the funds would be based on numerical strength in Parliament and the other 50 percent of the funds based on the strength of the votes garnered in presidential elections. If you married the two- I have just illustrated that local elections are predominantly local but the two are national and these are the presidential and parliamentary elections. 

If we married these two, we can talk about the percentage. Let us do this, as it will also encourage other parties to field their presidential candidates rather than going under the cover of other parties because they are too weak. We have the chance of promoting these other parties as well as ensuring equity in reflection as regards the outcome of elections.

Hon. Members, if we did this and we finally support the amendments for accountability - I would like to add that the component of accountability should not be restricted to money got from government. If you have not accounted for monies as provided for in the law, and that is why I was talking about comprehensive, then you are not eligible to access the money. This will force parties to account so that the public knows which other sources of money they have because that was what made us enact the law on accountability. 

If we added this to the other elements, we would have a law that is quite fair. However, I would still have loved for the issue of funding for parties to be consolidated into one big Act so that you don’t have to run up and down looking for the law. Otherwise, I thank everybody who has contributed and I make an appeal that we reflect on this so that we incorporate those elements that are fair to this country. Thank you very much.

6.20
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make two comments, one on the point, which had been raised earlier and which my good friend the Leader of the Opposition has raised again about Mr Atugonza and then to make a comment on the report.

I really did not have information and in fact even now I don’t have information about the arrest of Mr Francis Atugonza. I am sure I will find out in due course. 

It is not true that I ordered his arrest because I was not even aware that there was any reason for arresting him. When I went to Hoima District as I usually do, I met the leadership of the NRM party in Hoima and one of the issues that we discussed was the disagreements within NRM about the conduct of affairs in Hoima Town Council. 

The simple disagreement within NRM was that in Hoima Town Council there is only one member of the Opposition who happens to be the mayor. NRM supported him because if they had not, he would not have been able to constitute the administration. 

As a consequence, he appointed all the members of his executive who are members of NRM. He went on to pronounce that he was implementing the manifesto of FDC so the question arose within NRM as to how people who were elected as NRM on an NRM manifesto support the FDC manifesto in Hoima. 

They were simply asking me how they could resolve the issue and my answer was that I would go back, as I didn’t have time then, to discuss with them how to manage that matter and that is all. If Mr Francis Atugonza has been arrested, it has absolutely nothing to do with that meeting or the issues that we discussed.

Point No. 2, I just want to respond to hon. Lulume’s point that there may be international ideological affiliations and therefore international support for political parties here. Yes, that is taken for granted especially his party and we have known it for a very long time that it is backed by an international grouping that subscribes to a particular ideological stand point. 

That is their right and nobody begrudges them to have that position. But as you know, the law limits you on how much you can receive as a political party in terms of funding from outsiders’ either from the US or individual donors and that is not really a problem. 

I think the problem outlined here is that if you become beholden to a foreign power then you compromise your independence as an organisation and of course if you took leadership of the country, you risk compromising the independence of the country. That is the simple point being made.

On the question of the formula, there was a demand that there should be a formula but this whole Bill up to 14(a) is nothing but a formula. Anyone who didn’t know what the formula was, please, read the Bill because what is written there is the formula, nothing more or less. The Bill is here and it says in Section 14(a) that government shall contribute funds and other public resources. 

I take seriously the proposal raised by the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the Independent Group in Parliament, hon. Malinga -(Interruption)

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I am Johnson Malinga, Member of Parliament from Kapelebyong constituency. I have never at any point been a leader of the Independents in this Parliament. I want to put it on record that I have only been the chairperson of COSASE and the Vice-Chairperson of Local Government Accounts Committee. I thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank hon. Malinga for making that point because the proposal being made here is to fund institutions and not individuals hence the idea of political parties and not independents. Mr Malinga, you made the point. The formula therefore is registered political parties. 

In respect of elections, government shall fund all parties on an equal basis and there is no clearer formula than that for all registered political parties. If the funding is Shs 1,000 per party, you will receive that and there is nothing more to it.

In (c), in respect of normal day-to-day activities, the formula is based on numerical strength. A point has been made about numerical strength. This is something that affects all of us. There is numerical strength on this side and that side. 

In most democracies, there is a basis for recognition of political parties and in all democracies that I know, numerical strength is the basis, because of course, there is no better formula. 

In countries where you have proportional representation, they use percentage even for representation in Parliament. For instance in Germany, if your party gets five percent of the votes, you are entitled to representation in Parliament. If you get four percent, you don’t get that representation so this is the most straight forward and clearest –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Mbabazi. I want to seek clarification because you have said in Germany if you get five percent of the vote that is what you get. Here the entire country votes and the only people who participate in the total votes are those under presidential elections. Museveni gets 52 percent, Kizza gets 49 percent but when you come to Parliament it is different. If we went by the vote, what does that mean? Don’t you think it is logical to apply the percentage of numerical strength where activities are taking place in the population?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I was citing this example to show that numerical strength is the determining factor for recognition. For instance, for representation in Parliament and the privileges that are accorded to those that go to Parliament, you receive state support including state funding in Germany and that funding is only if you have been able to attain that critical threshold and you make it to Parliament. Those who don’t, don’t. 

In our party, we thought about this and tried to look at other ways of doing it but we couldn’t find a rational, straightforward way of handling it except what is being proposed using what you call numerical strength as a basis.

Talking of today and tomorrow, I am comforted by the clear fear of the Opposition that they will always remain small because I thought if –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, my honourable colleague for giving way. We discussed this the other time when we debated at the Conference Centre. I would like to point out that I am comforted by the fact that you are dwelling more on your sentiments than the reality on the ground. This is because we have had three elections where the numbers have been changing and anybody who is conscious of the changes would know that we should be looking forward to the continuation of the changes because we have been making major in-roads. As a matter of fact, in the last elections we swept all your ministers from West Nile to Eastern Uganda. Therefore, you cannot be comforted that we are afraid of anything. 

The point that we are trying to bring out is that the example you gave of a proportionate representation is also reflected in the outcome of the presidential elections, and given that we are not in one or the other absolutely, a balance would be fair to everybody in the long run, actually the phase for all the parties to support it.

Because whatever happens you have equity that this numerical strength in the House alone cannot offset. That is the essence of the thing, but we are not driven by fear. As a matter of fact we are even suggesting that we could vote against the Bill so that we are not funded by the state and we sort ourselves out.

MR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, hon. Mbabazi for giving way. The minister said they did not have alternatives in the way a formula could be established to be fair and that is the basis on which we want to give you information on how fair it can be. 

You have learnt about the threshold for a political organisation and I think we can establish having Members in Parliament as a threshold and thereafter we can talk about activities. This can be based on guidelines, proposed by the Attorney-General and passed in this Parliament of what kind of activities to be supported by the state and therefore establishing the activities and the budgets.

I think this one was something that hon. Bahati and hon. Aol alluded to, and I think it could be a fair way. This is an alternative kind of information, which I am giving the minister so that he is not basing his arguments on a single piece of information that he has.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Madam Speaker, I hear the Leader of the Opposition and I applaud him for the ambition to increase his percentage share of the votes in Uganda. It is not a bad ambition but we have been around, we have had votes, we have had by-elections -(Interjections)- -(Laughter)- so we will wait and see.

I think it is not proper for us to dwell into that hypothetical argument. But the simple point I was making was that of course you never know, in the unlikely event that the people of Uganda think that the Movement is not doing the right thing, then you never know they could vote for someone else. I do not know whether it is for you though.

So the simple point I was making was that the idea, the formula of numerical strength as a basis for determining qualification really is universal. It is not something that we are starting afresh or inventing. It is something that is applied universally in many democracies. 

I would like to urge my colleagues in the Opposition not to have fear of it especially now that the Leader of Opposition has said they also have the ambition of sometime in future -he did not say when- maybe to have greater numerical strength than we have today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this Bill is very short but it has generated very interesting proposals, some of them cutting across both sides of the House. I would like to give the minister and the chairperson an opportunity to reflect. 

Also I would like to see this time written proposals for amendments. Some times when people jump in from the floor you agree on something – So, I want to give you time. 

I am adjourning this session to Tuesday afternoon, only for this. After that I will let you go to the sessional committees. The House is adjourned to Tuesday. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.38 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 21 April 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
