
Wednesday, 17 April 1996

The Council met at 2.30p.m in Parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE JUDICATURE BILL, 1996

MR PINTO (Kakuto County, Rakai): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: The Judicature Bill, 1996 be Read the First Time.  I beg to move.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 1996

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Bachou): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  We have before this august House a Bill entitled: The Uganda Wildlife Training Institute Bill, 1996.  Mr Chairman, just last week we passed the Bill which seeks to establish the Uganda Wildlife Authority and this Bill simply complement the one that establish the Wildlife Authority, because the Wildlife Authority to run the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the National Parks and so on that fall under it and the previous Game Department all will require a mix of professionals skills to help manage the sector in terms of conservation, protection of wildlife and so on.  

Just like what we had for the Uganda Tourist Board and Hotel sub-sector.  For that sub-sector also you recall we had a Bill here which had since become a statute establishing the Uganda Tourism Board and that was complemented with a Bill that establish the Tourism Training Institute in Jinja.  So, the purpose, of course, of doing this, is because that the Tourism Industry is a skill oriented industry that requires professional application of knowledge and skills in literally all the sectors and the Service sectors in Hotel and Catering and of course also in Wildlife Management.  

This proposed Institution will substitute for the African Wildlife Management Institute in Mweka Tanzania which the Government of Uganda has been using in the past for the purpose of training people to manage the wildlife sector.  The Uganda Government will still continue to use the Mweka Institute for higher levels of training, but at the diploma level we need to have our own institution because as the tourism sector expands in terms of receiving more tourists and as the wildlife population increases we are going to need more manpower to manage the sector.

If we assume that institute will be graduating between 30 to 40 people with the right skills every two years because the training is supposed to cover a period of two years, then for a National Park as wide as the Murchsion Falls National Park which might require something like 300 manpower in this category or person power in this category to manage, then we are talking of a long period of time to raise the required manpower.  But, as a sector itself is building systematically of a period of time, so are we proposing that the institute also builds up the person power strengths systematically of a time?

Mr Chairman, there is really not very much that I can say about this Bill say for the following, that most of it’s provisions are simply normally regulatory provisions and administrative provisions.  I do have two or three amendments which I will propose as an appropriate time, I hope that Members have read these bills which covers just a handful of pages and that with the benefit of hind knowledge that the tourism sector is increasingly becoming a lead sector for earning foreign exchange generating employment and revenue for government extra that they will give this Bill the support that it deserves and depending very much on the wisdom and judgement of my hon. Colleagues in this august House to give me the required support.

Mr Chairman, I beg to move -(Applause)


THE CHAIRMAN: The Uganda Wildlife Training Institute Bill, 1996 is open for discussion.


AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I raise to support the Bill that has just been read for the second time, I am aware as the hon. Minister the Mover has stated a week a ago this august House had time to handle the Uganda Wildlife Authority Bill which has since waiting perhaps the approval to become a statute.  In doing so, Mr Chairman, I would like to support, especially aware that the Wildlife policy which actually created the Wildlife Authority and together with this particular one, we seek that autonomy so that the institute to be created along side Uganda Wildlife Authority should carry out it’s functions in a manner as stipulated in the Bill. 

I would like also to say that, it is not that from time to time whenever a Minister reads a Bill for the Second Time a report follows, but I would like also to report verbally that we handled both Bills the other one and this particular one and in going through we did not find much to disagree on especially we only sited one area which is coming as the hon. Minister will move at an appropriate time in clause 7; when you look through you will find that the board to be created is not given time for how long should Members be in the office and because of this an amendment will, therefore, come showing that tenure of office before any other person can then be appointed.

We also found in clause 5, that sub-section 3; does not do justice to the Chairmanship of the board, because if we take it that three members are to be appointed as in sub-section 2; by the hon. Minister then we have a representative of the Students Association, then we have these other representatives.  Then the sub-section 3; says, “The Minister shall appoint the Chairperson from the Members appointed under sub-section 2”, and if that is taken all the same it means that even the student’s representative will be appointed Chairman or the Permanent Secretary who is responsible for Wildlife will as well double and become the Chairman.   

So, I think, at an appropriate time an amendment will be brought in, may be, restricting this appointment to bring those who come under subsection 2(a); and possibly (d); because whoever is coming as a Member from a registered tour operator or travel agent appointed by the Minister that one I think is someone who is knowledgeable and, throughout our study or scrutiny of the Bill found that the object are well stated because we found that when we were passing through our wildlife conservation and as you pass through these other places in other countries you will find that even if it looks wild somehow it is protected and cared for.  As opposed to ours which when it is wild, it is wild and there is no sign that someone somewhere cares that this particular sort of contract is looked after.

Mr Chairman, so important in this particular Bill is the creation of the institute which is to train people who are to manage this strange places and we have also found that in this particular institute certificates or courses will be offered.  We hope with its association with other institutes abroad or in the country they will also elevate and make the certificates or diplomas that to be obtained such that will be internationally recognised.  More than that, we have also found and we are in total agreement with the management of this particular institute that it should have someone of standing repetition if he is to create discipline, if he is to be in control of the academics and discipline of the people who are to benefit from this institute.  

So, it is a welcome idea that a Wildlife Institute be created for the purpose of carrying our or getting people who are equipped and who can carry the objectives as stipulated in the Uganda Wildlife Authority Statute.

So, from this kind of observation, there is no way we can do without this particular institute. Only that over time people have always tended to equate themselves with other tertiary institutions.  For example, if there is a strike down Polytechnic there will always be another strike at the UCC Kabale.  We hope, since the Bill states clearly that, whoever goes there it will be an institute seeking funding, some of by students themselves and this should actually be spelt clearly so that as one goes there he does not turn round again and say, why can we not have that which is being done to another institutions also being practice in this particular one.  We hope that these other associations will also look to our interest and also to the standard that we would like to acquire so that our wildlife institution will also be the type that is required.

With this, Mr Chairman, I beg that this particular Bill be debated in good faith and do pass.  I beg to second.


AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Bill.  Mr Chairman, before I make my contribution allow me to confirm a report which appeared on today’s New Vision, the title is Kony  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, concentrate on the Bill please.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, this is a very serious issue -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Concentrate on the Bill please.

AN. HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, on this Bill, I particularly want to say something about section 13; sub-section one.  Mr Chairman, in a number of occasions we have seen Papers laid here after one, two, three, years, it is because there is important factor of accounting which is missed that is the way how the book should be kept.  Particularly, if you read this, “The institute shall keep it’s proper books of accounts of all it’s income and expenditure and proper records in relation to them”.  Here, I am intending to add this word that, ‘balance daily and monthly’, if you go to banks books are balanced daily, even local authorities books are balanced daily, but if you go the office of Ministries and parastatals these people do not balance books daily.  This gives a loophole for misappropriation, because a big figure will be stated there when the actual amount is not there, but the figure stands.  So, if the books are balanced daily it would be easy to extract returns.  

For example, Local Government there three of books kept the cash book, the daily abstract, and the monthly abstract, so in daily cash book you post whatever you have you have received and record whatever you have paid you balance and then you know exactly what balance you have today and every expenditure you make under each item which sometime we call here programme you record this, today you have paid so much, the mileage so much, salaries and others.  So, at the end of the month you transfer this balances you put them in the monthly abstract. When the year ends he will just pick these balances from monthly abstract, so this really will stop misappropriation of funds.  So, I would request the Minister to agree with me to add this word here, “income and expenditure proper records in relation to them and balanced daily and monthly”.

Mr Chairman, section 2; “Subject to any direction given by the Minister the institution shall cause to be prepared to be prepared in respect of each financial year and not later than three months”.  I am saying, this should be one month, because there is no reason why you give it three months when somebody just goes and extract the balances and with this introduction of computer system it is just a matter of a week. So, I would request the Minister to accept my suggestion that, this will be after one month.

Mr Chairman, section 15; “Any funds of the Institute not immediately required for any purpose under this statute shall be invested in such a manner as the institute may with the approval of the Minister determine”. Mr Chairman, most of the parastatals are Government institutions of investment, so here my suggestion is that, this institutions which generate income for the Government, so when there is any surplus at the end of the year I think it should go to the consolidated fund.  For example number 10; here indicates clearly if you read number 10, section 10.3; “A loan or credit facility obtained by the institute under this section may with the approval of the Minister be guaranteed by Government and when so guaranteed the principle some and interest of the loan shall be charged on the consolidated fund.”  So, this one I have no dispute because it is a Government institution and the Government must be responsible, but when it makes a surplus it should go to the consolidated fund.

Mr Chairman, with these few words I support the Bill. But finally, it is a very serious issue just to be very brief, really the prices in Arua have gone up, but when I read this newspaper I do not know where my brothers from Arua got the information.  I think when you hear such complaints you try to check the information on ground it is true a bottle of soda is shilling 1000, fortunately enough the trailer of Pepsi Cola arrived in Arua when I was there, so definitely after that, the price may go down, but the prices had really gone up terribly.  So, I am requesting my Brothers from Arua that when there is a problem just simply do not defend it, try to dig the information right down so that people know that you are working for them.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.


MR NKALUBO WASSWA (Nominated Member):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Bill.  While supporting the Bill, Mr Chairman, I have about two or three observations to make.  Mr Chairman, we are creating a training institute; the problem here, once we have agreed to create an institute is the struggle as to where it should be located.  There has been a struggle when we said we are going to have a university in the North; it has not taken off because of where should it be; whether it goes to Arua, it goes to Gulu or it goes to Lira.  Now, we are being requested that we create one; this training institute ‘Wildlife’.  My worry is that as soon as we approve there will be a struggle whether it goes to Ssese Islands or it goes to Kotido or - I would request the Minister if he has any cite in mind so that he can put my worry at rest, other than creating something which will be a source of power struggle as to whether it should go to his constituency, and say look I have brought - yes, we may decide to put it in Masaka where there is no park at all, where people cannot see the wild animals.  Because, actually, this is a serious matter that we have projects which have not taken off, though we have approved; or which have taken years and it is because you are struggling that it should come to your place.  Unless we stop this habit, this is a costly affair; we sit here and fail to implement.  

I will give an example; sometime back the Uganda government got money, a loan, for rice scheme; the money arrived, we were being charged interest but we were fighting who should implement; and then we were just lucky that these fellows did not want to take their money back, otherwise, they would have charged us the interest and withdrawn the grant.  But, I think, later on we compromised who should implement.  The money was available, but then here we were fighting who should implement.  Likewise, the site may be a reason not to start the training institute.  I would have been happy if the Minister had hinted to this House where he intends to put the training institute.  

I am happy that at the moment the Minister is, actually, proposing such an institute to train Ugandans to man the wildlife in Uganda.  We have eaten almost all the animals, it is high time we come to the rescue of most of these tourist attraction; otherwise, foreigners will be coming here only to see Ugandans, because all the animals are being wiped out.  So, I would rather appeal to the Minister that we try and conserve our own wildlife, otherwise, by the time you finish the training almost all our wild animals would have been finished -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that in some parts of Uganda, especially in Mbarara District, in Nyabushozi, the cows and the wild animals have, actually, mixed.  When you drive from Lyantonde on the way to Mbarara you meet cows, then you meet impala, then you meet all these wild animals mixed up with goats and cows, and it is difficult to know whether it is the cows which have become wild or whether the Cobs have become domesticated.

REV. ANGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member Wasswa is making a very, very important observation, and that I think, is the more reason why wildlife authority is now in place.  As regards protection, I think, I was even ashamed in Britain when I went to a Zoo in North London, what did I pay to see there?  I paid to see Uganda rhino which was taken from here and labeled ‘Uganda rhino’; that means time has come when we shall begin and be very serious with our rare species.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the first informer that now in Mbarara you find a lamb sleeping with a lion, that is a welcome -(Laughter)-  Mr Chairman, this is a very brief Bill; however, going through it, I have some problems, say the composition of the Board, that is under section 5.  The Minister is proposing to have a Board; three members appointed by the Minister, a representative of the students’ association, the Director of Wildlife, a member of a registered tour operator or travel agent appointed by the Minister.  I do not know when I come to this ‘a member of a registered tour operator’ he should have been from an association; but if you say you just appoint a member of a registered tour operator - he should have been from the association so that he is a representative of the whole group.  But just taking only one, it will not, actually, reflect their interest.  Then he said Permanent Secretary responsible for the Wildlife; I would rather have his representative; he will bog down the working of the boards -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member on the Floor is raising a very important point on the composition of the board.  I would also like to remind him and the Minister that there is no provision of the post of Secretary to the Board.  I am wondering whether it was a deliberate omission or it was probably that the board will stay without a Secretary who will be recording minutes of the meeting and so on.  Thank you.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Mr Chairman, it should have been - when you say the Secretary is not provided for, maybe, the Minister should have put in a section to appoint the Director of the institute to be the Secretary to the Board; normally it is the situation, where the Director is the Secretary.  But all the same, I would have proposed that this Director should have been a member of the Board; an ex-official, other than leaving him out.  We are creating a board where the Director is not included.  

Mr Chairman, as I said, the Bill is very brief.  I come to the section of Finance;  the previous contributor, hon. Adam has proposed that the final accounts should be ready within three months.  This is institute is owned by hundred percent by the government.  Now, I wish to draw the attention of the previous speaker to the Finance Act.  The Finance Act is the main body which is controlling all this.  According to the Finance Act, an accounting officer is given three months to submit the final accounts to the Auditor General, and unless we amend that section this has to follow suit.  I would advise the previous contributor that if he has a chance to come back here, he should advise the legislature to amend the Finance Act, now that we have computers, we can have the final -(Interruption)

MR ADAM:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member has referred me to the Finance Act, the three months is just maximum, but it cannot bar a law to limit a certain period.  Because this is really to control funds; if you leave this section open, Mr Chairman, you will find that you make payments in a day, which may amount about one million, and you had a cash of UShs 2,000,000; if you do not balance your books, somebody will have come and say; how much cash do you have, and you say it is finished, because all the vouchers are all there, they have not been posted.  Really, this is the way of controlling funds and it has been myth; if at all it is there in the financial regulation, it has to be amended.  Since it is below the three years, I think, this does not stop this period to be stated in this Statute.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Well, thank you for the information, but I wish to advise that the other one is the main - that is the Finance Act of 1972; now, if we have to bring this in order, we have to amend the other one, and then you will have to look at the financial instructions from the Ministry of Finance, how an Accounting Officer has, and when he should submit; you need also to amend that section. Now, to be in order to follow what financial instructions to accounting officer, it has to rime with the other one; otherwise, the financial instructions to the accounting officers say it is three months.  Now, we cannot amend this law which is contrary to the instructions we have put in place.  

Mr Chairman, we look at section 10, the powers of borrowing; the Minister is proposing that with his approval, the institute can borrow, that is okay; but then we come to subsection 3, of this section and the Minister says that a loan or a credit facility obtained by the institute under this section, may, with prior approval of the Minister be guaranteed by the government and when so guaranteed, the principle sum and the interest of the loan shall be charged on the consolidated fund.  Mr Chairman, it is a constitutional matter that where we have to guarantee this approval can only be given by this Parliament, not the Minister, and I would request him to desist to tempt us that we can approve; it is only this House which, according to the constitution, can approve such loans and such facilities.  I think, we should substitute that ‘with the approval of this House we can guarantee or the institute can borrow money’ otherwise, if the Minister did so, that contract would be null and void, it will be unconstitutional, Mr Chairman.  

Similarly, when we come to section 11, where the Minister says he can approve the estimates of the institutes; but we are looking at an institute which is going to come to this House to be allocated money. Now, if the Minister approves such an estimate should come for the final approval and appropriation of funds from this House I would rather have that, it is this House to approve money to the institute, but not the Minister where will he get the money from?  If he approves then he will come in to beg us and he is not sure whether we will approve or not, why give himself that bother and not bring the estimate to us, we approve as we approve other Budgets.  

Otherwise, I second this Bill whole-heartedly.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all I want to reinforce the point regarding the secretary to the board which has been raised by hon. Ogwang as an information to one hon. Member.  It is important that, the position of the secretary to the Board be stated very clearly in the Bill and I do believe that it was the intention of the drafts men and the Minister responsible that really the secretary to the board should be the director because this is implied if you look at the schedule to the Bill, it says; “A Director shall keep or cause to be kept the minutes of every meeting of the board”. That is in regulation number 3; on page 14; and, Mr Chairman, if you look at clause 8, it says, “The board shall appoint a Director of the institute and the Director shall be the chief administrative and academic officer of the Institute and generally be responsible to the board for the management of the institute.” 

Now, Mr Chairman, having looked at the regulation and this, all that the Minister has to do now is to include in clause 8; that one of the functions or the responsibilities of the Director is to be the Secretary to the Board.

Mr Chairman, there is also the issue of the use and custody of the common seal, I see in clause 3; sub-clause 2; which says that, the institute shall be an autonomous body co-operate with - succession and a common seal and may sue and be sued in the corporate name. But there is nothing in the Bill which speaks about how this seal is going to be used and also who is going to have custody of this seal.  I do believe, Mr Chairman, that is the practice to have the Chairman and one or two members of the board to -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my hon. Brother, that if he can bother to look at clause 21; it talks about the common seal of the institute and the executors of the contracts and in this case 21.2 says, the common seal of the institute shall be such a device as the board my determine and shall be kept in custody of the Director of the institute.  Thank you.


MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have forgotten my glasses to day, so it has been a problem to read, Mr Chairman.  It would have been much better and I do agree with hon. Nkalubo that the institute would have stated it’s place like you would say, Makerere University Kampala, Mbarara University in Mbarara, Mbale Islamic University in Mbale, Nkozi University and so on, but Mr Chairman, when you leave this thing in the open like this, it is going to be subject to a lot of political problem.  However, I do believe that it is not to late for -(Interjection)- because I think even for the Hotel Institute we decided in Jinja.  It is Jinja now that I see -(Interruption)

DR MAGEZI: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the hon. Omara Atubo, you see we are making a law in this House and where this institute finally be is a detail.  Now if we legislate here and for any reason which may be, un foreseen at the moment that institute cannot be in Karamoja it would require an amendment to be brought to this House, but implementation, there is another arm of Government which can do this business and that is the Executive.  Once we have agreed in principle that we need an institute in Uganda we may even end up by having branches of these institutes elsewhere.  So, to me I think we should not really make this Parliament so mighty that it has to go down into the detail of saying, this institution must only be in Arua, we must have confidence that once we have approved Government can be able to re-located the institute, Mr Chairman.  I seek clarification on this since he is a very able lawyer as to whether really a law in Parliament should go in that detail.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I do agree with my hon. Friend John Magezi that it may be, more practical not to put the name of the institute in the Bill, but, Mr Chairman, my argument is backup by the existing practice you see we go by precedence when we are making law, and even for these institute in Mweka Moshi where I had a privilege of living in exile for two years and I visited it, in our law it states where that institute, there is a law in Uganda which recognises that institute.  So, all I am saying, Mr Chairman, is that we have all these institutes whether  -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I thank my Brother for giving way.  We have an example of Kyambogo as an institute specifically so, when hon. Magezi talks of the Executive doing it, why did we mention specifically Kyambogo in the law which was passed here?  Thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, we need a very good explanation from the Minister, when it comes to a time for reply, why he is not having placement of the institute within the Bill because all the laws we have made here do have those provisions, what is special about this? To go back the point of hon. Magezi, if for example you say the wildlife institute at Kidepo and for reasons war and insecurity Kidepo has disappeared even as a park and you cannot have this institute there.  First of all if it means transferring the institute because of reasons such as war and so on, you can always have a temporary location of this place and there are so many examples which have happened.  If it is because the wildlife has disappeared in Kidepo and you can no longer have wildlife there, then you want to transfer it to Nebbi where possibly a new wildlife park has come then there would be no problem in that.  

So, Mr Chairman, all I am saying is that, it is a valid point raised by hon. Nkalubo and possibly the Minister will have to explain to us to me I would have preferred that the name of the institute be spelt very clearly in the Bill.  (Interruption)


MR ONGOM: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am actually confused I want clarification from the Speaker on the Floor.  Why I say this, is I am illustrating by practise, in this House hospitals came to be allocated in 1962 after independence we got one.  This one we got was allocated under a tree in Aringa, in there it was said, when I win that was of course, late president Obote who promised the people -(Laughter)- I mean, ex-president Obote, he stated if you give me a vote I will build a hospital at Yumbe, now the House came here and allocated a hospital for Aringa and named it Yumbe.  Technicians were sent to build the hospital in Yumbe, they found Yumbe itself could not provide the site, they move it to Kulu, unfortunately Yumbe and Kulu are very close, but Yumbe fail in the constitution of Onama and Kulu failed in the constitution of Logida this gave us a lot of politically headed during the time when the hospital was being opened.  In the end it was name Yumbe, but it was - really up to now it is in Kulu, we call it Kulu hospital for technical reasons, but for future reasons we call it Yumbe and this has been giving us problem in the village I thought it was proper because the Minister was seeking an institution for Uganda, he was saying let us have a training institution for wildlife in Uganda. To me it would not matter, but then the technicians would come and say, where do we site it?  If they say it should be in Mbarara that is the best place for it to me it is okay, if they say let it go to Masindi for the technical reasons it is okay; I fail to see sense by saying let us allocate it now let it go to Arua and once we put it in Arua on paper it must always be in Arua when technically it will go to Jinja we must call it Arua which is wrong.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all the question of Yumbe hospital cannot be compared to what we are discussing now because Yumbe hospital is not a corporate body and there was no act of parliament for the construction of a hospital in Yumbe.  So, Yumbe is not a body co-operate, so it is a complete different situation which we are talking about.

Secondly, Mr Chairman, I am sure that the best people to answer these queries of how Yumbe came to be located or a hospital which was meant for one place I am sure that Onama and Obote would answer that one much better than me and I am sure that there will be a proper occasion for them to do that, whatever it is.

Finally, I want to wind up by saying this, and with your permission, Mr Chairman, let me say this, that since we are discussing the issue of institute I would like in one minute only, Mr Chairman, and with your permission to raise the issue of Makerere University and I think it is important for this parliament having read in the paper for the last two days what is going on in Makerere that we express -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Concentrate on this Bill.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I only want to say that it would be important for the Government -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Concentrate on this Bill alone.

MR OMARA ATUBO: But, the Bill, Mr Chairman, I am asking for your permission.

THE CHAIRMAN: Concentrate on the Bill.

MR OMARA ATUBO: I see.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I said I was winding up and I had wind up and I was asking you to give me one minute and if you object normally in Parliamentary practise as a Chairman, to allow you to digress a bit on an issue which you think is important, but if you think it is not, then, Mr Chairman, I will have an opportunity to raise it in another forum.  Thank you.

MR WESUGIRYA (Kubuku County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and the hon. Members. I stand to support the creation of this institute.  I am just too happy to note that actually wildlife conservation has attained recognition in this country.  It has been said many times that tourism as an industry is the fastest growing industry in the country, and as far as I know wildlife does contribute greatly to the success of this Tourist Industry.  I am, therefore, very happy to realise that so far there has not been any resistance to creation of this institute.  I have been with wildlife conservation for quite a long time and I am quite concerned about our people year in, year out being sent to the Wildlife Institute in Mweka, when actually all this long we could have created our own wildlife institute to train our people.  It is not all that easy perse, in as far as the management of wildlife is concerned.  Wildlife does require a lot of people who are actually trained in this field, we needed for example the game biologists these are supposed to be researchers, they have got to research on various fields in as far as this conservation is concerned.  I will give you an example. 

In the mid 70s, there was a report as a result of the researched work by the game biologists that there was over population of the elephants in Kabalega Falls National Park.  Now, how was this arrived at?  The Game Biologists at that time came to discover that actually the elephants because they were many had resorted to pealing off some trees and thereby causing them to dry in the park and after some time we came to find that so many of those trees had just dried up.  So, what was the recommendation as per that time?  The recommendation was that over cropping of the elephants does take place, so a certain number of elephants was recommended to be cropped to reduce on the destruction of the trees.  So, Mr Chairman, it has cost this country quite a lot of money sending our people to the Institute of Mweka, -(Interjection)- Mweka is in Tanzania.  

Mr Chairman, as I was saying, it has cost this country a lot of money to send our people to the Wildlife Institute in Tanzania. We have been sending the Game Assistants there, we have been sending the Game guards, the Rangers and so on and so forth and I think to reduce on this expenditure, it would be very advisable to create our own institute where we have to use our local currency.  

On the issue of the location for this institute, Mr Chairman, in my view I feel we should not be bogged down by just location of the institute, after all this institute is going to be located within the boundaries in Uganda.  Mr Chairman, I know there has been an Institute of Ecology in Mweya and probably if I was, may be, consulted I would also slot in some recommendation and say, may be, this institute to be, let it be located in Mweya that is of course -(Interruption)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, when the Sectrol Committee was going through this particular Bill we were made to understand as also indicated in clause 19; of this very Bill that there is an institute which has not been legislated upon and this is the one in Entebbe.  So, I am not to sure yet, I will have to verify with the hon. Minister so that we do not labour on the location rather labour on the legality of the Institute to be created.

MR WESUGIRYA: Mr Chairman, I think we wait to see that, because the Member is saying that the Minister will have to be consulted on that one, so I do not know what is likely to come out, but permit me, Mr Chairman, I will like to emphasize much on the need to actually have this institute which we have been told is for manpower training.  Out of experience - of course I am aware these wildlife conservation areas are gazetted and usually there are some conveniences which live along the gazetted area.  It requires one to be of a certain training to be able to manage such areas.  These ones we normally refer to as a buffer zone.  The areas whose boundary is between the animals themselves and the community, the people.  

Normally, like recently when we went to Western Uganda, we visited some of those recently created national parks.  We did interact with many of those park wardens and I was just too obliged to be told that some of them had gone for training for just managing these buffer zone.  It entails a lot of things.  How do you treat the community in such an area?  Are you going to use a gun like we have been reading in the papers that, so many poachers were killed? What are you going to do?  The approach has got to be different.  It requires a lot of sensitization in that area.  Maybe for the Community to understand the value of conservation, one would say here that as you move towards Mbarara - Nyabushozi place, you get some antelopes mixed up with the cattle, with the goats and so on and so forth.  I think this is a healthy development.  I can liken this to what is actually going on even in Nairobi; within the boundaries of Nairobi City.  Soon after you have left the City centre, you actually encounter these antelopes.  They are not being harassed.  The park is quite adjacent, but there is no harassment.  So, if a similar case is happening in Western Uganda, I think we are moving towards the ideal to this situation.  And for one to say that maybe lions lying in the sheep; No! that one is unthinkable, Mr Chairman.

And then lastly, Mr Chairman, I would like to actually stress that since there has been a creation of this Wildlife Authority. I know in this country we are facing some problems.  There is, for instance, competition for land use.  In Uganda there are so many empty places where you find the people are really sparsely populated.  But to advise those ones who are living within the park boundaries and maybe the game reserves and so on, it appears to be so difficult for them to move out.  When actually Wildlife Conservation as I have already observed is contributing quite a lot in the Tourist Industry.  Now, if it is doing that economically, then why should people not be sensitised to actually live elsewhere outside the game boundaries?  We hope to see this and Mr Chairman, I think with a government’s backing I believe this will materialised.  Thank you very much. (Applause)

MR ORYANG (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support this Bill.  I think this Bill is so important to consolidate Uganda’s intention to go into tourism seriously as an Industry.  One problem I have although I did not come with it earlier and yet I should have done that early, Clause 8 ‘talks of the Board appointing a Registrar and their academic members of staff particularly 8(4)’.  And then when you go back to Clause 4, it is talking about objects of the institute which is to conduct training in Wildlife Management and Conservation, to conduct examination etcetera.  It would appear, there maybe a missing link here.  

If you look at the Board members, I am not sure maybe with the exception of the Director of Wildlife Parastatal, the other members of the Board are not knowledgeable above academic staff to appoint them.  It would appear pertinent that, the Ministry could have put something here, provision for hiring expertise say from Makerere Institute of Ecology if there is one.  Hiring Expertise when time comes for appointment of academic staff.  I feel this is quite important because to conduct training in Wildlife and have examinations which are recognised, the staff should also be recognised.  To have recognised staff, they should be appointed by an authority or a group of authoritative people.  So, I feel there should be a provision indicating probably under 8(4), the provision that when time comes for appointing academic staff, the Board would hire the expertise of the Institute of Ecology in Makerere.  

Apart from that, the idea of siting the institute.  I am talking from experience as a Member of Uganda Hotels Board and a Member of Crested Crane Hotel which used to be a unit in Uganda Hotels Limited; was taken over for the purpose of training in Wildlife Management and Tourism.  For the purpose of training in tourism and all this, an administrative arrangement could have taken place where the institute starts in Jinja.  You never know.  But I quite agree with colleagues who mentioned that the location of the institute is an administrative arrangement.  The important thing is to have the institute established.  I do not think we are so backward that we start wrangling about title which can be handled administratively.  This House can only establish an institute; but the siting can be done by the executive, I quite agree.

Mr Chairman, having talked about academic standards required from where, I see that the composition of the Board of Governors needs to be repealed to bring in persons that could assist in the academic standard setting up of the institute during the liaison with the universities if necessary.  In that case, there maybe amendment to propose more members of the Board of Governors to in check such necessary quality in the Board of Governors.  All in all, I support this straightforward Bill, which should not take too much of our time and I hope Members are not going to delay us here un necessarily.  This Bill is straightforward and I recommend that we pass it.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ONGOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill.  Mr Chairman, the need for such an institute need not to be argued as many Members have already stated so.  This is because as it is already stated, tourism is increasing as a business in Uganda and is likely to increase in the future.  You therefore, need a pool of trained people to run such an industry and such training can only be done in such an institute.  We also recently as has been pointed out by other Members, we passed the Wildlife Conservation and Management Authority Statute for the management of conservation and conservation of our wildlife.  Again here you need trained people to handle the conservation and management of Wildlife.  

I have only one problem with this Bill.  Yesterday in fact, I did ask the Minister whether it was necessary to create a whole institute, rather than make it perhaps a faculty of one of the many institutes already existing.  But I was assured by the Minister that, this is a very specialised area and it needs separate institution. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.  Proceed please.

MR ONGOM:  Let me also Mr Chairman, join in welcoming our future alternative Chairperson.  Mr Chairman, as you see already on Clause 19, we are told that there is already a Wildlife Institute in Uganda which I understand is located at Entebbe.  I was wondering if such an institute already exists, why not just expand it?  Why not give it you know, Body and make it operative rather than create another one?  So that, it takes over the assets of what is perhaps dormant.  If we have failed to run this Wildlife Institute, what guarantee is there, Mr Chairman?

MR WASUGIRYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that actually the other one is a Wildlife Education Centre and it is not a Wildlife Institute.

MR ONGOM:  I am saying for the information, I was only following what is written on the Bill, Mr Chairman.  It is written; Clause 19 says, ‘on the commencement of this Statute, the assets and pending liabilities of the former Wildlife Institute, shall vest in this institute.’  Now I was wondering if actually the name is different, why was necessary to give us the wrong information here?

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, may I inform my brother that, currently we are winding up a number of parastatals and selling them off at a give away price.  But, Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give is that, could the Minister not amalgamate and get this to be Uganda’s School of Wildlife, so that it is under the Uganda Wildlife Institute which is already there.  And then it will be cheaper to the country, so that this is a school to be under the other Body which we created last week.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from the mover of the Bill, please.

MR BACHOU: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would not like hon. Members to confuse the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre in Entebbe which originally you know was the National Zoo, with the Wildlife Institute which is referred to under Clause 19.   When it is time to wind up the debate, I will be able to clarify on this matter and indicate here exactly how we intend to move.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wonder what there is in a name, whether you call it a Wildlife School and a Wildlife Institute.  They should be doing the same thing surely.  The aim is to train people in Wildlife Management.  What is worrying me also on that clause is that, the new institute we are starting is going to take over pending liabilities of the whole institute or whatever Wildlife School.  Now, if the liabilities are not yet there we are only expecting it, is it really necessary to burden a new institution with liabilities which are not yet even known to us and the new institute?  Can the Minister please enlighten us on this?  This is worrying me.  That the liabilities are pending.  We do not know how much this is?  If it is so much we may cripple the new institution immediately with these liabilities.  Mr Chairman, this was the main concern I wanted to find out.  Maybe the Minister in his winding up will -(Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the point the hon. Member on the Floor is labouring has some significance.  If left as wide as that and as vague as that, you may find that the liabilities of the Wildlife Institute which is in place are more than the assets.  And if those liabilities are inherited, they will cripple the functioning of the new institute we are trying to set up.  We could coin a word there.  And say that they will just take over tangible assets or tangible liabilities.  And that means these are liabilities which have assets which are not yet paid for.  But if left unqualified, I tend to support the Member that, we may find that we shall cripple in this organisation.

MR ONGOM:  With that Mr Chairman, I am also not in agreement with Clause 9(2) where it says’ all income and monies of the institute shall be deposited to the credit of the institute in a bank approved by the Minister and shall not be withdrawn etcetera.’  I do not agree that the Minister where you have a whole Board should get involved in appointing a bank where the money of the institute should be banked.  I think that is properly the responsibility of the Board and they do not need to involve the Minister in it, Mr Chairman.  I hope the Minister can see that this is un necessary burden given on the Minister.  And maybe to just alter the word Minister to a Board Chairman.  With those few words, Mr Chairman, I support the Bill. (Applause)

MRS NTABGOBA (Woman Representative, Kisoro):  I stand to support the Bill.  But I have the following to say.  I have noticed that the objects of the institution are very good.  That is to provide studies and training to the students.  Then I have noticed that the work that is to be done by the institute is also very good.  It is quite a long list.  But then when it comes to Clause 4, subsection 2; it says ‘the institute may perform.’  There is this word ‘may’ which gives an option to the Director and to the Board to do certain jobs and leave out some.  If the institute is to do its work properly, there should be no option to the people managing the institution.  Otherwise, we shall end up having half baked students and half services rendered to the people concerned.  I would suggest to the Minister that we use the word ‘shall’ instead of ‘may’.  For efficient services and the running smoothly of the institute.  

Then in Clause 5, Membership to the Board.  It says ‘the Minister shall appoint three people to belong to this Board.’  He does not tell us exactly what type of people are going to be appointed to this Board.  We might find that anybody regardless of qualification, regardless of maybe character and all that, anybody can come up to this Board.  I will suggest that the Bill tells us exactly where these people are to be picked from and on what merit if possible.  Then when it comes to representation on the Board, he decides to have a representation of the students.  I would suggest that the Members of staff, the lecturers or teachers to be represented.  Otherwise, you cannot think of the students’ interests and leave out the teachers.  There will always be complaints and therefore, this will make them feel unrepresented, not cared for, and therefore, they will not be doing the work properly.  The teachers and the workers should be represented on this Board for proper management of the institute.  

I would also suggest that the community in which this institute is built should be represented,  because we always have these people affecting the smooth running of the institute.  Either they will be in for the smooth running of the institute or cause chaos in terms of maybe spoiling the infrastructure or causing some discipline problems to the students.  But if they are represented on the Board, then they become part of the institute and life will be easy and the institute will progress.

Now, next is subsection 3; it talks about the Chairperson who is going to be appointed by the Minister from among the members.  Among the members, we have got the students as well. We have other three people whom we do not know yet.  Suppose there is collaboration or weakness on the part of these people?  Any person could be picked to be chairperson and therefore, if this person happens to be weak in one way or another, then the institute will suffer.  It will not progress.  Therefore, I will suggest that this chairperson is picked maybe from outside this list of members of the Board.  So that we get a proper person, instead of getting maybe a student picked as a chairperson.  Because each of these people has the chance of being picked as a chairperson.  So, for proper management, let this person come from a different group. 

Then when it comes to clause 7, subsection 2; somebody is removed from the office or from being a member of the Board.  It says ‘ the Minister may appoint another person to replace this person.’  The word ‘may’ again, gives an option to the Minister to replace this person or not to replace him.  And when it comes to the quorum for the meeting, it will affect the number of five.  I would suggest whoever is removed from this membership, another person is replaced.  Therefore, the word ‘may’ should not be used.  

Then when it comes to Clause 8; ‘the Employees of the Institute shall hold office on terms and conditions as the Board may determine.’  I request the Minister to see that good conditions of service are laid for these people.  This is an institute which we expect to do go work in training a student, teaching, these students are going to be examined, given certificates or diplomas; and expected to do good work when they complete their training.  Therefore, if these people are going to have hard conditions of services, maybe poor pay, no houses, maybe no transport and such poor conditions; these people will run out of the institute, go elsewhere to look for green pasture; and therefore, we shall suffer lack of proper training and lack of good teachers.  I am requesting that their conditions and terms of service are looked at favourably.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR BAKASHABARUHANGA (Kashari County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all, I have very few observations to make and I support the Motion.  Number one; I am surprised that the hon. Members are worried about the siting of the institute.  Because surely, if the object of the institute is to provide studies in conservation of Wildlife, it is obvious that a lot of these studies will involve practical training which by implication means that the institution must be near where conservation areas exist.  That is how I would look at it.  

I do not like us to be tempted like what I read the other day; that sometimes a politician is a person who promises to build a bridge where there are no rivers.  So the institute by nature if it has to fulfill its objective, must be in an area where there is conservation or where conservation can be easily studied practically. 

Number two; I was surprised when my hon. Brother Adonia said that lions and cows are staying side by side.  These days the method of conservation is no longer exclusive.  Studies have shown that today, it is encouraged for conservation areas to live side by side with communities as long as you teach communities how to behave towards wild animals.  They should be co-existence not exclusive.  So, this is rather surprising to think that a lion - when you go to Bunyaruguru, you should teach people of Bunyaruguru how to look at the wild animals as of value to the nation rather than to say you should put overlain wall between the two communities.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale):  Thank you, very much, Mr Chairman.  We as a country are trying to do away with parastatals and some of us who have been exposed to management principles would rather feel that instead of the institute being separate with its own Board and the rest of it, has the Minister thought of putting that institute under the Uganda Wildlife Authority?  So that, the whole management will be synchronized and therefore, in line with what goes on in the modern world of management.  In doing so we will save quite a bit of money instead of establishing Uganda Wildlife Authority and then we establish the Uganda Wildlife Training Institute.  

If Uganda Wildlife School was to be under the Uganda Wildlife Board, the Executive Director would be the person responsible and then there will be a principal of that institute and then we save quite a bit of money instead of establishing another parastatal completely.  I say this so that we can save money.  And therefore, the principal; the person who will be in charge of the Uganda Wildlife School, would be the person, but he comes under the Board of the Authority; and therefore, seem to be in good line and I would request that the Minister should think about this instead of creating a separate institute at all.  Because that would be spending a bit more money.  Mr Chairman, I agree also that -(Interruption)

DR MAGEZI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much.  I would like to inform the Member on the Floor, that the objective of the Uganda Wildlife Authority as passed last week, are clearly spelt out.  And they include a link how they relate to the proposed Uganda Wildlife Training Institute.  This is an academic institution and the authority embraces the Conservation, the Management, the Committee surrounding Wildlife Parks, the definitions as we went through them now.  And there is no way in which you can say, that you can just have a principal and he will run the Training Institute.  Definitely, the organs being set up under this institute must justify their own creation as it has been before, only that the two must relate to each other.  But not that one must necessarily be under the authority, Mr Chairman.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, experience has shown that bureaucracy wants itself in and keep an institution.  We will like this institute to be self-accounting and free to manoeuvre just like other institutions.  So, for purposes of avoiding bureaucracy, it is better this institute remains on its own separate from the authority.  As the previous speaker had informed this House, there is a clear way in which the authority can relate to this institute.

MR WANENDEYA:  I thank hon. Members who have given me information, Mr Chairman. But it seems to me that the two Members are not aware of management systems which can be co-ordinated. (Laughter)  I say this because in universities you have Research Institutes belonging to  particular university and they can get funds from outside even the university, as long as they are designated for that particular use.  Therefore, the information which has been given to me is not useful if we are to create systems whereby we can conserve extravagance and we are trying to get some of the parastatals to be wound up; and as I said before being sold cheaply.  Mr Chairman, therefore, you will find that under Section 5 of the Uganda Wildlife Training Institute Bill, the Director of the Wildlife Parastatal which I take to be the authority would come in.  So, instead of appointing new directors almost in the same style as the Bill we passed last week, it will be in the best interest of this country to synchronise the two; as it is done in some other countries, Mr Chairman.  I thank you very. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s session.  I give you time to write down your amendments. And with that we have come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. thank you.

(The Council rose at 3.50 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 April at 2.30 p.m.)
                                                               


                           


