Tuesday, 17 April 2007

Parliament met at 3.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you back from the Easter recess and I hope you have had the opportunity to interact with your constituents and you are now ready to work here.  You are very welcome.

3.06
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Rt hon. Speaker.  I rise on a matter of concern to Bunyoro Kingdom where there is an increasing problem.  On the 27th March, before I went on recess, in the villages of Miduma and Kijunjubwa in Kimengo, Masindi District, people who have been hostile to the kingdom attacked the kingdom antiquities. 

There was mob justice whereby the Saza Chief of the king was attacked and his vehicle was burnt.  This happened in the presence of the DISO and instead of apprehending the perpetrators; it was the king’s subjects and the custodian of his place who were dumped in prison with some funny charges levelled against them. It is until a few days ago that they were released on Police bond, yet they had been charged with murder.  How can somebody who has been on a murder charges be released on Police bond?

The community in Bunyoro is very concerned because there is increasing movement of nomads with cattle, which graze in people’s gardens. They consider those gardens to be fodder for their animals; they are very arrogant.  We are wondering where these cows are coming from.  

We are, therefore, requesting the Minister in charge of livestock to let us know where this influx is coming from, and if this is not stopped, it is going to transmit diseases to our animals.  

We are also concerned that to date, the people who caused mob justice and loss of life have never been brought to book.  We are wondering what can be done to make sure that this matter is handled?  Because we are now currently under maximum restraint, we do not want a scenario where people are going to move in self-defence.  As you are aware the kingdom has Abarusura and we do not want to see our own kingdom going into self-defence because the ministry concerned has not protected it.  

The kingdom is very bitter and I would like to request to lay on Table the kingdom’s concerns about this incidence. As you all know, Bunyoro Kingdom has hosted so many people. We have lived with our brothers even when there was war in the North, we lived with people from all over the Great Kitara and we cannot be accused of being tribalists at this point in time.  So, we would like to request those who know where these people are coming from to urge them to be more cultural and stop the arrogance with which they are abusing the kingdom.  I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that is the request from the Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom.  I do not know whether the Minister can take up his part of it.  The document will be sent to the Committee on Gender, Culture and Social Services so that they can study it and give us a report.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF (STATE) FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Right hon. Speaker and honourable members of Parliament this touches of course on security, which is my mandate.  We are fully aware about this incident. We have received reports from both Police and other security agencies. 

I want to assure this House that everything possible is being done to ensure that normality returns to that place.  Investigations are going on and the people who committed those acts will be definitely followed up according to the law.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
3.11
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, this is a ministerial statement on the public demonstrations that were held in Kampala over Mabira Forest.

Right hon. Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, the background to the situation is as follows:

 On 12 of April 2007, some members of Parliament who included: hon. Beatrice Anywar (FDC), hon. Nabilah Sempala (FDC), hon. Erias Lukwago (DP), hon. Beti Kamya (FDC), hon. Jimmy Akena (UPC), hon. David Ebong, (Independent), hon. Sebuliba Mutumba (DP), hon. Kyanjo (JEEMA), Mr Frank Muramuzi (Environmentalists) and some members of the Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA) like Mr Issa Ssekito, spearheaded the demonstration purportedly to express grievances over government’s proposed leasing of part of Mabira Forest to the Sugar Corporation of Uganda Limited (SCOUL).  

Some of the organisers with hidden motives together with criminal elements used the demonstration to cause mayhem in the city.  The results were loss of life and property, as well as general disruption of business, peace and order.  The situation later calmed down after the regular Police was reinforced by the Military Police.


Madam Speaker, prior to the unfortunate events, there had been public debate in the media over the government plan to de-gazette part of Mabira Forest to the Sugar Corporation of Uganda Limited (SCOUL) and this was for sugarcane growing and expansion. The public debate generally tilted in favour of those opposed to the de-gazetting of the forest.

This prompted government to issue a statement in Parliament explaining that the de-gazetting was a proposal still under discussion. This was, however, not accepted by a cross section of the public.

It was against this background that MP Beatrice Atim Anywar the Shadow Minister of Environment wrote to the Inspector General of Police on 5 April2007 notifying him of her intentions to hold a peaceful demonstration on 12 April 2007 in Kampala, over the Mabira Forest give-away.

 In her letter, hon. Anywar indicated that the demonstration would be peaceful and would match from the Railway Yard via Kampala Road, Entebbe Road and converge at the Clock Tower Grounds for a public rally.

The Police in their reply did not object to the procession but directed that Kampala Road should not be used for the purposes of traffic and easy crowd control; instead, the route through Nasser Road - Entebbe Road to Clock Tower Grounds was to be followed. 

Chronology of the events of 12 April 2007

On the 11th April, the Police met and talked to Anywar and repeated that the route to follow would be Nasser Road through Entebbe Road to Clock Tower Grounds. She rejected the Police directive. The Police also talked to Ssekitto and Livingstone Zziwa of KACITA as well as Muramuzi, to try and draw their attention to the likely consequences of the demonstration especially in the business center.

In the early morning of 12 April 2007, the Police deployed to block demonstrators from accessing Kampala Road from the Railway Grounds where they had assembled. Police also deployed in other strategic places such as the roundabouts and road junctions.

At 10.30 a.m., the conveners of the procession and their supporters assembled at the Railway Grounds, and attempted to move to Parliament but they were blocked by Police as this had not been agreed upon earlier on. They again tried to move to the central business area using Kampala Road but were also blocked.

The demonstrators re-grouped at the Railway Grounds, where they started throwing stones at motorists, parked vehicles and the Police. The Police contained the situation, and the procession moved along Nasser and Nkrumah roads towards Entebbe Road. However, in the main, a few defiant leaders, including hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar, insisted and moved along Kampala Road.

At the junction of Entebbe-Kampala Road, one motorist by names of Mohammed Ahmed Harshad, 23, of Asian origin, driving motor vehicle Reg. No UAF 634S, was attacked and injured by the crowd. He was forced to the pavement and accidentally knocked and seriously injured two people, who were rushed to the hospital, one of them being Mr Stephen Kaggwa of Radio One who is admitted at the International Hospital.

Madam Speaker, a motorcyclist also of Asian origin, on motorcycle Reg. No. UDD 333J attempted to ride through the crowd at Clock Tower towards the city centre. The crowd caught and dragged him off his motorcycle and beat him up. The Police rescued the cyclist and rushed him to Mulago Hospital. However, he later died while undergoing treatment. The doctors recorded the cause of his death as a head injury. 

A group attacked a Military Police vehicle with stones and broke its windscreen at Najjanankumbi on Entebbe Road in an attempt to block a convoy perceived to have been carrying Mehta. Military personnel shot in the air to disperse the attackers.

The crowd along Entebbe Road attacked another motorcyclist again of Asian Origin and he ran into the Hindu Temple for refugee. The crowd besieged the temple and threatened to burn it.  The Police intervened and dispersed the crowd. Part of the crowd broke into the Bata Shoe Shop along Luwum Street and looted the shop. 


An unruly crowd at the Clock Tower set ablaze a trailer registration number KAX 662M belonging to Tom Mugenga, a Kampala businessman.

A motorcycle shop at Katwe was broken into and 12 motorcycles and assorted spare parts were stolen. Fortunately, 11 motorcycles have been recovered since.

A security guard from Uganda Securiko reportedly shot a suspected looter dead at Maria Galleria Building, along Dastur Road. The guard has since been arrested and investigations into the shooting have been instituted.

Unknown people shot an unidentified person near Barclays Bank on Luwum Street. Police is investigating this incident. 

One Mohammed Kateregga, 39, was shot and injured by unknown persons outside Bank of Uganda. He was admitted at Old Mulago Hospital and is still undergoing treatment.

Steps taken by the Police

Madam Speaker, what are the steps so far taken by the Police?  The Anti-Riot Police was called in and they took charge of routes to curtail rioters. 

The Military Police was called in as a support force to prevent the escalation of the riot. 

The Police was deployed to rescue and protect the Asians.  

The injured were assisted by the Police to go to hospital, while intensive investigations are underway and arrests of a number of suspects have been carried out. 

34 people have been arrested so far, with several offences ranging from murder, inciting violence, malicious damage to property, and outright theft. 

The Police have stepped up security in the city and has deployed both foot and motorised patrols in the whole of Kampala and the outer areas. 

The Police continue to monitor the situation to ensure law and order, as well as the protection of life and property for, and of, everyone.  

In conclusion, government regrets the events of 12 April 2007, in which innocent people died and property was destroyed and lost, and totally condemns the perpetrators of such barbaric actions. 

Government notes with deep concern the defiance and impunity on the part of some of the organisers.  It also abhors the extent of destruction of life, property and business in general. 

Government will continue with investigations to bring to book the wrongdoers. 

Government wishes to appeal to the entire population, especially those in and around Kampala, particularly the foreign business community, to remain calm.  

Government will do everything possible to prevent a recurrence of similar incidents. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister.

3.25
MR TANNA SANJAY (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker and honourable members of this August House, I stand up today to condemn the acts of violence that were perpetrated on the streets of Kampala last Thursday.  Following the statements from the honourable minister, there was loss of three lives on the streets of Kampala that day, as a result of a demonstration that was supposed to have been peaceful. 

The cause of the demonstration, in my own opinion, was very noble.  Therefore, the loss of property, the loss of lives, the loss of business and the loss of integrity of the human race, is really condemnable. 

It is unfortunate that the media, especially the international media, has chosen to focus on only the death of one Asian. The international media has gone ahead to report the actions of Ugandans to be racist.  

I would really like to urge the press, through you, Madam Speaker, to correct that image because, like the Minister has just said, Tom Mugenga is not of Asian origin yet he lost a lot of property.  There are several other Ugandans who lost property and two other Ugandans who lost their lives. Therefore, to magnify only one event is extremely sad and is a misrepresentation of facts.  

I would like to further elaborate. If the Ugandan people were racist, I would not be standing here today –(Applause)-  Madam Speaker, to put the record right, there is only one Ugandan of Asian origin in my constituency who voted for me.  So, really how can the international media and the Ugandan media also come out and say that it was a racist attack? 

There are several other people caught up in that jam. I found a woman of black colour with two kids at Central Police Station that day.  She was also caught up.  

So, I would like to request each one of us seated here, and those out there, in our various capacities as leaders who the people listen to, to refrain from comments and opinions that could incite the crowds to behave in a sectarian manner. This is a global village. 

In the last few days, I have spent a lot of my time on international media trying to explain that, had that person of Asian origin, who the Minister has mentioned, not knocked into that crowd, we would probably not have had that death.  So, it is a sequence of events that was probably uncontrollable. 

 It is important that we acknowledge one major fact. Our democracy is still in its infancy. Those seated on the opposition and those seated on the government side both need to recognise that freedom of expression is one of the pillars of democracy. Government came out in goodwill and granted permission. However, this was abused by the people who went out on the streets that day. So, who is to blame?

 I believe strongly, that rather than asking the question, “Who is to blame?” I would like to ask,” What is the damage?”  We are damaging the democracy that we have today and should we continue repeatedly abusing our right to freedom, we will come to a corner one day where we will be denied that right.  

I would, therefore, like to urge all leaders in their own capacities, to condemn the acts of violence. It is very unfortunate that it happened.  I also stand up to condemn the misrepresentation of the facts, and categorically condemn whoever is inciting violence on the basis of race, colour, creed and religion. Like the honourable minister said, a prayer house was also attacked. It can become very volatile. I would not want us to start something that we cannot control. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.31
MS JESSICA ALUPO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for his statement. I would also like to commend the demonstrators for their attempted peaceful demonstration, which later on degenerated into violence. They stated in their request to the Police that they wanted to show how and why Mabira should not be given away. It is true that Mabira is ecologically important to the country. But I would also like to join my colleague, and condemn the sins committed during the course of the demonstration that turned out to be violent, and to some extent sectarian and satanic, since so many innocent people lost their lives and property. This was not the motive of the demonstration. 

The demonstrators and their leaders have shown this country that such demonstrations are always used and exploited to achieve very many hidden agendas, which are even politically motivated. Therefore, it is incumbent upon us as leaders of Uganda, to totally condemn and look for ways of holding peaceful demonstrations in future, to send a message to whomever it is supposed to be sent to, without interfering with the lives of people and the property of others. 

I would also like to note that -(Interjection) 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know you will give me opportunity to speak but there is urgent information I need to pass on.  

As we sit here, we are aware that my colleagues are not around. But even before we set out to go to Court with the MP for Kyamuswa, and other people, there is now a team of people in civilian clothes armed with clubs, unleashed by the government Minister of Internal Affairs on the streets of Kampala. If they find you standing in twos, you are clobbered. It does not matter whether you are a son of a diplomat or even a security officer in civilian clothes, these people do not ask questions. As such, two MPs were beaten. It is puzzling! The people were saying, “ I was crossing the road and I was clobbered”. 

At least if these were policemen, people would identify them as policemen. But these are people in civilian clothes, with clubs, beating other people. So, how do we handle the situation? This is the information I want to give you. It is happening on the streets right now and we have recorded it. The Police are there and people are being beaten as we speak.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister will explain to us how that happened.

MS ALUPO: I want to thank my colleague for that information. I think those are the measures that the Minister talked about in his report, that are being taken in order not to have that incident repeated. 

Finally, the demonstrators and their leaders have set a very bad precedent because they have shown that a demonstration can be used to solve tribal and religious sentiments, and perhaps, even business sentiments, you never know. I propose that if a demonstration is to be held, especially one that is supposed to be politically motivated, investigations have to be carried out first before the demonstration is allowed. This is because it is now common knowledge that any demonstration requires the intervention of the Police, the Military Police as well as the use of tear gas, if we are to protect people who are innocent. These demonstrations are becoming platforms for achieving different hidden agendas. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.40
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs for coming out with this timely and very articulated statement. 

Last week, I was extremely taken aback when I watched television and I saw my colleagues, the honourable members of Parliament, in the forefront of violence. I was taken extremely aback. Earlier on, some people from the media rang me and asked for my opinion on Mabira, which I gave them. Little did I know that I was yet to see something very bad in the form of violence being led by colleagues from this House. 

It was bad! So we must ask this question: who is to blame? Let us not beat about the bush. Somebody must be squarely held responsible. The children were telling me, “Look here uncle. Hey, you mean that is an MP also?” And I said, “Yes.” And even that one?” I said, “Yes”. And they are your friend?”  They said, “No. You cannot be a friend to those people.” I said, “Yes, there are my friends.” It was very unfortunate and bad. We must squarely and roundly put this blame to whoever was leading this demonstration. 

In my answer to the press, I said, “Yes. I do not support the degazetting of Mabira.” However, that does not mean that I had to go to the streets and start throwing stones and killing my colleagues, my friends, my fellow Ugandans. Now, who has lost? Is it India? Is it Kenya? It is we Ugandans that have lost today. We are the losers. Let us not hide behind certain clauses and say, “Hey, we have got it.” 

The last time I saw this kind of thing was during the overthrow of Amin. At that time I was a student at Makerere and we were being encouraged to loot. Yeah. The people would say, “Wanainchi njonjo hapa”, blow off the shop and then order people to go in. Oh my God! I thought these were days gone but alas, it is in our midst. Why should somebody die simply because you are trying to put a point across that you care so much about Mabira more than Alex Byarugaba or any other person? 

No, you are not special and neither are we but we do not have to kill our friends. To kill in the name of Mabira is not godly either; even future generations will blame us. Why do you have to kill to protect the environment when you can talk about it? This is something we have not even talked about and I am here to blast it. I am going to blow it and not support it -(Applause)- Yes, I am not. 

Those of you who were in the Seventh Parliament will remember when we heard that this is the time for us to talk using the microphone, not guns, sticks or stones. But what are we seeing? The opposition must come to terms with reality that Uganda has moved from that chaotic situation to a multiparty democracy and we must be able to behave ourselves. Surely we must. 

I saw a certain Parliament, I do not remember which, where members of the opposition were flying over to fight Members on the government side. I do not expect to see myself jumping over there to fight Alex, Godi, my colleague and friend or hon. Ekanya a very good friend of mine. I do not want to imagine that. 

I am a little bit emotional about this because I have gone through it, hon. Speaker. I have gone through this and I do not want the next generation to see what I saw during the bad days. I do not want to see that again. I do not even want my children to see it. I do not want those people –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Can I give you information?

MR BYARUGABA: Please.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. colleague for giving way. I have been intrigued by history. You have talked of the racism of 1973. If I may read verbatim what the framers of this Constitution wrote in respect to equality and freedom from discrimination. “All persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social culture, life and every other respect and shall enjoy equal protection of the law without prejudice. 

Clause 1 of this article states: “A person shall not be discriminated against on grounds of sex, race, colour, ethnic, origin, tribe, birth, religion, social-economic standing, political opinion and disability.” On TV, on Thursday, I saw somebody holding a placard and even one member was saying that for one tree cut, five Asians should die. This is serious because that is racism. 

I have seen in The Red Pepper today that Ugandans are going to be deported. We have Ugandans who are working in Europe. Suppose they are treated the same –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is that information or a submission?

MR KAKOOZA: I appeal to Members. This is the information I wanted to give you- (Laughter)

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, hon. Speaker. The National Objectives and Directives of Principles of State Policy, that is our Constitution and Roman XXVIII goes further to emphasise what my colleague has just elaborated upon. Racism is something we should not even be talking about. We have seen states that have gone through racism and the evils that devour the people therein. 

What would we call racism? Racism in the Oxford Advanced Learners’ Dictionary is defined as, “Unfair treatment of people who belong to a different race or use of violent behaviour towards them”. It is a belief that some races are more superior to the others. I saw these placards being carried and a hon. Member was not ashamed to be party to that. This is a global village. We must be able to respect one another. We should be able to encourage love and tolerance and we should be able to learn to live together as Ugandans. Thank you.

3.46
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the statement. I would also like to send my condolences to the three families that lost their relatives.

Madam Speaker, the cause of the demonstration was a noble one, but I want to quote from the minister’s statement that if the organisers had followed the designated roads this violence would not have erupted. 

We all know that our Constitution gives us the right to demonstrate when there is a pertinent issue but I want to encourage and advise hon. Members and the country at large to try and work within the law. Time came when even the organisers could not control the mob. It is extremely regrettable that we lost lives and property. 

Madam Speaker, I know very well that our Rules do not allow us to anticipate, but I would have loved for the Minister- because as we talk, we are just discussing the symptoms. We must discuss the gist of the matter. We are just protecting Kampala but I want to inform you that about two days ago in Mukono people started losing property whenever Wanainchi identify them as having dealings with MEHTA.

People have mature cane that is ready for harvest and they have contracts with MEHTA so they cannot sell their sugarcane to anybody else. However, anyone who harvests to sell to MEHTA has his or her sugarcane burnt. There is need for government to come up openly and resolve this issue. You are going to receive very many of these statements because last night I was in my constituency on one of my islands called Lyabana and the people told me openly, “It is up to you. If you give up Mabira some of your property will be lost”. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, concerning the way the Mabira issue has reached- the Executive this is a very good document but we want to be told if Mabira is to be given away today. Let us know or let us debate it rather than being on bunkenke every day, everywhere -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give is that on Friday I was travelling to Jinja between the beginning of the estate and the end. I found more than 12 roadblocks and on coming back on Friday evening it was even worse. The question is, for how long are we going to create uncertainty in this country? For how long are we going to create fear and for how long are we going to say that we are talking of demonstrations? 

I thought this Parliament is here to resolve issues in this country. This is because when we say that the public should come out to demonstrate when we should be telling them what is right and wrong means that the Parliament is useless. Can I, therefore, request that this Parliament prevails and that we come out and dispose of this issue of Mabira? I thank you so much.

MR NSUBUGA: I want to thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, my last appeal is that I condemn violence but there is always a cause for violence and that is where the matter arises. 

As we talk the people of Mukono District especially areas surrounding MEHTA that grow sugarcane are in terrible problems. We want an assurance from government because even selling Lugazi sugar is a crime. In Kampala you can get protection; I have also seen the policemen but what about in Kiyindi and the islands? We all know the policemen are still on the ground. 

I know the Executive have a timetable of when to table the Mabira issue but since we have already lost lives there is need to expedite the process such that this issue is settled once and for all. 

I would also love to get an assurance from the Minister of Investment because I recall that a few days ago we received an assurance from Mengo government that they also have the equivalent of land to give to MEHTA. 

As we are debating this violence we should also be thinking loudly of the alternative. If at all there is an alternative let the government rise to the alternative. If Kabaka gave land and the land has no squatters because that is also very important, let us go for that option. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you are anticipating the future debate.

3.53
MR DAVID EBONG (INDEPENDENT, Maruzi County, Apac): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. Chinua Achebe in his book, “Things Fall Apart” says when a frog jumps out of water during daytime that means that something is after its life. It is for that reason that I rise to contribute to this pertinent issue when the report of the Minister of Internal Affairs is also implicating me as being one of those at the forefront as far as this demonstration is concerned. 

To put records clear, as far as I am concerned this report could be true to the extent that it is a mind reader and it is pre-empting my position as far as Mabira is concerned. However, I did not participate in the demonstration neither was I part of the planning team of the demonstration -(Interruption) 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to, first of all, apologise that hon. Ebong’s name was included. This is not correct. The person who was being referred to and who is not on the list is actually hon. Prof. Anokbongo who is here. I want to profusely apologise for that error and that is the information that I want to give -(Laughter)

MR EBONG: However, Madam Speaker, I should not hasten to add that I had moral and spiritual support for the demonstration in as far as the issue of Mabira is concerned. We are at the climax where Uganda should be confronting very squarely the issue of climate change and Mabira should be at the centre stage of being conserved so that Uganda is strategically well placed to tackle the issue of global warming and climate change. 

Madam Speaker, I join the rest of the colleagues in the strongest way possible to condemn racism in this era. Where the World is a global village racism is no longer called for and we regret the death of the three persons. 

We should also strongly condemn the international press for promoting racism. When a black man dies he is not counted but when it is a white person then he is more human than the black one. I think this is what we should say to the World and we should confront it at whatever level we may be. Racism is no longer justified in this era of the 21st Century. 

I want government to look at this issue in a fairly open way because when I look at the names of the people implicated as being on the forefront of the demonstration, this is a common cause and we all share in it whether you are independent, NRM or FDC in this Parliament. It does not matter what party you belong to. 

I tend to suspect that even the investigation is flawed because there are reports that are also saying that some of the individuals inclined to the NRM party were also part of this demonstration but the report has totally exonerated them. This is the unfairness of this report. I could have gone on to name them but the same source that brought this report should go ahead to substantiate. I agree, the issue of Mabira should not be politicised – (Interjection)

MR EKANYA: Hon. Speaker, the minister needs to retract his report and come up with a better report. His report has many mistakes because there are some MPs who were there –(Laughter)- The MPs were there, there is a video record of this. I want these MPs to come out honestly. 

There are several inaccuracies too. Jinja-Entebbe Road was the gazetted route for the demonstration; this means that traffic should have been diverted. If traffic had been diverted, these motorists would not have hit youths who were playing the band but Police never closed traffic and instead allowed people to demonstrate and continue driving vehicles on this road. This is what sparked violence. This is the mistake of police but the minister in charge has not mentioned this. I can continue to mention more. 

In good faith hon. Minister, you need to retract this report and where need be, Madam Speaker, we need a Select Committee because Police cannot investigate itself.

MR EBONG: Madam Speaker, we need to justify locally as a government of the Republic of Uganda our commitment to address this issue in the fairest way possible. We need to take a pro-active move to collaborate with the Indian government in dealing with this issue and assure the people of the Republic of India that Government of Uganda is in control of this issue and we should restrain whatever action that would promote racism on the part of these two countries. 

We have over 2,000 Ugandans in India and we also have Indian brothers and sisters in Uganda in big numbers. These governments must take a very pro-active move to ensure that there is clear collaboration in addressing this issue of racism and call on people to be calm. 

Lastly, the responsibilities we are conducting today either as parliamentarians or as the President of the Republic of Uganda are delegated responsibilities from citizens of this country. When a responsibility is delegated to you as a politician, the element of being accountable is more than important, so that we avoid the unequal relationship between governments and citizens. 

If I am taking a decision as a Member of Parliament, there should be justification that it reflects the wishes of the citizens. This is the scenario, which has blown the issue of Mabira out of proportion and compelled citizens to take the law into their hands. 

Government should be more accountable on the issue of Mabira and listen to what the local people are saying. Sometimes they say that democracy is the dictatorship of the majority against the minority.  When I look at leaders who are still very confident in moving to degazette Mabira at whatever cost, I take it from their own words, although this issue has not yet come formally – (Interruption)– we should indeed ensure that we act basing on the wishes of our people, after all, what is leadership? Leadership of whatever form assumes the existence of the people, and it is for the happiness of the led. Thank you.

MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raise to express concern over the saddening circumstances in which the home of our party president, John Ken Lukyamuzi –(Laughter)- was invaded by unidentified men who were armed, and in civilian clothes on Sunday. Right now we do not know his whereabouts. Government should tell this House where our party president is –(Interjection)

MR OGONG: I want to inform my sister that actually your father is not lost. He is under the Mayuni –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is under what? –(Laughter)

MR OGONG: Under the yams –(Laughter)– Mayuni.

MS NAMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, the honourable colleague does not know what he is talking about. I wish to read the number plates of those vehicles, which had parked adjacent to our home. These are: UAA 911A, Mark II, UAH 235K, Saloon car, among many others.

Madam Speaker, in this multiparty dispensation, a member or a leader of a political party is not supposed to be treated in such a manner as if we are in Amin’s regime. 

On behalf of my party and on behalf of the people I represent, I would like to ask government to tell us where our party president is –(Interjection) 

Madam Speaker, in this Mabira saga, it is the government and the Police to blame. The Police permitted the demonstration and guaranteed security to people but this was ignored. Police failed to follow the demonstrators wherever they went. They even failed to identify the key demonstration points where these people were. Government and Police should come up and explain. 

Madam Speaker, Mabira is a central forest reserve, which should be protected and held in trust by the government as articulated under Article 237 2(b). We need a White Paper on Mabira. We need members of Parliament to express their interest on Mabira degazettement. Otherwise, if government fails, we shall do something –(Interjection)- As members of Parliament and as concerned citizens, we are supposed to protect our natural resources.

MR KASAIJA: Hon. Speaker, I am seeking clarification. I do not know whether we should be addressing ourselves on Mabira at this time when government has not presented this matter before Parliament. The Prime Minister stood before this House and said, “In due course if this becomes necessary, this matter will be presented to Parliament.” 
So, I am seeking clarification as to whether we are in order to debate this matter. Shouldn’t we rather concentrate on what happened on the 12 April 2007?  Thank you –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think Members got carried away and are continuously going back to the issue of Mabira. It would help if we had a timeframe in which we are to discuss this matter so that we concentrate on this debate and identify the time -(Applause)- You will not believe it, I was in some villages deep in Bukoli over the weekend, and peasants were asking me about Mabira. It is a matter of concern. It is a matter of urgency. Government should give us a timeframe towards which we can work.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification because the demonstration that was allowed by the Police seemed to be a demonstration against the proposed degazettement of Mabira. It is from that proposed demonstration that subsequent events happened that led to the Minister producing this statement. Would it be unwise, in the process of debating this statement, to refer to what caused the circumstances to occur, that is, Mabira forest? 

I want to be guided because you will find it difficult to talk about this statement without talking about Mabira unless we are going to postpone the entire debate on the statement by the Minister until government concludes on the issue of Mabira. I wanted to seek guidance from your Chair, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, government has admitted that the spirit in which the demonstration started was okay, and that that is why they gave it permission to proceed. If there had been no subsequent events, we would not be discussing this matter. They would have demonstrated and gone to their homes. Let us focus on the circumstances that occurred afterwards and get a timeframe from the government. When are we going to discuss this matter because it is such a public issue that we shall keep going back to? 

MR KALIBA: I need some guidance from you, Madam Speaker. I need to be guided because the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs granted permission to the demonstrators on an issue that has not been debated in Cabinet or brought to this Parliament. Was the Ministry right to grant permission to these demonstrators when they knew well that the matter had not been debated in Parliament or in Cabinet? I need guidance on that matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there had been no hooliganism or violence, this issue would not be here. If they had demonstrated peacefully and gone to their homes, it would have ended there. Government was right to give them permission because they knew their intentions were good, only that subsequently other events occurred, which are now causing this debate.

MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for the paper he has presented, except that the paper has gaps as to what really sparked off the violence. I request, honourable members, to look at page 4, where road junctions are mentioned, Entebbe-Gaba Road and Clock Tower-Entebbe Road. These roads were gazetted for the demonstration. 

The reason, which is portrayed, to have sparked off the demonstration was that the demonstrators used a road, which was not gazetted for that purpose and that was Kampala Road. Where did these deaths occur? Were the people who were killed, injured and maimed found on Kampala Road or they were in areas, which were gazetted for the demonstration? 

In my opinion, this issue should unite us as Ugandans. Foreigners who are in Uganda are also within the boundaries of Uganda, they need a good environment, and they should also join us. Over generalisation of hatred on the basis of race is too much. Even if the issue is against Indians, we also have other people of Asian origin who are here. We have Arabs, we have Japanese, and we have Chinese. If you say Ugandans are now racist and that the racism is against Asians, can you quote Japanese or Chinese who have been attacked for this same reason? 

I thank my brother, hon. Tanna Sanjay from Tororo Municipality for coming out strongly – (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much honourable member for giving way. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I have had an opportunity to participate in a number of public meetings under which the issue of Mabira forests has been discussed. 

The last meeting I attended was organised by Nature Uganda. I was invited as one of the discussants. When the meeting was discussing the proposed degazettement of Mabira, an impression was created in the room that members of the Asian community were propelling it. 

In the meeting, we had about six members of the Asian community but whenever they talked about Mehta, everybody grinned when he looked at them. When they were given an opportunity to talk, one of them was Abid Alam, an investor in the eco-tourism lodge in Mabira Forest, stood up and spoke strongly against the proposed degazettement. So, if he had been got in the process of this demonstration, he could have been injured and hurt, yet he has even committed resources to ensure that the environment of Uganda is better protected than some other Ugandans.  

I wanted to give this information to this Parliament, and for the public to know that there are many people out there who were being victimised for a case, which is not necessarily theirs.  I thank you very much.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much for this information. Asians in Uganda also need a good environment.  In the particular case of Mabira, there are very many of them who are opposed to the giving away of the forest to the Mehta Group of Companies.

Secondly, violence is bad for all of us, and it is not an activity or a characteristic of the members of the opposition. If you are honest, those of you who are in the NRM Party and who participated in the planning of, and in the demonstration itself, you would willingly tell us that you were there, so that we share.

The violence that was experienced that day of the demonstration is as bad as the violence of today, and as bad as the violence of tomorrow.  Most of you who have condemned the violence in this House now have not referred to the violence, which is still going on now as I speak.  

Hon. Ekanya gave information here. I was there together with our Leader of the Opposition.  We went to the Court to stand surety and to make sure that our hon. Members, hon. Hussein Kyanjo (JEEMA) and hon. Beatrice Anywar (FDC), get bail and come out, as investigations continue.  But I saw with my own eyes, about 100 people armed with sticks and guns, beating up people as the Police and the Army men in red tops stood by.  Now if you say violence is bad, why do we allow this to happen here?

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member holding the Floor is continuously repeating it that, security officers guarding the Court were part of violence.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude please.

MR FUNGAROO: I think the honourable Member needs to be informed.  I did not refer to the members of the security forces, like the Police and the army guarding the Court, as being violent.  I was actually saying that it would be good if it was a Policeman in Police uniform or a soldier in Army uniform, beating up people, since he would be on duty, because, then we would ask him to explain since we would have known who he is. Now, somebody you do not know, beating up people and the army men and policemen are there, and they are not arresting that person? That is my point of contention.  

MS MUHANGA: Madam Speaker, when you read the newspapers about what happened on the streets on Thursday, demonstrators actually threw stones at the Policemen. First of all, you must know that not all people who are in security or the Police have to wear a uniform. It is of importance that the security can deploy people not dressed in uniform to control some of these situations.  

Honourable members, if you had shops in town and they were looted, like it happened to these people who are running businesses, would you support any more demonstrations in this town? Some of them are even operating on loans, and all their property has been taken. Now, their houses are going to be taken by banks.  Surely, Madam Speaker, I think sometimes security can deploy the way they want. You do not have to say people have to wear uniform.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you honourable member for giving way. I witnessed what the hon. Member is talking about and I disagreed totally with my colleague hon. Muhanga.  Bad must be bad, and it must be condemned. I must commend the Minister of Internal Affairs with whom I shared this experience when I was driving on Kampala Road and I met a group of young men with sticks, chasing other young men. It was actually a state of hooliganism.  When I informed the Minister, he took action and informed the Inspector General of Police, and then he came and whispered to me that it has stopped.   This is what we want to see Ministers doing. 

I saw young men with sticks, chasing other young men with stones and they were all in civilian clothes.  You could not tell who the hooligan was or who was not a hooligan; it was all hooliganism. Many were saying these ones are the official military men. If such an operation is to happen and the Policemen were just seated in hundreds, watching the stampede, I get so concerned.  It was so bad.  If such operation is to happen, let it be carried out by the Police in uniform, Army men in uniform or the LDU in uniform.  If it is these other laymen like ISO who are not in uniform, it should be a joint operation.  But seeing civilians with guns, and sticks while Policemen wearing uniform are sitting and not doing anything must be condemned.  

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I hate violence and I hate for our country to proceed to a state of lawlessness. When I was outside, I heard you say in respect to this matter- I heard you say, Madam Speaker, that the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs will have to clarify on the matter of civilians beating up other civilians in the presence of Policemen.  This matter is now taking another dimension.  In order for us not to go back to it, can the honourable minister now stand up and explain to us the circumstances under which some group of civilians are armed with sticks and allowed to beat up people even in the premises of Court?

MR MABBIKE: Madam Speaker, I would like to give this House very important information.  The incident that happened today is a very, very serious one and in fact if the trend continues, this country is going to blow up into flames.  

Yesterday when the announcements were put on radio and other media that the G6 leaders would meet at Christ the King this morning, a similar meeting took place at UTODA offices in Old Kampala. The G6 is a group of the six big political parties. A meeting was organised and elements purporting to be security operatives of UTODA – I am told UTODA has got its own security department - were mobilised and briefed on the steps they would take – (Interjection)- The thugs in civilian clothes who first surrounded Christ the King have been on the streets causing mayhem and they have their origin in UTODA. This can be investigated. We can volunteer more information to Police. There are many video recordings that were taken yesterday during this meeting. I think this matter should be taken seriously.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I received this information, and as hon. Banyenzaki said we shared it and alerted the Police leadership. They are now investigating and handling the issue. When we have more information, we will readily make it available to our colleagues in this House. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 


MR FUNGAROO: As I wind up, I would like to say that the debate that has taken place here has come to one conclusion, that violence is bad; violence yesterday, today and tomorrow is bad. Two, we have also observed that demonstrations are necessary because in a democratic environment they are a way of expression – (Interruption) - Yes, peaceful demonstrations are necessary. 

Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to the last observation. My people of Obongi Constituency are among the people of Northern Uganda who have suffered, but I have never seen people rising up to demonstrate in any of these rural areas. This implies that demonstrations are a characteristic of urban consciousness. This brings us to the question, “Where should demonstrations take place?” Obongi is not for demonstrations. Demonstrations are for Kampala City. 

If demonstrations are a characteristic of urban consciousness, how can you say that they should not take place in the urban centre? We have sacrificed Kampala Road before. When dignitaries are passing, we tell our people that at such a time we shall have VIPs passing through this road. We see the Police surrounding the place and Ugandans respect that. Now, if Ugandans have deemed it necessary to have a demonstration through Kampala Road, why don’t you sacrifice one hour and tell the public to close shops because there is going to be a demonstration, so that we can avoid these problems. 

Honourable members, when someone says that if we do not prevent the continuity of men in civilian clothes carrying arms Uganda will explode, then you are making a mistake. Assume there are rebels passing here with guns, how do I report to Police that I have seen men who are not supposed to carry guns passing here with guns? I will assume that these are the usual people designated to do this kind of work. That is why in the Minister’s report here, the people he refers to as having been killed are said to have been killed by unknown people. They are unknown because they were in civilian clothes. Now, why do you want to continue with that kind of dilemma? If they kill people in Gulu tomorrow, as long as they are not in uniform we shall assume that they are the usual killers.

In conclusion, rules are rules and they must be for everybody. Emergencies are emergencies; Minister of Disaster preparedness, this issue is an emergency. The issue of Mabira is also an emergency. Why do you keep Ugandans waiting for a very long time when you can save them by telling them the true stand of Government?

4.32
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to start on the premise that demonstration is a constitutional right. Article 29(d) of the Constitution talks about protection of freedom of conscience, expression, movement, religion, assembly and association. It says: 

“Every person shall have the right to – 
(d) freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition.”

I wanted to start on that premise, so that the debate should not be whether or not the demonstration was necessary. It is a right.

Secondly, the demonstration was legally sanctioned by the Police. Despite the fact that the Minister is talking about the people who demonstrated, we should recognise that a group of people demonstrated peacefully and followed the right route that the Minister has talked about in his statement. I think the Minister should have recognised that despite the fact that a group of people moved through a route that was not designated, there was another group, including hon. Tom Butime, who followed the right route.

I also want to note that the demonstration started across party lines. The majority of the people could have been opposition members, but there were many people who were not members of the Opposition. There were people of the civil society and many other people who were not of the Opposition. Besides, after the incident of the Asian attack, the Asian Community vividly came out and said that they are going to talk to Mehta, and the majority of them are not for de-gazetting Mabira Forest. So, we should also recognise that the Asia Community are with the Ugandans, and that the issue of not de-gazetting is an issue for all Ugandans. 

Thursday’s events should not derail us from the bigger issue. The bigger issue is that Ugandans are united. Ugandans are united that Mabira should not be de-gazetted. I think as of now, that is the stand of many Ugandans and the stand of many members of this august House.  

I also want to agree with the people who are saying that violence and racist tendencies must be condemned. I want to agree with hon. Tanna that we should not talk about racism in Uganda per say but we should talk about the racist tendencies that were manifested on Thursday. There were tendencies by some people to bring up racist behaviour, but in Uganda racism is generally not here. We have lived with people from all over the world in this country and we have never had problems. If racist tendencies are emerging, everybody must condemn them. 

I further want to condemn some “rights” that were displayed. The issue of killing one Indian can be explained, but I cannot agree with the messages on some of the placards, for example, “One Tree Cut, Five Indians Dead” and “Amin Was Right”. We must know that we have people studying in India and others are admitted in hospitals there. There are also many black people out there in Europe. We are putting these people at risk.  

As leaders, I think we must guide our people. If this incident was an isolated one, which I think it was, we must condemn it and urge our people to stop any such occurrences. We must ensure that we do not put Africans in danger. When it comes to India, it is not only Ugandans but also other Africans as well. Whenever they see a black person, that person will be in trouble. 

Madam Speaker, I also think that we need to try and find out where Mehta’s arrogance is coming from. Even after the demonstration, the man is interviewed and he says, “The issue of Mabira, go and ask so and so. For us we are still with Mabira.” When he is asked whether he will accept the land from the Kabaka, he says, “That will be additional land.” Where is this arrogance coming from? We need to start questioning investors who are coming to Uganda. Why are some of the investors not following the right procedures? The issue should come to Parliament, but the man is behaving as if the issue has already been concluded –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, let me give my sister some information. In the Sixth Parliament, we were looking at how Mehta was claiming money from Government concerning the UGMA project. Recently, we have established that Mehta is doing what is called “insider trading”, contrary to the laws of this country.  He has not been paying corporate tax, alleging that the company is making losses. However, he lends the company money to himself at a rate of more than 25 percent, the rate that the banks would give. By the end of the financial year when his books are computed, the company has incurred losses. This information is with government officials.  

I want to say what I have received –(Interjections)- we received this information from senior government officials who studied an audit, which was carried out on Mehta by KPMG. Although all the government officials agree that this is illegal and is contrary to the law of this country, nobody has moved on Mehta. So, you need to know where the man draws his strength.

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I think we need to revisit the broader issue of the policy on investors. Some investors must not feel more of investors than others. I want to appeal to Government; the people have spoken and government draws their powers from the people. The people vote and they surrender their power to people to govern them. The people have spoken. I want to say we cannot isolate this debate from the Mabira de-gazettment.  

The broader question is, “how do we follow the land policy when it comes to the recent issue of the forest give away?” We need to answer the broad question of investment policy, how investors follow procedures and how we allocate resources and valuable land to investors. I want to call upon Government to, -(Interjection)- I am pleased with the recent development within the Executive, if that is a correct report. I hope that the Government will listen to the voices of the people over Mabira Forest and soon it will be disposed of.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.41
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I make any comments on the statement made by the Minister of Internal Affairs - I hope he is listening - I would like to inform the House about the message from the Leader of the Opposition. 

Madam Speaker, I have been told by the Leader of Opposition that earlier on in the day, he was in contact with the Office of the Speaker. He informed the Office of the Speaker that members of the Opposition will be in court trying to see the fate of some of our colleagues who are in police custody now –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Speaker did he inform? I am the Speaker now and he did not inform me. I was not informed. 

MR KAJEKE: I am delivering the message, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I am telling you that I was not informed.

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, he told me that he informed the Rt. hon. Speaker, Edward Ssekandi. He said that the statement made by the Minister of Internal Affairs should be deferred to tomorrow because most of us would be in court today. However, now that the statement is on the Floor of the House, he says that the official position of the Opposition and the response to the statement will be delivered tomorrow but members are free to make their comments, and therefore I also want to make my comments on the statement.

Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister for the statement –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kajeke, is it the position of FDC that they will speak tomorrow, and are you now abdicating from that arrangement?

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, I am saying that the official position of the Opposition, not FDC, will be made tomorrow. However, members here are free to make comments on this statement now that it is on the Floor of the House. I now want to proceed to make my comments on this statement. 

The Minister has named the purported leaders of the demonstration. When you look at the names, any reasonable person would think that there is an innuendo here that the demonstration was an issue of the Opposition, because all the Members of Parliament named here are members of the Opposition. Honourable minister, I want to make it clear that the demonstration was not for the Opposition. It was for Ugandans. It was citizens of Uganda who were demonstrating, opposing the de-gazetting of Mabira Forest because it is a natural resource. 

I even thought you would have the courtesy, honourable minister, since you were naming Members of Parliament, to name other Members of Parliament who are not from the Opposition, because I saw them at the demonstration. There was hon. Butime. He is not a member of the Opposition and he has not denied that he was there. I also saw hon. Tanna. I think it would have been courteous to also name these -(Interjection)- Hon. Tanna is an independent person, but of course he signed a memorandum of understanding -(Interruption) 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kajeke is naming some members who are not in the Opposition and were at that demonstration. I would like him to clarify why his name is not here since he saw these people like hon. Butime and others. So, he is also accusing the minister for not including him. Thank you. 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, hon. Kajeke has just mentioned that I was at the demonstration but that is not true. I would like an honourable member to behave in an honourable manner. We swore, when we were initiated into Parliament, to speak the truth. At no time was I part of the demonstration. I was in Kakiri with honourable colleagues from the beginning to the end. By the time I came, it was time for picking the dead bodies that were at the mortuary, around 4.30p.m. Hon. Muhanga here is aware that I overtook her car and she told me to go slowly. So, I beg you, Madam Speaker, to ask the honourable member to correct the statement in the Hansard and withdraw my name from that. 

Yes, I support the context of the demonstration and I also stand against the de-gazetting of Mabira Forest, but I do not support and do not accept the actions of those members on that day. I have severely and individually talked to them. Like hon. Betty Amongi said, first of all they started with racial placards, Waragi was given out, cannabis was distributed and they carried stones at the beginning. The photographic evidence is there in the newspapers. So, Madam Speaker, I want to disassociate myself and ask the honourable member to do so as well. Thank you. 

MR EKANYA: I want to give some information. I am slightly surprised by what hon. Tanna has just stated because just about one hour ago in the dining hall, I was sitting with hon. Tanna and he told me that at the beginning of the demonstration he was there but he withdrew (Laughter) Honestly, unless I heard it wrongly –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the question of who was or was not at the demonstration is not an issue here. I think you should not focus on who was or who was not there. We have all agreed that the right to demonstrate is a right for everybody. So, nobody is going to be taken to task as to why they where there or not there. Let us concentrate on the events that followed. That is why you have permission to demonstrate. 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I stood up on a point of order and I would beg that you rule. The facts are that I was not there and I would want that to go on Hansard. Hon. Margaret is here, there are several people who were in Kakiri - hon. Obua, hon. Alex, and the honourable Minister Kasaija and I were actually seated next to each other. When the first reports of murder came, I contacted him in Kakiri. He is there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kajeke, did you see hon. Tanna at the beginning of the demonstration? 

MR KAJEKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to tell hon. Kubeketerya that seeing does not mean participating.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, start with hon. Tanna. You have accused him of participating in the demonstration and he has said he was not there. Was he or was he not there?

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, I watched WBS and I saw hon. Tanna –(Interjections)- I do not know what time the caption was. Hon. Tanna said at 4.00p.m he was around, so I do not know, but I saw him on TV. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we have to get the truth. It is hon. Tanna who has caused himself a problem. Just now we were in the canteen having lunch and hon. Tanna was seated with hon. Ben Wacha, her and other members and I was next to them. He narrated the story himself. For him now to come here and say this; why was he lying to the honourable members in the canteen? 

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, the issue about hon. Tanna has been raised by hon. Kajeke, who in the first instance was not part of the group that has been referred to. However, is it procedurally right to entertain gossip, which was mentioned outside this Parliament, in the official business of this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the gossip came because hon. Kajeke said hon. Tanna was part of the demonstration and he denied it. So, hon. Tanna, what did you discuss in the canteen? Did you say you were part of it or not? 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, just now hon. Ekanya has said we were on table with hon. Betty Amongi. I would like her to clarify if I mentioned anything of that kind. I did not! That is not true at all. Hon. Matia Kasaija was with me in Kakiri, hon. Bahati was with me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, honourable, I think you were not at the demonstration. Please conclude. 

MR KAJEKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The demonstration started in the morning and went on almost throughout the whole day. If it was not for the intervention of the security forces and rain, it would have continued for some time. I do not know what time because when people are recording, they take so many shots. So, I do not know what time. Hon. Tanna has said at 4.00 p.m. he was around taking dead bodies –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member let us leave that. 

MR KAJEKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Back to the statement; the point I was making is that the demonstration was not for the Opposition. The demonstration was for Ugandans against the giving away of Mabira Forest. On page one, in the last sentence of paragraph one, the Minister has named people, saying they spearheaded the demonstration purportedly to express grievances over the Government’s proposal to lease out part of Mabira Forest. It was not purported that people demonstrated against the de-gazetting of Mabira. The reason people demonstrated that day was that they were against giving away Mabira Forest to Mehta Group for growing sugarcane. So, it was not anything like a disguise. The issue was that Ugandans were against the giving away of Mabira.

On page six, where the Minister talks about what has been done so far, he mentions that 34 people have been arrested. I thought the Minister would be courteous and inform this House that two of the 34 people arrested are honourable members of this House, hon. Hussein Kyanjo and hon. Atim Anywar. They are our colleagues and part of the 34. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, I want to clarify that the Office of the Speaker does not operate through rumour mongering. The Speaker of this House is not in Kampala and therefore he is not in office, so I would have expected the Opposition to contact me. I have an office in this building. I also have telephones. I want to make it clear that you did not contact me. 

4.57
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for this timely statement about the events that occurred last Thursday here in Kampala. 

I would like to say that every country has got national interests. Unfortunately, in Uganda for all the years of our independence the interests of the party in power have been dubbed and deemed national interests. Perhaps if we can take time off as Ugandans, both those in government and in the Opposition, to have a national dialogue to identify interests that are purely national over and above the reach of any particular group or individual, incidents like that which happened last Thursday would not occur. It is not in national interest to perpetrate violence. Racism is not in national interest, and all of us must roundly condemn violence. All of us must roundly condemn racism in whatever form. 

You know, I am a professional demonstrator –(Laughter)– yes, by practice, I am a professional demonstrator. I attended meetings that planned this demonstration. The meetings were not partisan. The meetings were attended by everybody. I do not want to name –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have settled the matter of who was there and who was not there. You have a right to demonstrate. Let us not continue along those lines. 

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, the organisers of the demonstration were well meaning. They never had the intention to kill anybody. They never had the intention to loot any property. 

Being a professional demonstrator, I would like to tell you that whenever you organise a demonstration and people gather, as soon as the demonstration starts there is something they call “mob psychology” that takes place. Mob psychology has got no reason. Mob psychology is not sober. In fact, mob psychology is essentially riotous. What happens in developed countries? This demonstration was okayed by Police, meaning that Police was supposed to be present from the inception through the process to the end, to ensure law and order. 

Madam Speaker, Kampala has got all sorts of people. When you start a project like this, well meaning as it is, and it is joined by hooligans and thugs, you cannot be accountable. In a demonstration, the actions –(Interjections)- You may say, “No” but you have never demonstrated. I have been demonstrating for all my adult life. Now, I am educating you –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are now an experienced demonstrator?

MR MABIKKE: Yes. (Laughter) In a demonstration, individuals are accountable for their unlawful acts. They are not collective. Nowhere in Europe, America and even in Africa are people going to be collectively held responsible -(Interjection)- No, I do not need information from somebody who has never demonstrated.  I am very informed. 

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mabikke is misleading this august House. He claims that in the event of any violence in a demonstration, the punishment imposed by the authorities is never collective but individual. 

I would like to come up with a point of order, but maybe I would like to say this first. When I was a student in Germany, I was representing all the foreigners in the State of Lower Saxony. They have a law that in the parliament of all states, there has to be a representative of foreigners who is termed as “Ausländerbeauftragte”. We had a demonstration against the way the Police was treating blacks on the streets. Because I was a leader of the black movement within Lower Saxony, I was arrested. I did not even know the people who did it. So, is it in order for the honourable member to mislead people, including me who has had these international experiences? (Laughter) Is he in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Mabikke, you are out of order. In fact, recently I think the Italian Government had to suspend the football league because of violence at the stadium. They suspended and banned the audience. They played without audience for about two weeks because of the violence.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, not all action or steps taken are reasonable. They must be rational in taking a decision of that nature, and I would like to think that if you were arrested anyway, your arrest was not reasonable. (Laughter)

I would like to continue by saying that the events of last Thursday point to very many issues which Government, the Opposition and the nation as a whole must address. The first issue is the capacity of our Police. Uganda Police is under-facilitated, and the anti-riot group of the Police is so ill-trained that it needs re-orientation. That is why today Police was helpless when taxi touts picked sticks, stones and guns and went on rampage on Kampala streets. Uganda Police must be re-oriented and given adequate facilities, which are so badly required. 

We know that for the last 20 years, the National Resistance Movement has been focusing more on equipping the army and intelligence because of the so-called rebellion because of such acts. Madam Speaker, it is now time for Government to be challenged to ensure that we build a police institution that has capacity to keep law and order during the so many demonstrations because this is a multiparty dispensation. Apart from this demonstration, we are organising so many other demonstrations. 

Police should have the capacity to keep law and order. We are calling for a bigger demonstration, a seven-day demonstration. If you fail to handle this one for a few hours, what about the one that will last seven days? (Laughter) We are going to camp for two days in Mabira, four days here in Kampala, and then the last day we will visit State House to greet the occupant. (Laughter) How are you going to handle if you do not have the capacity? Uganda Police must be supported so that it gets capacity. (Interruption)

MR ANTHONY YIGA: Madam Speaker, I have been observing these demonstrations in our country for some time. At times, those who have been demonstrating have also been complaining about Police presence, about this vehicle with teargas and so on; now I hear hon. Mabikke complaining about the capacity, the numbers of the police (Laughter) This makes me wonder about last Thursday’s incident. Should the Minister have deployed over 10,000 policemen to march along the demonstrators to be able to maintain security? I am baffled about what hon. Mabikke actually wants. Maybe now that he is realising that there is lack of capacity in our Police, which may take time to get built, is he suggesting that we should suspend demonstrations until the Police has marshalled enough capacity? (Applause)

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to the previous speaker, hon. Yiga. When we talk about professionalism, is it about numbers? Must the policemen be 10,000 or 100,000 in order to effectively do their work? Whether we like it or not, if we do not talk about professionalism and capacity of our policemen I think we are going nowhere. It is not about numbers. This was about professionalism or about some other security operatives hijacking the role of policemen. So, let us address the root cause. The root cause is very glaring and yet we do not want to address it. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, please wind up. Let me finish with the Opposition.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Yiga has been effectively handled – (Interruption) 

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, the member holding the Floor said that he is a professional demonstrator, and that when you are planning for a demonstration you expect mob psychology or violence. Last Thursday there was violence, loss of life and looting of property. He is now the same person saying that they are still organising more demonstrations. Does he want the Government to put a ban on demonstrations so as to avoid excessive destruction of property and loss of life? Thank you.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, I think I will ignore hon. Mutuluza’s contribution. (Laughter) The second issue we go to is land. Why should the Mabira saga get this far? Why should our country now waste a lot of resources and time on an issue which has already been resolved in our Constitution? 

Part of the reason for public outrage is the arrogant response of our President on Mabira. I have been wondering whether the President has got any advisors. Why does Uganda pay for a stream of presidential advisors? What is our Minister of Water, Lands and Environment doing to advise the President on Mabira? More surprising, what is the Vice President, who is the chief advisor of our President, doing? (Laughter) It is true that the Vice President of Uganda has taken on the name “Mahogany” and all of us are aware that there are so many mahogany species in Mabira. All of us are wondering why the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda is keeping quiet when fellow species are about to be destroyed. (Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT (Mr James Baba):  The Vice President of this country knows that the issue of Mabira is going to be brought before Cabinet, which he is even likely to chair, and it will subsequently be brought to Parliament for consideration. He is an organised and well thought up person, who will follow the due processes of governance. 

I would like, in addition, having taken advantage of this situation, to advise this professional demonstrator. He even added the idea that when you demonstrate, there is mob psychology. He should have advised these last demonstrators that this peaceful demonstration they applied for should have been called off having read the posters, “Asians Must Go”, “We Must Kill Foreigners”. He should have known the consequences. He should have called it off. I am surprised that he continues to talk on the Floor. Is he in order?

MR WACHA: I would like to give information to the honourable minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But he has left the Floor.

MR WACHA: It is important because he is not telling us the whole story.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I have looked at page 2 and realised that paragraph 1.3 clearly spells out the position of the Government at the moment. It says: “The public debate generally tilted in favour of those opposed to the de-gazetting of the forest. This prompted Government to issue a statement in Parliament explaining that the de-gazetting was a proposal still under discussion.” What the Government is doing at the moment is discussing. 

The Minister is only trying to advise hon. Mabikke on the best way to handle his profession. However, I want to find out whether the Minister is in order, especially now that Government position is still unclear. They have failed to restrain Mehta from making provocative statements in the press, demonstrations have taken place, lives have been lost and he says they are still discussing! We demand to know when this discussion will end so that the issue of Mabira comes to a conclusive decision. Is he in order to ignore giving the position of Government and instead continue advising that the best way is to handle further strikes? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he was addressing what occurred and also the statement by hon. Mabikke that as a professional demonstrator, he should know that when there is a demonstration it is followed by mob activity and mob physiology. He was saying that if hon. Mabikke was aware of that, he ought to have called it off because of the mood depicted on the placards, which the demonstrators were carrying. 

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the honourable Minister of State in the Office of the Vice President, who claims that the Vice President’s matters do not come before Cabinet, that the Vice President is a member of the NRM party. He must have received a letter dated 8th December 2006 addressed to all Movement Members of Parliament, which reads in part: “You must have been following the controversy surrounding our decision to give some forest land to the manufacturers. There are three forestlands that have so far been given out to the manufacturers. These are: 
1. 	Some land in Kalangala for BIDCO, a palm oil project.  
2. 	Some forest land in Mabira for Mehta to expand his sugar operations, and 
3. 	Earlier on we had given the blanket forest in Namanve for an industrial park. 
I have been involved in these land allocations. Why? It is on account of the urgent need to industrialise our very backward but rich country in terms of natural resources and raw materials.”  
The letter is signed by Yoweri K. Museveni, Chairman NRM Party. In other words, the land is already allocated.

MR MABIKKE: I have not been disappointed by that information, Madam Speaker. Finally, I would like to say that first, we would not like to see Mr Mahogany involved in destroying- (Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, this is an august House. This is the Parliament of Uganda and the person being referred to is the Vice President of this Republic. Is it in order for the distinguished Member of Parliament for Makindye East to equate the second most important person in this country to a species of a tree and call him Mahogany, when the honourable member knows the rank and title of His Excellency the Vice President? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, my records indicate that the Member for Busiro North is hon. Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya, the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda. So, you are out of order.

MR MABIKKE:  Much obliged.  Madam Speaker, I would like to convey protests from the people of Makindye West over what happened to their MP. This morning, over 200 constituents of hon. Kyanjo raided my office and asked me to come to Parliament and convey their protests over the arrest of their Member of Parliament. Their argument is that perpetuators of violence during a demonstration must be held individually accountable, and that it is not reasonable at all to arrest and hold the MP for Makindye West together with the Woman MP for Kitgum - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, that matter is now sub judice. They are under the due process of the court.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, I only wanted to convey the protests of the people of Makindye West.

Finally, I would like to say that the issues I have raised are very important. Police must prepare for more demonstrations. Next week another demonstration is on. I am just warning in advance that we are proceeding -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, I think you will write to the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell him what you are going to do and when. You do not have to address this House about what you are planning. He is the person to see.  

5.23
COL TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the Minister’s statement. In the first place, it is most unfortunate and regrettable that the peaceful demonstration in which I participated on Thursday last week ended in a catastrophe. People lost lives and property, and it was characterised by hooliganism and indiscipline. That is most unfortunate. 

It is also a pity that among the three who died one was a foreigner, and that the world today is depicting Uganda as a country of anarchy. It is most unfortunate. However, that is what happened though it is most regrettable. I sympathise with the Minister of Internal Affairs because that was another very serious situation to handle, like the one which occurred at the High Court last month.

Madam Speaker, the Minister used the word, “spearhead” in his first paragraph. At the end of the sentence with the name Mr Issa Ssekitto, he uses the phrase, “spearheaded a demonstration.” I think the reason my name is missing is because I did not spearhead the demonstration. (Laughter) 

Secondly, on the third page, paragraph 2.3, the Minister says that at 10.30 a.m. the conveners of the procession and their supporters assembled. I think what is missing here are the words, “The conveners of the procession plus their supporters and well-intentioned demonstrators assembled.” -(Laughter)- I was well intentioned and I also assembled at 10.30 a.m. at that particular place, though I was not a supporter of whatever actually happened. I only went to demonstrate and challenge the de-gazetting of Mabira Forest and to support the National Association of Professional Environmentalists. Even if another demonstration takes place tomorrow, I will be there. (Applause) 

There is already consensus in Uganda that Mabira Forest should not be de-gazetted. You either go with the consensus or there is a problem. This is the argument. I request that if anybody sees His Excellency the President tonight, -(Laughter)- anybody here, please inform him that there is consensus in Uganda that Mabira Forest should not be de-gazetted. Therefore, the earlier he causes Cabinet to discuss it and a statement is made that Government has no intentions, there will be peace and I will not demonstrate again. This is very simple -(Interjections)- I have not asked any particular person, but I said should there be -(Laughter) 

I joined the demonstration at 10.30. At the beginning, I really thought that it was going to be a peaceful one. However, at 10.30, I could see that some of the people who had come to demonstrate were already carrying stones. When Riot Police blocked the route to Parliament, other people chose to take Kampala Road. I physically participated in persuading demonstrators not to take Kampala Road but I got exhausted. I will not tell you where I stopped. I got exhausted because to persuade irate people not to use Kampala Road and go through Nasser Road, which had been agreed upon, was a difficult thing. So, some continued on Kampala Road, though I am not very certain whether hon. Anywar actually followed the same road. However, that is the statement of the Minister and I do not want to contest it. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Section 32(1) (b) of the Police Act, says: 
“Any officer in charge of police may issue orders for the purpose of- 
(b) directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads or streets or at places of public resort and the route by which and the times at which any procession may pass.” That is the Police Act, and that was actually done. The route was charted out between the organisers and the Police. 

Although hon. Kaliba thinks that the Minister of Internal Affairs should have stopped it, everybody expected this demonstration to be peaceful, and more so, there is no law that empowers the Minister of Internal Affairs to stop a peaceful procession. There is no such law because to demonstrate is a constitutional right. 

This is what the Inspector General of Police can do, under Section 32(2): “If it comes to the knowledge of the inspector general that it is intended to convene any assembly or form any procession on any public road or street or at any place of public resort, and the inspector general has reasonable grounds for believing that the assembly or procession is likely to cause a breach of the peace, the inspector general may, by notice in writing to the person responsible for convening the assembly or forming the procession, prohibit the convening of the assembly or forming of the procession.” The Inspector General of Police did not do that because he was satisfied that this was going to be a peaceful demonstration. So, this requirement did not apply. He deployed accordingly and comfortably sat back not knowing the demonstration would unfortunately get riotous. 

Madam Speaker, anybody who joined our peaceful demonstration with criminal intent, wherever he or she came from, did the most despicable thing and must be condemned. (Applause) We must disassociate ourselves completely from anybody who had this criminal intent, and from anybody who caused murder. Imagine finding a young man, who has come from India to Uganda and got employment, riding a motorcycle and you stone him! These are Ugandans. 

The death of the other two Ugandans was most unfortunate. The Police will tell you that you can shoot to disable so that a suspect does not run away, but you should not shoot to kill. You can shoot the legs so that somebody cannot run away, but shooting to kill is in itself criminal, and it is intent to kill. This was most unfortunate. Last night in Virginia in the U.S., somebody burst into a technical university and shot 33 people dead, including professors and students. That kind of violence!  

Madam Speaker, with the little experience I have, my personal reflection on this event is that at a certain point, the Police was unable to control the demonstration. Instead of people demonstrating as one body, they broke up into several groups and several bodies with their own agenda. Some became looters, others criminals while others remained peaceful, like myself, and so on. Some of us demonstrated and went home, but others had other things to do and that is why we had that unfortunate development. 

The choice of venue for demonstration and where the procession would end itself was dangerous. Clock Tower, Katwe, Owino Market, Nsambya Road, Entebbe Road, Kafumbe Mukasa Road, the Park; these are places where crowd control is absolutely impossible. I must advise my good brother, the Minister of Internal Affairs, if they had opted for Kololo, for example, maybe what happened would not have happened. Kololo itself is intimidating. If a hooligan commits a crime in such a place, he will not survive arrest because there is nowhere to run. Since Kololo is far from areas of hooliganism, thugs may actually freeze and commit no crimes there. With Clock Tower, this is not the case. The area is so porous. There are so many escape routes that somebody can commit murder and get away with it.

Finally, Madam Speaker, this country is waiting. All this is because of Mabira. Let the problem of Mabira be solved. Let consensus reign. If by any chance anybody sees the President tonight, please inform him that the consensus is that Mabira remains as it is. (Laughter) I thank you.

5.39
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. Honourable Members of Parliament, I am really grateful for this opportunity to address this august House. If I was sure that we all belonged to the same faith, I would have asked for your permission to ask all Members of Parliament to recite the prayer of Our Lord. However, since I am not so sure, I will only quote part of the Lord’s Prayer, which says, “…do not lead us into temptation, but deliver us from evil”.  

Madam Speaker, I really need to thank the Minister for presenting this document, and I also thank the honourable members who have contributed. Hon. Butime has presented a very sentimental speech. If I had not been eager to contribute, I would have asked us to end here because he has practically said everything. So, I am requesting, do not lead us into temptation. 

The Police have been identified. As seen on the ground, Police was incapacitated and could not control the crowd. The planning somewhere was bad because the final place was bad. The hooligans themselves were tempted, the people who had good intentions were tempted, and the honourable Members of Parliament who have been mentioned were also tempted. 

What is the root cause of this? Incidentally, I was not here. I was in the village, but maybe I would have joined the demonstration. I was down in Kooki. The people of Kooki sent me to tell this House to make sure that Mabira is not de-gazetted. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I would like to wind up. The Mabira saga is sucking in a lot of interested groups. Cultural leaders particularly here in Buganda, the Kabaka, the Church, the environmentalists, the investors, the World Bank, women, the youth, disabled and even witch doctors. They are all saying, “Please, please.” 

There is an alternative to this. Give that piece of land to Mehta. He has got enough money so let him irrigate that piece of land. Give him another piece of land in Karamoja, and another one in Rakai. But let him leave Mabira alone. Why do we not listen to the voice of the people? It is my humble request that we close this gap of temptation by requesting – incidentally it has been mentioned. I will quote in Luganda: “Mujjula ebitayidde” which when translated means, “You are getting into matters which have not reached a stage of being debated.” But if there is a demonstration, and death already, if there is looting and torture, why should we wait, and for how long do we have to wait? 

Hon. Mabikke is promising another demonstration. Already the Minister of Internal Affairs has got a problem with his forces. Let us not even lead the Army into temptation. I have heard somebody saying that the Military Police was in escort. When the Army starts shooting at the people, it will be a very difficult situation to defend. My humble prayer is that we should not lead ourselves into temptation. Let the Executive come out and present whatever they have in this House. As for me, I will demonstrate in this House by saying that I do not want Mabira to be degazzetted. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us speak for just two minutes. I think everybody is more or less in agreement about the violence.

5.45
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The people who organised this demonstration were not ordinary Ugandans. These are highly intelligent leaders. They were political leaders, religious leaders, environmentalists and so on. Therefore, a high level of responsibility was expected of them. It, therefore, means that us here, as leaders, have a big role and are accountable to our people. 

We know that the history of this country since Independence is characterised by instability and violence. Therefore, whatever we do as leaders, we must bear this point in mind: that we have a responsibility to prioritise interests and these include peace, law and order, and the life of the people. It has been quoted that Article 29(1)(d) provides for the right to demonstrate. While this right to assemble and demonstrate is provided by the Constitution, I will emphasise that this right must be exercised responsibly. But most people have the tendency to quote their rights saying, “This is my right.” But they tend to forget Article 43 of the Constitution. I am disappointed that nobody quoted that because Article 43 of the Constitution gives a general limitation to the exercise of your right when it says that when you are exercising your right, you should not prejudice and/or injure mine. Why am I saying this? 

Those who were demonstrating had their constitutional human rights provided for in the Constitution, but those who were not demonstrating also had their rights provided for. They had a right to open their shops and do their business and earn a living; they had a right to travel; and the highest right provided in any law, whether natural law or constitutional law, is the right to life. The right to life cannot be subjected to the right to demonstrate. 

I would advise you when you are talking about human rights, to study the evolution of human rights. The highest and first category of human rights is the right to life. You cannot prejudice and subject the right to life to the right to demonstrate. Therefore, when you are exercising this right, you must know that there are higher rights, which must never be spoilt by the other rights.

Madam Speaker, let me state that the makers of our Constitution did not just emphasise the right to demonstrate, but the right to peaceful demonstration. It is qualified in the Constitution. Why did they qualify it in order not to make it just a question for the right to demonstrate - (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I want to inform my brother hon. Daniel Omara Atubo that sometime ago, he and other people in Lira organised a very peaceful demonstration that turned violent and many people died. It actually turned tribal. Was he protecting the rights of others or was he infringing on the rights of others? (Laughter)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I am not going to be disrupted while making my contribution. The fact is very clear. This was not a demonstration; it was a prayer in Lira stadium. Unfortunately, and I was going to come to that, in every demonstration you have negative forces [Hon. Members: “So?”] Please, I am going to come to that. Do not just say, “So?” When the makers of our Constitution talked about demonstration, they deliberately used the words, “The right to peaceful demonstration.” This is because a demonstration, by its nature, is disruptive and therefore –(Interruption)

MS NAMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, how can the Police fail to control the mob that was unarmed? These people were peaceful and not armed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nampijja, hon. Butime was part of the demonstration and he says that before they started to move, there were people with stones. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Please, let me conclude. I want to say that while the right to peaceful demonstration is provided for in the Constitution, I think it is important for us to direct our mind to the issue of how we can exercise this right of peaceful demonstrations without injuring the other rights. I was about to come to that and say that I support peaceful demonstrations and I am even able to organise one if need be. But the issue is that a demonstration by its very nature is disruptive and in order to achieve the noble purpose of demonstrations, I want to venture into advice of five conditions, which must be fulfilled. 

The first one is that every demonstrator must obey and co-operate fully with the Police and law enforcement authority. If you are organising a demonstration, please, fully obey and co-operate with the Police and law enforcement authority especially if you are a Member of Parliament. If you are a political leader and you apply to the Police and you are granted permission to demonstrate, do not start diverting people to different routes because you are likely to cause problems. 

The second one is that as the crowd assembles, address them first and give them the message that they have to go with. 

Thirdly, try to identify and isolate the wrong elements –(Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want hon. Daniel Omara Atubo to clarify on the first condition he is putting forward. To the extent that if you the organisers do not agree with the Police, what do you do? You have not told us, because that is why the demonstrators and the Police have let us down today.

MR OMARA ATUBO: If you have not agreed with the Police and the law enforcement authority, you are going to have problems. Therefore, the best thing to do is to postpone it -(Interjection)- let me just rush through this. I will give you an opportunity –(Interruption)

MR MABIKKE: This is important. Thank you very much, hon. Atubo for giving me way. Madam Speaker, when we were on the Opposition together with hon. Atubo, he initiated me into opposition. He gave me all the tactics of demonstrating. As a lawyer, he took me through human rights lessons. I am very confused right now by his new guidelines because I am still operating on guidelines he told me –(Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I actually want to help my colleague who is holding the Floor, by responding to one of hon. Angiro’s interventions or queries that he raised when he said, “what if there is no agreement?” 

First of all, I would like to thank hon. Butime for coming out straight on the responsibilities of the Police, by citing the relevant provisions in the Police Act. There is a very fundamental Article in the Constitution, Article 21, which relates to the functions of the Uganda Police Force. It says, “The functions of the Uganda Police Force shall include the following -
•	To protect life and property
•	To preserve law and order
•	To prevent and detect crime
•	To cooperate with the civilian authority and other security organs established under this Constitution and with the operation generally.”

If there is no agreement, it is the duty of the Police to protect life and protect property and do other things that are mentioned in this Article.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, in No. 3, I said that in any demonstration you are likely to have wrong elements and, therefore, the organisers together with security, must be able to identify and isolate the wrong elements.

Four, carefully select the route and the venue. I think this is what hon. Butime was emphasising. 

Finally, avoid any form of provocation. Madam Speaker, for somebody to go with a placard reading: “For one tree felled, five Asians must die.” That should not have been allowed in that type of gathering. The messages, the songs and the placards must all be relevant to the cause of the day. So –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, is the Minister of Health in order to be sleeping here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he is thinking about the infant mortality rate. (Laughter) 

MR OMARA ATUBO: The Minister of Health is looking after his health very carefully. Madam Speaker, let me conclude my remarks. I want hon. Mabikke, my good old friend, to know that there are certain State matters, which are above politics. The secret of my political life has been that I identify what is higher in the survival of a State and I go by t. Therefore, I do not think it is fair for you to say that I did assist you to grow up politically and that possibly now my words are a bit different. That is not true. I live by basic principles of what I believe is the priority of this country. When a demonstration turns violent you and I must condemn it. If there is unlawful arrest, it must also be condemned. You and I must now co-operate to make Uganda a peaceful and prosperous place to live in. (Applause) 

If we do not do that, whether you are on this side of the House or on that side of the House, we will all get destroyed in the fire. So, please, let us live by that; I think I will live by that. I call upon you, because I think you have a longer life than me, we should leave Uganda better for you to live in. I have children as old as you and I want them to have a happier life than what I went through.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we proceed, honourable members, I have just learnt about the death of our former colleague hon. Dr John Bulamu, the former Member of Parliament for Luuka. He died this afternoon but we do not know yet the arrangements for the burial. We shall inform you probably tomorrow. Let us stand up in honour of the late Dr Bulamu. 

(Members rose and observed a minute of silence.)

6.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to contribute to this statement as a Member of Parliament for Bujenje County. The people of Bujenje County and I would like to convey condolences to the families of those who lost their people in the 12 April 2007 saga.  

Madam Speaker, I think this time the Police tried to listen to the organisers and they took their word that it would be a peaceful demonstration.  Indeed they did deploy along the agreed route. I have seen demonstrations but Police always never seals off a route, although it does direct the demonstrators. Unfortunately, the organisers did break the rules according to the directives of the Police, effectively dividing the focus of the Police, their attention and of course their efforts. And at that point when the demonstration turned violent, the role of the Police changed: they had to concentrate on quelling the riot. After all that confusion, I was hurt when I saw our colleague, hon. Beatrice Anywar saying in Luganda that “gakyali mabaga,” I was shocked! Even a young girl of less than seven years as she was whisked out of Agha Khan said in Luganda, “Oba omuyindi omu aguze Mabira ate ffe tukoze ki?” That if only one Indian had bought Mabira Forest, what had they done to deserve this? I was really heartened about that girl’s analytical skills where the old people had failed! 

Honourable members, from this experience I can say that Ugandans have not reached a level where they can control demonstrators to focus on their cause. When government at times tries to be careful and says, “No, hold on. We are not ready, we cannot give you permission,” it is at times construed as government trying to violate the Constitution’s provisions. But here it is in our face; we must condemn the racial sentiments, hooliganism and the insensitivity of especially the organisers that came up. There are innocent civilians who become victims of the sophisticated maneuvers of the perpetrators of violence. At the face of it, it may seem to be a very good cause like, “We are fighting for Mabira; we are fighting for human rights,” but underneath, there is a lot of politicking, thuggery, incitement and chaos.

For the organisers it is very unfortunate that the blood of the innocent people who died in cold blood during the demonstration that they failed to control when they promised that it would be peaceful will forever soil their hands. They will forever be haunted by the souls of those who died. Whatever they do; whatever happens, they are squarely responsible. I want us honourable members, as Ugandans to rise up with one voice and learn from this experience so that when there are restrictions in future, then it should be taken in good faith. I thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, it is on record that this demonstration was organised by the: environmentalists, church, cultural institutions and business people. It is also on record and minuted that KACITA told Police that the business community had agreed that all the shops would be closed. It is on record and minuted that Police went around telling people, “No, for us we are available,” and it is on record that the other two people who died, died in front of Bank of Uganda where there was no demonstration and another one who died down on Dastur Street was shot by unknown people.

It is still on record that there are people without Police and military uniform carrying guns on the streets. Therefore, is it in order for the Minister to stand up and condemn Police, which is allowing people to carry guns in plain clothes? Is it in order to condemn Police and the Churches for organising a peaceful demonstration? And it is here on record that Traffic Police did not stop the man who was driving the vehicle from entering the crowd. If this man had not entered the crowd and caused the violence, Madam Speaker, what transpired - the looting would not have taken place. Is she in order to condemn the churches, traditional institutions and the Police, which participated in organising this demonstration? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I am unable to rule on that one. I did not participate in the preparations for the demonstration. So, I do not know who was there and who was not.

6.07
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, I also rise to thank the Minister for the statement and to add my voice to those who have condemned the killing of human beings in that demonstration. I believe that it is a shame that should not happen in Uganda in 2007 because this country has suffered so much. I believe that we all would take time to try and forbid that which would destroy life. Because those placards that people have talked about – the leaders must have seen those placards that were showing everywhere to those who did not go for this demonstration. Therefore, people should have really tried to talk to these demonstrators even before the demonstration began. Therefore, that this happened and life was lost, it is a shame, I must repeat. 

But I would like to say that for those leaders in this House who even now, say, “Anybody who is going to identify with Mehta can be killed; is in trouble,” I think even that language alone is wrong for leaders to be speaking. Because what wrong has Mehta done? This is an investor; all he has done is requested for a piece of land –(Interruption)  

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Museveni for giving way. The information I want to give is that Mehta – we, Ugandans own 51 percent of SCOUL, and if we own it, it means we have a say in SCOUL. And if we have a say in SCOUL – if we are telling Mehta that what he is doing is wrong, then we are right.

MRS MUSEVENI: In my opinion, it is wrong. It is wrong for leaders of people to say that it is wrong for anybody to identify with Mehta because he has asked for a piece of land in an area where he should not have. That can be explained to Mehta. He does not have to be looked at as a criminal and that anybody who will do business with him will have their crops burnt and be incriminated. Why is it like that? What has Mehta done that is so wrong that we cannot – we are supposed to be a democratic government in the year of our Lord 2007, and we are supposed to be doing everything to make this government and country a democratic society where all people can live in harmony with confidence. 

If we say that simply because Mehta has requested for a piece of land, anybody who does business with him will find trouble; and Members of this House speak in this House and say that that is the case; I think we are the ones guiding our people to demonstrate like they did, to write placards that they write and get away with it. What comes thereafter is the destruction of life like what happened. 

This is supposed to be a civilized nation. Surely, it is right for anybody to say what they want and if people do not agree with what they say, they can also express their opinion. They do not have to go so far to say that, “If you talk with so and so, we will kill you, and we are going to do something”, and all that is happening in this House. The people we lead are listening to what we are saying and if they follow us as we speak, they will surely do what they did in this demonstration.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that I want to add my voice to what –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member of Parliament for Ruhama County asked a very important question. She said, “What wrong has Mehta done?” She also condemned, and I strongly support her, any Member of this August House, who makes any remarks that incite the public, yet we are supposed to make laws for the good governance, peace and order in this country. 

I want to talk more about the question she asked. Of recent the executive officials of the Mehta Group of Companies have been quoted in the public media to have made utterances that in themselves could have been construed by the reasonable thinking members of this community as either disrespectful, or in themselves, provocative. The issue is that all parties could also use the same opportunity while government is considering and evaluating the request by Mehta, to cease making statements that could be misconstrued by other members of the community, including Members of this House. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, the question of what wrong Mehta has done is very clear. Mehta is wrong. One time I was in the sugar industry and Madhivani ran short of land for sugarcane production. He entered negotiations with Kinyara Sugar Works to get facilities for more cane production. Similarly, Sango Bay had some understanding with Kinyara. So, for Mehta to insist not only on a piece of land but this tropical forest and one of the only two pieces we have in this country, is in itself wrong. We are not talking about killing, but Mehta has caused this whole problem. That is the piece of information. Mehta would have the liberty to negotiate for Sango Bay or other pieces of land, which are free for sugarcane production.

MRS MUSEVENI: Madam Speaker, I think that what Mehta does or says or what his employers say, really cannot be compared with what leaders of this nation will say to the nation. Mehta is just another person in civil society. He can say what he wants, but we are leaders. We lead millions of Ugandans and they look to us to know which way to go. That is why I say that when we stand in this House and say that whoever does business with Mehta can have his crops burnt or something will be done -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take it?

MRS MUSEVENI: No. Let me conclude and then you can give that information. I want to conclude by saying that I will add my voice to condemning what happened in that demonstration.

Also, one of our other colleagues was proposing that business should be stopped on Kampala Road if there is a demonstration for one day. But if we are saying that demonstrations should be allowed to happen every once in a while, and if we are going to say that every time there is a demonstration the business district should be closed, for how long will that be done and how much business will we lose as a poor country?

In conclusion, I want to say that we must all remember the history of this country, where we have come from, and try as much as possible, as hon. Omara Atubo just said, to build a better Uganda, and not go back to where we believed we had come from. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have all been saying the same thing the whole afternoon. Don’t you think we should put an end to this debate?

6.19
MRS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the ministerial statement and to commend the Minister of Internal Affairs for that statement. The other person that I want to commend is hon. Akena because I read in the press and indeed I actually saw him trying to direct the demonstration to Nasser Road. 

Madam Speaker, I was in a business premise that belongs to my family and which happens to be very near the place where the demonstrators gathered, so I was able to observe what was going on. However, I am wondering what happened to the leaders as this demonstration degenerated into chaos. Did they run away? Did they hide? They became absent and were no longer in control –(Interruption)

MR AKENA: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I want to give is that I was neither an organiser nor a convener of this demonstration. I went there to exercise my right as a citizen and to peacefully demonstrate against the Mabira give away. When matters deteriorated - as a leader you have to stand up to the situation and that is how I got involved in trying to separate the demonstrators from the Police by putting myself in between. 

This also continued up to Entebbe Road where some Asians were being attacked and I intervened to save the lives of some of them at that material time. So the information that I would like to give is that not all of us as was earlier said as leaders were there to lead people in violence. Most of us went there to peacefully demonstrate. When things went out of hand we were left with the small option of trying our best to control the crowds under difficult circumstances. I thank you.

MRS LAGADA: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable member. That is exactly why I am commending you for: for having taken up your role as a leader in a situation that was definitely out of hand. 

Members have stood in this House and condemned the international press but I have been asking myself: are we justified in condemning the international press? I don’t think we are justified because what came out in the press is exactly what happened. Anybody seeing the posters that were being held would come to that conclusion. What would you conclude if you are leading a demonstration where people are saying that for one tree cut five Asians dead or you are leading a demonstration with posters saying, “Asians go home?” What do you expect? 

Madam Speaker, I was a student in India not too long ago in 1998 and when you walked on the streets and somebody asked you where you came from and you said Uganda they would say, “Eh, Amin?” The common Indian on the streets thinks Uganda is Amin. I was so pained on Thursday that what we experienced during the time of Amin was happening right before our eyes. Quite a few of us I am sure are beneficiaries of the Indian scholarships. They give lots of scholarships to this country so when we send the sort of messages that we did on Thursday, I don’t know what impression or what conclusion those people whose money is given to the Ugandan Government for Ugandans to go and study come to.

I want to come to today. We have been told in this House of groups fighting with the Police standing by and watching. Again I was in the unfortunate situation of being in Workers’ House today and I looked down the street and saw people fighting policemen in uniform. While we are busy saying the Police did not do enough, I think we should ask ourselves a question: what is it that we are doing that is making the citizens defiant to the Police? If you are carrying sticks and you are beating a policeman in uniform, you are carrying stones and stoning a policeman, what is the consequence? 

I have ever said in this House that I commend the Ugandan Police and indeed I do. Everyday I see demonstrations and I see what the Police go through and I sympathise with them because we want this Police to keep law and order and protect us yet at the same time we are busy beating them up ourselves. If you were a policeman what would you do? I want to ask that question that I have asked before. If civilians behave in that manner and you are a policeman what do you do? 

We said we watched the Police standing by as people were fighting each other. Maybe the Police withdrew after what I witnessed from Workers’ House today. They must have withdrawn and said, “Let there be a balance of terror in the streets of Kampala”, and I can assure you that when there is a balance of terror we are all going to run away from Kampala. So as leaders I think we have to go back to the drawing board and try to exercise some control over people who support us because most of these people support one of us or the other. We have a say in the way they behave because they respect us as their leaders. 

Finally is the question of accountability. Since Thursday I have asked myself about the young Indian man who was killed. I learnt from the press that he was the only bread earner of his family and that he was going to marry. When people behave like we did on Thursday, who takes responsibility? I usually see when the Police shoots somebody or something or arrests somebody they sue the Government and the Government pays or something like that. In the case of these people who got killed in demonstrations organised by certain people, where is the reparation? Who is going to be responsible? I would like to ask that. I thank you very much.

6.26
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to rise and really condemn the violence that led to the death of three people. I believe in Christ and I know that it is his death that gives glory to God. I cannot at any time support any form of death that has been perpetuated by anybody. 

I want to draw your attention to the last bullet of the Minister’s statement. The honourable minister said that the Government is trying to put in place certain measures. Since this issue went out of control, we feel that we need to be safe so we request for the measures he is going to take. Is he talking about increasing more lorries of tear gas? Is he going to bring here a constitutional amendment to scrap off the right to demonstrate? What is he going to do exactly? What is he trying to tell us? 

I also want government to know that the root cause of this problem is not anything but the sale or give away of Mabira. Some people may say it is in the process but in the Catholic Church that I believe in, for us you sin by thinking and by doing -(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the procedure for de-gazetting a forest reserve or a forest for that matter is known and is very long. Cabinet has not presented a paper to this House about giving away Mabira. The councils where these forests are located have not convened. Is it in order for the Member to say that the root cause is the giveaway of Mabira when government has not done that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think some communication was read to this House, which was not disputed, and which indicated that it has been given away. It was read on the Floor of this House and it was not disputed so I don’t know.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, we need your guidance and clarification in view of what we are debating. Whereas we are here discussing the post-mortem of what happened on Thursday, as Parliament we don’t seem to be moving in the direction of the Minister of Investment, Minister of Lands and the Minister in charge of sugar production. They should tell us how in future we are going to prevent and immunise this country by giving us a land use policy and the direction of where sugarcane should be grown and any other plantations in this country. 

I seek clarification from the minister so that we don’t just discuss the post-mortem. We should be seen to be moving in the direction of planning investments and planning where sugarcane should be grown so that we know whether a forest is a no go area or it is an area that is in the Government plan’s and which could be promoted for sugar production. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There will be a time for debating the Mabira issue extensively but now we want to conclude on the issue of violence. We have asked the Government and they have agreed that they will be coming here to bring the Mabira issue formally to Parliament.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, my only concern was to save the Minister of Internal Affairs from overstretching because the problem is being generated elsewhere, and the Minister of Internal Affairs is only on the receiving end. We are now overstretching our security organs, which I think is wrong.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The reason I said that the issue of the giveaway of Mabira was the sole cause of all this, unless it is coming clearly from government that, “We are not going to touch Mabira”, I want to assure you that people are getting organised because they are ready to defend Mabira. I want to assure you that people have lost confidence in us. They say that in Parliament we make decisions but those decisions are not implemented. Supposing it comes to such a time where we will take a decision in the House and it is not obeyed; we will make a resolution and it will not be obeyed! I want to assure you that I will be part of the demonstration as soon as I see a tree falling in Mabira. 

As I wind up –(Interruption)

MR KABUUSU: Thank you honourable member for giving way. Madam Speaker, I want to share this information with the honourable member holding the Floor. Several forests lost, not only to sugarcane growers, have impacted negatively on the masses. Investors have instead gone to publicise the issue of Mabira by taking pictures and bringing them to the press, saying that there are no forests. A forest reserve is never a forest seen growing. Most of the forests that we see are secondary, and they have just grown after others were cut. 

I was hurt yesterday when I saw a press release in Bukedde on the Mabira issue. Somebody was justifying the application and the give away of the forest. The public is not happy. The minister in charge of production should condemn these people. They should not justify Mabira’s request and giveaway -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are going to the demerits of whether we should give away Mabira or not. That is not where we are yet. That one is still premature.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to wind up and say that we need to streamline our investment incentive policies. The reason the business community had these anti-Asian sentiments is because they are seeing most of the incentives going to this category of people -(Applause)- we want to solve this problem, and we want the solutions to come from us.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): I thank you Madam Speaker and honourable members. The incentives available to investors are not racial. They have nothing to do with colour. As for the information from hon. Ekanya, Mulwana has just been allocated a piece of land next to his factory. So, I would like to appeal to honourable members to go to Uganda Investment Authority for free information. Incentives are available to every investor in this country. Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I know that you are also constrained because of the complexity of this subject matter, to have it debated the way it has been debated. Rule 40 of our Rules of Procedure, on statements by ministers –(Interruption)- I am reading the Rules of Procedure of 2006 as amended. In terms of drafting, an amendment becomes part of the Rules of Procedure. What I want to raise is that even the debate or any elucidatory matter being sought on the statement must be on the statement itself, because as you have guided the House, the Mabira issue is coming for debate. Right now we are concentrating on the violence. Now the hon. Member of Parliament is raising the issue of incentives. Shall we ever finish?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us concentrate on the areas we wanted to cover on the violence.

MR TINAKASIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The reason why I raised that issue is because I read this statement. I understood it and I interpreted it. I can see here that Kampala City Traders Association, KACITA, participated in the demonstration and one of their leaders was arrested. I have information from their meeting. They are complaining that other business people are being segregated against. They are not given incentives that other business people are being given. Some of them are given free land. I do not think that all investors here are being given -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, this matter is very important. At Tororo Cement Industry the workers’ union complained that other tribes were being favoured during employment and that they have different terms and conditions of work. At the cement industry, there is no Ugandan who is a wholesaler. An Indian is the only wholesaler in the whole of eastern Uganda. 

We people of Tororo are not racist, that is why we voted for hon. Tanna. He is a very good man; he struggles for our people’s plight. If you go to Mukwano Industries, you will notice that working conditions are very bad for black people. If you go to BIDCO or some of these factories owned by Indians, Indians get goods at cheaper prices and at wholesale prices and sometimes on credit, yet when it comes to black people, they do not get -(Applause)  

Madam Speaker, let me conclude. The people of this country are not racist. If you sow sugarcane you get sugarcane. If you sow racism you get racism. Several Ugandans are being deported from Kenya not because they are foreigners, but because they behaved wrongly in Kenya. Several Ugandans are suffering in other parts of the world, for example in Dubai, because of their bad behaviour. In Dubai, if you steal, they cut your hand off. It does not matter whether you are a Ugandan or a Kenyan. If our brothers the investors want peace, let them sow peace. If they want trouble, let them sow trouble.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you very much for that information. As far as I am concerned, one of the outstanding ways of solving a problem is identifying the cause and appropriately addressing the causes. That is why in my contributions I have addressed and asked government to address issues that are causing people to demonstrate.

Everybody should have known that people are going to demonstrate over this thing. It is not hard for His Excellency to say that government has abandoned the idea. He and Mehta are aware that we do not support this thing. Mehta knows that he is looking for trouble from Mabira. Let government listen to what people are saying before they even demonstrate. That will help to solve many problems in other areas besides Mabira. There are many other troubled areas and people are complaining. As a result, they want to demonstrate. People should not continue to demonstrate as if they do not have a government that listens.

6.42
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute. First of all I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for making this statement. Some points in the statement are very pertinent although others are missing.

Three lives were lost. We as Parliament should not allow lives to be lost in Uganda. The demonstration that took place on the 12th, in my view, was going to be a very focused demonstration, which was going to convey messages to the stakeholders. I was at the Railway Park at 9.30 a.m. It started very well. I counted my honourable colleagues and we were about 15. We were ready to demonstrate against de-gazetting of Mabira core central forest in Uganda.

Why demonstrate? National resources of this country do not belong to us although we can use them economically. The national resources of this country belong to the future generations as well. I think we should not deny them the benefit of what God has given to this country.

Madam Speaker, two or three hundred years ago, the chiefs of Africa sold some of our people for beads – for personal beautification. Now two hundred years later, we are seeing history repeating itself. You know we may say that those great grandfathers had no moral authority. What will our great grandchildren say about us? Isn’t it the same?

What I am saying is that let us be very transparent in whatever we are doing for this country; doing things in secrecy will only lead this country back to chaos. Transparency, honesty and integrity will salvage Uganda. 

6.46
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having listened to the debate and the Minister’s statement, it is incumbent upon this House to pronounce ourselves on some of the issues raised namely: violence, hooliganism and the traits of racism that were manifested during the demonstration.

Therefore, on a matter of such public importance, I wish to move a motion under rule 44 of the Rules of Procedure, seeking for a resolution of Parliament to condemn the violence and racist behaviour exhibited on the proposed give away of part of Mabira forest:

“WHEREAS the National Association of Professional Environmentalists (NAPE) under the umbrella group “Save Mabira Crusade”, on Thursday 12 April held a demonstration over the proposed give away of part of Mabira central forest reserve to Mehta Group of Companies;

AWARE that the issue of conserving the natural forests is enshrined in our Constitution and it is of public interest and that de-gazetting Mabira central forest reserve for any other land use activity has not yet been presented for discussion in Parliament;

COGNISANT of the fact that it is the responsibility of the state to protect important natural resources including land, wetlands, minerals, oil, fauna and flora on behave of the people of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS, Article 29(d) of the Constitution guarantees freedom to assemble and demonstrate with others peacefully, unarmed and to petition; 

FURTHER AWARE that the demonstrators became rowdy and engaged in acts of violence, in total contravention of the law, destroying and looting property of both Ugandan and non-Ugandan traders and lynching people resulting into bloodshed, grievous injuring culminating in hospitalisation and the loss of three human lives, namely two Ugandans and one Asian; 

AWARE THAT Article 21 of the Constitution strictly prohibits discrimination of persons on any ground, including racial discrimination yet acts of racial discrimination were evident during this demonstration as some of the demonstrators displayed placards portraying racist sentiments and Asians had their property vandalised and looted and some were beaten resulting in one death;  

RECOGNISING that Uganda is committed to promoting peaceful co-existence, non-alignment and has always opposed all forms of discrimination and racism;

THEREFORE, Parliament must condemn all acts of violence and racism as exhibited during the Mabira demonstration;

CONVINCED that political stability is the cornerstone of economic investment in any country and acts of violence pose a political risk to investment in any country;

IT IS, THEREFORE, the duty of Parliament to promote peace, order, development and good governance in Uganda as well as peaceful co-existence of humanity by condemning such acts;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved as a matter of agency that Parliament resolves:
1.	That it collectively condemns the acts of violence and hooliganism that occurred during the demonstration.
2.	That it collectively condemns the acts of racism exhibited during the demonstration.
3.	It urges Ugandans of all categories to adopt peaceful methods of demonstration to express their concerns and desist from any other methods that may put to risk or endanger people’s lives and property and or inconvenience those who may not be party to the demonstration.  
4.	Parliament urges government to ensure maximum protection and guarantee the security of all including foreigners and ensure that such acts of violence, hooliganism and discrimination do not re-occur.” 
I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the text of the motion.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I have in my hand here our Rules of Procedure. I do support that the motion be brought by the honourable member but I am not clear and in support of the procedure it has been moved. Rule 44 is very clear because this is an oral notice of motion. We have just been put to notice. I can read the rule: “Notwithstanding the provisions of rule 43, a Member may, with the leave of the Speaker, give oral notice of a motion during a sitting, but the motion shall not be placed on the Order Paper of Business until three clear days have elapsed since the notice was given, unless the Speaker is of the opinion that it is in the public interest that it should be placed on the Order Paper of Business prior to the expiration of three days, in which case, the Speaker may direct that it be placed on the Order of Business at such a time as he may think convenient.” 

Right now this motion has been placed and we have got notice. It was not on the Order Paper, we are not prepared to debate this very important motion. Honourable members, I want to assure you that this particular motion is very important and we need to prepare and put all the ingredients that are necessary in this motion. I would like to urge this House that we move in an orderly manner, follow our Rules of Procedure and put this motion on the Order Paper so that we come prepared to debate and amend it appropriately. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, rule 44 gives me powers and having listened to the debate, I am satisfied that the ingredients of the debate are contained in the text of the motion. I allowed her to move it. I am using my powers.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. While I agree with the mover of the motion, I want to address the fifth paragraph, which reads: “Further aware that the demonstrators became rowdy and engaged in acts of violence ….” We are now aware that Members of Parliament, like hon. Jimmy Akena, were not very rowdy in that demonstration. Hon. Anokbonggo was in the demonstration, he was not very rowdy. So I think it is in order to put it that, “some demonstrators” it could be better. Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is a legitimate amendment.  

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I fully support the motion but I would like to propose an amendment in the preamble before, “Further aware” to say that “and aware that Article 43 of the Constitution provides that, in the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.”  I beg to move.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I refer you to the second last bullet No.1, which says: “It collectively condemns the acts of violence and hooliganism that occurred during the demonstration”. I think here the debate which eventually led to this motion may just be justified. We agreed that violence on the 12th as compared to today and violence of tomorrow are all bad. We could, therefore, amend this to read, “It collectively condemns the acts of violence and hooliganism that occur any time and anywhere” giving reference to today’s beatings on the streets.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the heading was specific. It related to those events that took place last Thursday.

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, I think really he has got a point. You remember the election violence; you remember the violence we suffered at Jinja?  Now you see this one on the streets of Kampala! You see the violence we have just exhibited on the streets of Kampala today. But what we must ask ourselves as leaders, what is generating all this violence in the country? We have the cardinal duty to condemn and try to find a solution to any violence occurring at any day, at any time to any person in this country.  I think hon. Fungaroo has a point.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I support the motion.   On: “Now, therefore, this motion is moved as a matter of urgency that Parliament resolves, 1, 2, 3, 4”, I want to add “5”, to read, “It urges the Government to leave no stone unturned in bringing to book all the perpetrators of violence, racism and hooliganism for the sake of peace, order and good governance.” (Applause)

MR GODI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The further amendment I would like to add to this motion regards the introduction. I suggest that we give it a legal reflection from the Constitution. Therefore, it would begin: “Whereas the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for the protection of the right to life under Article 22, respect for human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment under Article 24; protection from deprivation of property in Articles 26 and 21(2) provides that no person shall be discriminated against on the grounds of sex, race, colour ….”

I will go further to amend this motion where the honourable member said that political stability is the cornerstone of economic investment in any country and acts of violence pose a political risk to investment in any country, it is, therefore, the duty of Parliament to promote peace and order, development and good governance in Uganda as well as peaceful co-existence of humanity and condemning such acts. I would like to add an amendment to that to read, “Considering our past history of 1972 where the Asian community in Uganda suffered a very glaring fate of which about 75,000 Asians were expelled from Uganda by the then President of the day,” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that we are angry about any revival of racism but we cannot capture all the incidences. Then we shall go back to slave trade, the colonial days, you know –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: I am moving a motion that the question be put after having discussed the statement is in line with this motion. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the motion as proposed by hon. Karooro and variously amended be approved by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for the work. We shall resume tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.01 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 April 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)

