Tuesday, 13 April 2010

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FORM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I would like to ask you to join me in welcoming some very important guests in our gallery. These are members of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians, Africa Region, Executive Committee. They are here to attend a consultative meeting and I am happy to introduce them as follows: Hon. Binta Garba, the vice chair of our committee from Nigeria; the honourable Alfreda Mwambwa from the National Assembly of Zambia; the honourable Mary Mboya Meboka from Cameroon; the honourable Shakila Abdalla from the National Assembly of Kenya; and hon. Gin Sendezza from the National Assembly of Malawi. (Applause) You are all most welcome.

Secondly, I want to remind the chairpersons of the sessional committees that they are required to handle the National Budget Framework Paper between now and 26 April, and you should be ready to present the reports to the Budget Committee of Parliament between 26th and 29th of this month. As you will appreciate, we should have started this on the 1 April, but we had to take an Easter break and that is why the National Budget Framework Paper was presented on 6 April. 

I would like to appeal to the chairpersons of the standing committees not to conduct their business for the next two weeks, to enable the sessional committees sit and run through the report before they compile their comments. This will enable the House to present the Budget report to the President by 14 May 2010. We are talking about this date because 15 May will be a weekend. So, please apply yourselves diligently. 

The third one is from the Anglican Chaplaincy. This is to inform you that there will be an Easter Holy Communion Service today in the Members’ Lounge at 5.30 p.m. So, Members of the Anglican Chaplaincy are invited to attend this service accordingly.

The last one is an invitation from the Governor of the Bank of Uganda. As you will appreciate, for sometime now, the relations between Bank of Uganda and this House have been a bit uncomfortable. The Governor would now like to have a retreat with Members of the House to do the following: to appraise the chairpersons on the mission and mandate of the Bank of Uganda; share opportunities and challenges facing the Bank of Uganda in light of the global financial crisis and economic recession; to try and reach a broader consensus on the working relationship between Parliament and Bank of Uganda. This retreat will take place from the 17 to 18 of April 2010 at Serena Lake Victoria Resort Hotel. You are required to report on the 16 of April.

The Members required to attend include: The chairpersons and vice chairperson of all standing committees; chairpersons and vice chairpersons of the sessional committees; members of the Budget Committee, Committee on National Economy, Public Accounts Committee, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and the Committee on Natural Resources. Of course, the Directorate of Budget in this House is also expected to attend this retreat together with clerks to the committees mentioned above. Please take the opportunity to have this interaction - 

MR OKECHO: Correction, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Correction? On what? 

MR OKECHO: We have been informed this morning that this retreat will take place at Imperial Resort Beach Hotel in Entebbe. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the letter I have reads Serena and it is from the Governor, Bank of Uganda.

MR OKECHO: No, Madam Speaker, it was announced during the Budget Committee meeting this morning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I said, I am reading a letter from the Governor of Bank of Uganda; that is what he wrote to me. If the venue was changed, we shall inform you. The letter indicates that on 17 and 18 of April you go for the retreat; reporting is on the 16 of April.

Also, honourable members, this weekend, one of our colleagues had a problem, the Minister of State for Agriculture, hon. Bright Rwamirama, lost his son in circumstances which we have not yet understood. The burial took place yesterday and that is why he was not able to be with us today. I would like to ask the House to observe a moment of silence.

(Members observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the same gallery, we have, Mr Bart Vodderie, the First Secretary to the Embassy of Belgium, together with Mr Simon Osborn from the Programme for Deepening Democracy in Uganda. You are welcome.

3.02
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I am standing in for the Leader of Opposition. I would like to say that as Opposition and the country at large, we are disturbed by what The New Vision attributed to H.E. the President in its Volume 25, Issue No.72 of 12 April 2010. The New Vision alleged that the President seems to have supported security hooligans. The headline states: “Museveni reacts to Besigye’s Attack.” 

With your permission, Madam Speaker, let me just read one paragraph and it reads: “… Besigye was going around telling lies that I sold Lake Kyoga… when he went to Gomba to tell those lies he fell into problems. I hear some people attacked him because he was telling a lie…”

Madam Speaker, I want, through you, to urge the Minister of Internal Affairs, or the Leader of Government Business to clarify whether really the President was rightly quoted by The New Vision or he was quoted out of context. I am saying this because this matter is under investigation and it is proper for the Head of State to allow the institution of Government to conduct their business independently without interference. 

According to our information, the gentleman who attacked Col. Kiiza Besigye is a member of the State House Counter Intelligence Security; he was armed, and so, if the President seems to be supporting this kind of thuggery that will promote more thuggery in the community –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, if the matter is in Court, why are you introducing or identifying who the person is? Ask whether that is what the President said, not about who did it? 

MR EKANYA: That is why I am asking the Minister of Internal Affairs to clarify whether the President was quoted out of context or he said it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the minister wish to say anything?

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, as a ministry, we do not depend on newspaper articles neither do we depend on rumours. I wish my colleague could formerly write a complaint to me to enable me reply it by way of a public statement to Parliament. So, I am not going to respond to newspaper rumours because I do not know anything about them. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am requesting that the minister brings a formal statement to the Floor of the House –(Interjections)– regarding the statement attributed to the President.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, there is a whole ministry in charge of the Presidency. For that case, I would like to say that I will convey this message to the responsible minister – she will come and explain this issue to this House.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Finance.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am pleased to report to this House that the National Development Plan 2010/2011 to 2014/2015 was formulated and has been approved by the President and Cabinet as the country’s planning framework for the next five years. I am fully aware that Members participated and have been waiting for this piece of work to come to completion.

The National Planning Authority Act, Section 8(6), requires that a plan formulated by the National Planning Authority should be submitted to the minister, who in turn should submit it to this House.

The five-year development plan succeeds the Poverty Eradication Action Plan, which expired in the year 2008/2009 as the overarching national development plan framework.

The plan, which I shortly will be tabling, provides the strategies and direction for the country’s national development for the financial years 2010/2011 and 2014/2015. 

The plan also identifies national strategic objectives and priorities. These priorities have been determined on the basis of the most binding national and sector level constraints that limit economic transformation. 

In addition, the plan outlines the strategies for achieving agreed upon objectives and targets. These priorities have a cost linked to the national budget through the medium-term expenditure framework, and the cost implementation matrix has also been formulated. I will also present it to the House.

Briefly, the theme of the plan is “growth,” and the economy must grow, “employment and social economic transformation for prosperity.” Underlying this theme is the need for us to accelerate poverty reduction by sustaining a positive economic growth rate and attaining further structural transformation of the economy.

The process of developing the plan has been highly participatory; it has been highly consultative and highly inclusive, and I am very pleased. Members of this House, you have participated and you have exercised your mandate of linking your constituencies with the Executive arm of Government. 

The President has been consulted and he has provided substantive input and guidance. The Cabinet has debated it and approved it. Political organisations, both in the Opposition and on the side of Government, have synthesised their position. Therefore, the plan really sets out realistic strategies for addressing the challenges of development in our country. 

Ministries, departments, agencies, have provided technical expertise in the formulation; local governments, private sector, civil society organisations, the general public, development partners, all these have been consulted. My view is that the process has been just as important as the document itself and has set out strategies to address the challenge that we face.

For this plan to provide the framework for the national budget strategy for this coming financial year, the existing laws must be amended. I want to report, Madam Speaker, that the process of amending the laws and harmonising them has already started.

Finally, on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, permit me to take this opportunity to extend my sincere appreciation and thanks to the Members of this House and to you, Madam Speaker, for the invaluable contributions you have made towards the preparation of the National Development Plan. 

For a long time we acted on three-year rolling plans; this is a very important step and we congratulate all of you who have participated in this important document, and we congratulate you for your achievement. 

Madam Speaker, in accordance with the required law, I now wish to lay on the Table, the National Development Plan 2010/11 and 2014/15 together with the cost implementation matrix, as well as the monitoring and evaluation strategy for the National Development Plan. I thank you and I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to confirm that this House did participate in the National Development Plan because we held a number of meetings in our conference hall. It was a very interesting process and we had been demanding for it. So, I would want to commit it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to expeditiously look through it and give us a report by Thursday, so that we meet the requirements of the new budget deadline. Thank you very much.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the presentation of the National Development Plan. This is a very important document and we, Members of Parliament, do not have copies. Is it possible for us to have a copy of this development plan so that when the national economy finally gives its input, we also have the information on which we can contribute? 

And maybe before I sit, I need to explain why I am smartly dressed in this attire. (Interjections)(Laughter) Hold on! What I am putting on is symbolic -(Interjections)- What I am putting on is Africa with all its Millennium Development Goals inserted inside it. I know the countdown is on; we are now in 2010 and we are remaining with five years towards the achievement of Millennium Development Goals. 

Today, we launched the ‘Kick out Poverty’ campaign, which was officiated by the Speaker on behalf of His Excellency, the Vice-President. It is very important that this House picks interest in this Millennium Development Goals campaign.

Let me also take this opportunity to inform you and the House that I have been appointed as the Secretary General of the African Parliamentary Network on MDGs to make sure that we carry the campaign together with the UN and ensure that we achieve the Millennium Development Goals. So, hon. Nsubuga, you need to take note. Thank you. (Applause) (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for reminding us about the MDGs, and I hope every Member of this House will have an opportunity to get a dress like that one. (Laughter) Minister, where are the 300 copies?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, the copies for Members of Parliament will be made available.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When?

PROF. KAMUNTU: They are being printed right now. By tomorrow they should be in the pigeon holes. Thank you very much.

STATEMENT ON OIL PRODUCTION SHARING AGREEMENTS

3.15
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Ms Winifred Masiko): Madam Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, I would like to make a brief statement on the Production Sharing Agreements as chair of the Committee on Natural Resources of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, you may recall that on the 7 April –(Interruption) 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I would assume that this is an important document to us and it is proper and fitting for the relevant minister of the sector to be available in this House so that we can harmonise and move together. 

The issue of having the Leader of Government Business does not make sense in this particular matter, and he is not even here. We feel the minister should be here to listen and answer a number of issues that will be raised. I thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, you recall very well that you were on that chair when the Minister for Energy was supposed to make a statement on the Floor of this House. The minister’s statement was differed until he lays on the Floor of the House, Production Sharing Agreements. To this date, the minister has not laid the Production Sharing Agreements on the Floor of this House. 

I find it totally erroneous and out of procedure for the committee chairperson, for the first time in the history of this country, to come and make a statement on the Floor of this House instead of bringing a report and laying all the documents, including the oil Production Sharing Agreements. This is totally out of order, Madam Speaker, and we are seeking your guidance.

MR OKUMU: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we know the working of committees. For example, if the oil sharing agreement was given to the committee, which should actually have been given through the House, what we would expect the committee to do is to bring to Parliament its own report and not to make a statement. It looks like committees have now started making statements on behalf of the Executive. We find this strange and unacceptable.

MR OKUPA: This is unbecoming of the ministers. I remember last year in August you gave a ruling in this House. I remember you asking the minister to bring the oil sharing agreements within two weeks. It is about 9 months today and the minister responsible has not brought it here. Is the Executive taking your Chair seriously, or are they just joking? When the Speaker makes these rulings, it is not for romance, he means business. So, can the Executive take this seriously and lay these agreements on the Table. We do not need the report from the committee. Can we have those agreements first laid on Table? Why are they hiding these agreements from Ugandans?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I just want to seek clarification from the chairperson whether this is a personal statement -(Laughte­r)- Yes! This report is not signed and that is the procedure with ministers. They can read statements that are not signed as long as they bear the title of the ministry. When you look at this statement, even before reading it, you cannot justify that this is a statement from the committee. There is no signature at all. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us allow the chair to explain. I think the Speaker directed last week that she comes and speaks on this matter. Let us hear from the chair.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, last week, for those of you who were in this House – I want to read verbatim what the Speaker requested us to do and we are just responding to exactly what was requested by the Speaker. I am not doing anything contrary to that. I will read it from the Hansard: “Whereas there are merits in what...” - this is after hon. Anywar had raised some comments on this - “Whereas there are merits in what you have raised, at this time we are dealing with a particular subject.” - That was a statement of the minister – “And as I said, there are merits in the observation and I appeal to the appropriate committee handling this subject of oil to pursue it, and if it has a problem, let them bring it to the House.”

So, I am actually bringing what we have and it is up to the full House to clear this. (Interjections) The statement I am trying to put across is none other than what the committee has done and once the full House has listened to what the committee has done and feels it is not adequate, then they can proceed and raise the issues on how they want us to proceed. 

Madam Speaker, this was a matter of information and if Members would like the information, they would listen to it and it would help us to forge the way forward. I certainly believe that the House should be able to guide us. I think you should listen to what the committee has done and if you think it is not proper –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we know very well how committee reports look like and how they are presented in this House. When I look at this report, there is no Member, not even the chairperson; there are no committee members and not even the vice-chair. So, is it in order [Ms Kawooya: “Order”] Oh my God! (Laughter) When I look at this report, it does not conform to reports of committees because it must have members’ names and their signatures attached. At least two thirds of them must sign this report. 

Now, the chairperson is telling us that this is the committee report. How sure are we that this is really a committee report, because it is not signed? So, is she in order to continue insisting that this is a committee report yet it does not conform to the Rules of Procedure of this House of presenting reports? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, last year I directed that the Minister of Energy must come here and give us those agreements. I think it would be premature for us to discuss this statement without hearing from the minister. (Applause)

I am sure that the document you have might raise issues that need to be answered by the minister. So, I am directing the Minister, again, to come and bring a statement here and present the agreements and then you can respond to what he presents. So, let us defer it for now.

MR OKUMU: Just to avoid future scenarios like this, we thought that the procedure of committees in doing their work, especially like in this case of the oil sharing agreements, it should have been tabled before this House and then it is referred to the committee and the committee discusses and brings the report back to the House. But in this case, I even don’t know whether it is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I have just ruled that the minister must come, present the document here and then we would proceed after that. That was my ruling. 

Next item.

REQUEST FOR PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE THE DECLARATION OF NAMED INDIVIDUALS AS PERSONS NOT ELIGIBLE FOR AMNESTY

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, Section 2(a) of the Amnesty (Amendment) Act, 2006, reads as follows: “Notwithstanding the provision of Section 2 of the principal Act, a person shall not be eligible for grant of amnesty, if he or she is declared not eligible by the minister by statutory instrument made with the approval of Parliament.”

My ministry did Table a Cabinet paper a few weeks back requesting that we come to Parliament and have four names of people who have been engaged and continue to engage in acts that are contrary to international standards and are rebellious and injurious to the citizens of this country and the neighbouring states. We asked Cabinet to allow us come to this House and request this House to approve that the following people – because they have failed to surrender or they have failed to take advantage of the law - should not be eligible for amnesty any longer.

These are: 
·	Joseph Kony,
·	Dominic Ongwen, 
·	Okot Odhiambo and
·	Thomas Kwoyelo. 

The first three have been indicted by the ICC and have been issued with arrest warrants, which were dully received and acknowledged by the Attorney-General/Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Uganda. Thomas Kwoyelo did not surrender; he was captured in action and he has even never taken advantage of the law. 

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to request this House to pass a resolution that these four people, according to Section 2(a) of the Amnesty Act as amended in 2006, do not qualify for amnesty anymore.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there no seconders?  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the minister has presented, but I need some clarification first to enable me debate. 

There have been reports that some of the people named here like Okot Odhiambo and Ongwen have been put out of action. We have read the reports in the press. Good enough, the Attorney-General is here; he will help us answer whether we can ask even those who have been put out of action to be removed from the list when they are already dead. I just wanted that clarification first before I go ahead to debate, unless the reports have not been telling the truth. But that is what we have heard from the press and the Army spokesperson, that these people have been put out of action. So, can I get that clarification first?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are the subjects of your declaration alive or dead? I think the Members want to know. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, according to the information available to me, all the four are still alive. The three on the list are either in the DRC, some parts of Southern Sudan or in Chad. But as far as I am concerned, they are still alive. The fourth one is in the hands of the security forces of Uganda. That is the information I can give.  They are still alive. 

3.32
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to oppose the request or the motion.

First, no sufficient grounds have been laid for this request. The information here is insufficient. We are not given details of this motion. Actually, there is no motion detailing the reasons as to why the minister would seek this approval. I thought it would be in form of a motion. I do not even know how the minister is initiating business here. Is this a petition? What is it? In my opinion, it should have been a motion. There should be a substantial motion with grounds clearly laid out. That is ground number one.

Secondly, we are not informed about the outcome of the peace process. What happened? For quite a long time, this House and the country at large have been requested by Government to support the ongoing peace process. We kept our fingers crossed; we gave you all our support. But we have never received a report that the negotiations between the government and Kony have come to an end. Therefore, it is now going to be a conventional war or to arrest him. Now, if we pass this motion or request, what is going to be the fate of the peace process? 

Again, we were not informed whether these four people who are the top commanders of LRA, are still in control of some of our children who were abducted. If they have abductees and we are here as Parliament saying, “No more Olive Branch to you; no amnesty! Therefore, wherever you are, we are going to get you!” What is going to happen if they still have control of the abductees? What is going to be their fate?

Finally, the only reason given here is that these people are indicted by the ICC. I am sure by the time we started the peace negotiation process and by the time you got out this indictment, you knew the legal implications. The Attorney-General should have known that you can’t pursue the two parallel processes; negotiations and indictment, because the moment indictment is issued, the obligation we have as a country is to cause the arrest of the indicted individuals, not to talk peace with them. We knew the implications. So, are we here to help the Attorney-General and his team with the legal mistakes they made? Because, now we are informed by the Minister of Internal Affairs – I can see their problem; they are in a catch-22 situation. The minister is telling us that the fourth person is already in the hands of the security agencies; they do not know what to do with him. Actually, they just want us to pass this request so that they can have this person prosecuted, because they can’t grant him amnesty; they can’t release him, and they can’t take him to court while the peace process is going on. 

Why should we operate like that?  So, I object to this because it is not brought in good spirit; is lacking sufficient information; and on top of that, there are legal flaws in it. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.36
MR CHARLES ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This urgent request was a bit unclear because I thought application for amnesty should be done by these people whose names appear here. Therefore, how do we decide on their behalf and make this kind of arrangement yet tomorrow, when given time, since the peace process is going on, they may apply for amnesty? So, my concern is, how appropriately are we going to move on with this? Thank you.

3.37
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The reason given by the minister in the declaration is, those persons not eligible for grants of amnesty (Indicted persons), and those charged with counts of kidnap with intent to murder.

Now, if I am to address the first issue, indicted persons, I see that beyond the first three, there are other people who were indicted, like Vincent Otti, who is not on this list. If you go to international communities like the ICC, they will tell you that the indictment on Vincent Otti still stands until they get a DNA test confirming that he is dead. I would like to know, from the minister, whether this DNA has already been obtained confirming that Vincent Otti is dead, or to tell this House the reason why he is missing from the list.

Secondly, those charged with counts of kidnap, with intent to murder. If you are to interpret this second section, those charged with counts of kidnap, where have they been charged? Have they been charged in Uganda or DRC or in Central African Republic or Sudan or elsewhere? The presumption is that this applies to Kwoyelo. In which court has he been charged with counts of kidnap with intent to murder?

Furthermore, there are those who are back; they obtained amnesty, but they have re-committed crimes in Uganda and they are living and enjoying life in Uganda. Some of them are under the protection of the state. I want to know the criterion you use for declaring legibility and non-eligibility. 

Do you now want to tell us that these are the only people – especially on Thomas Kwoyelo - in regard to counts of kidnap with intent to murder? Is it because he is a leader? What criterion did you use for selecting these particular individuals –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to inform my colleague and the House that one of the top rebel leaders that came out of the bush and was a terrible murderer, his name is Onen Kamudur. To the shock of many, he became a state witness, until when the Police later on nabbed him while engaged in his habit; he continued doing what he used to do in the bush until he was nabbed. Now he is in custody. 

MS AMONGI: Actually, he robbed my constituents in Apac several times and later he was arrested. That is why I am asking, why some people came out and obtained amnesty and are living freely, and they commit offences and you declare them eligible! 

Now, I want to know the effects of the declaration beyond the indictment. Suppose tomorrow, Kony comes out and says, “I want to sign for amnesty and I will stop all this suffering for the people of Sudan, DRC and for the people of Central African Republic”. What will be the political decision of Uganda, DRC and Sudan for the sake of their people, what will be the effect of this? Is this decision written in stone, or can it be undone?

Madam Speaker, I want clarification on these issues. But the ultimate question we should ask is why is it that despite the indictment, Kony has not been arrested by the international community, by the Interpol and all these groups? Why can’t Kony and these other four people be arrested? What is it that you are not doing? With all the money in this world, why have you failed to address this problem for the last 25 years? That should be the fundamental question for me as a leader. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.44
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am at a loss. I have in my hands a letter signed by Dr S.P. Kagoda, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs to the Clerk to Parliament and he says, “A request to Parliament to approve a declaration of named individuals as persons not eligible for amnesty”. It is supposed to be urgent. 

After that, I have a Cabinet minute, minute No.79 (CT 2010) and it says, “Persons not eligible for grant of amnesty; indicted persons and those charged with counts of kidnap with intent to murder”. It is a cabinet minute. 

Then, I have what is supposed to be a statutory instrument; it is entitled, “Statutory Instrument 2010” - not numbered. And it is supposed to be for the Amnesty (Declaration of ineligible persons) Instrument 2010.

Now, what are we discussing? We all know that what comes before us is supposed to be in form of a motion. After that, whatever we pass here has to be signed by the Clerk to Parliament for it to have effect. Now, Madam Speaker, what is your Clerk going to sign amongst these papers? Are we, therefore, irregular even in this discussion? There are a lot of pros and cons about whatever has been indicated here, but it is before us irregularly. Should we, therefore, continue discussing an illegality?

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, when we make mistakes, we should accept them. I would like to request this Parliament to allow me to withdraw this motion so that someone who was supposed to do his homework does it properly and then I will table the matter at an appropriate date. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

3.48
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read a second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded? (Laughter)

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, the House will recall that I had earlier introduced the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009. This Bill seeks to amend the Political Parties and Organisations Act of 2005, Act No.18 of 2005 in two major ways:

First amendment is to Section 11(4) and (5) of the Act. At present, Section 11(4) requires a political party or organisation registered under Section 7 of the Act, to notify the Electoral Commission in writing within 21 days after any change occurs in the title, name, address, premises or office, submitted to the commission when it was registered, and that the commission shall within 14 days cause this change to be published in the Gazette. 

The Electoral Commission has complained that often some of the information supplied in relation to address is not reliable and makes it difficult to trace the bodies or persons concerned. Clause 1 of the Bill, therefore, seeks to delete from Section 11(4) the word “Address” from the particulars to be submitted and introduces a new sub-section (5) which requires a political party or organisation to cause to be published in the Gazette and notify the Electoral Commission where any change occurs in the physical location of the office of the political party or organisation.

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to introduce a new clause 20(a) in the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 concerning the Chairperson of the National Consultative Forum. Section 20 of the parent Act at present creates the National Consultative Forum for political parties and organisations. It states its composition and functions; however, it does not specify who shall be the chairperson.

Therefore, the new Section 20(a), which is being introduced by this amendment provides for the Chairperson of the National Consultative Forum. The amendment requires the chairperson to be nominated from members of the consultative forum by the majority party or organisation in Parliament, and the chairperson shall be a person who is a member of the forum, and the tenure of office of the chairperson shall be five years.

Provision is made for removal of the chairperson from office by a vote of no confidence, upon a petition submitted by a member of the forum on specified grounds, including misconduct and incompetence.

The petition for removal shall be addressed to the secretary to the forum and the meeting for removal of the chairperson shall have a quorum of at least three-fifths of all the members, and the meeting shall be presided over by a judicial officer nominated by the Chief Justice. The chairperson, whom it is proposed to remove shall be served with the petition and will be given an opportunity to defend himself or herself, and may be represented by a counsel.

My ministry interacted with the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament; we shared comments from interested parties and stakeholders; the committee made its own comments; and we have responded to those comments. 

The Bill was given a first reading on 15 December 2009, and it was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny. My information is that the committee is ready to proceed with further consideration of the Bill.
 
Therefore, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009” now be read for a second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. 

Honourable members, before we hear from the chair of the committee, I want you to join me in welcoming Mr Paul Okello Otim in the VIP Gallery, from the delegation of the European Commission in Uganda. You are welcome! (Applause)

3.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy to present the first of the reports on proposed electoral law reforms. 

Four Bills were committed to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee sometime back in December and these are:

·	The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009,
·	The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009,
·	The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009, and
·	The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009.
 
The committee has considered all the Bills and the reports are ready, starting with the two which are on the Order Paper now. Two others will also be ready as soon as they are put on the Order Paper.

Madam Speaker, permit me to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009.

The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 15 December 2009 and referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders:

1.	The Minister of Justice and Constitution Affairs/Attorney-General
2.	The Electoral Commission
3.	The Uganda Law Reform Commission
4.	Uganda Joint Christian Council
5.	Uganda Law Society
6.	Citizens Coalition for Electoral Democracy in Uganda
7.	Forum for Democratic Change
8.	People’s Development Party
9.	Political Parties Platform
10.	The National Resistance Movement Organisation
11.	The Human Rights Network

The Object of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to amend the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 to require political parties and organisations to cause to be published in the Gazette, and to notify the Electoral Commission where any change occurs in the physical location of the office of the political party or organisation, and to provide for the appointment, tenure of office and removal of the chairperson of the National Consultative Forum. 

The committee made the following observations:

1.	The Bill creates the post of chairperson of the National Consultative Forum and does not provide for the vice chairperson of the forum. The committee, therefore, proposes to create a post of the vice chairperson of the forum. The vice chairperson shall be a person nominated from members of the National Consultative Forum by the majority opposition party in Parliament.

2.	The committee noted that a judicial officer to preside over a meeting to consider a petition for the removal of the chairperson needs not be nominated by the Chief Justice. The committee is of the view that this can be done by the Principal Judge. 

The committee recommends that the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be passed into law subject to the amendments attached. 

Madam Speaker, the report was duly signed. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I can confirm that there are more than sufficient signatures to support the report. Proceed with the debate. No debate? Can I put the question?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the question be now put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill - is there an amendment? 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment in clause 1, paragraph (a). Paragraph (a) should be amended by deleting the words, “…name or address” and replacing them with the words, “…name and address.” 

The justification is to compel a political party or organisation changing its particulars to notify the Electoral Commission. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: The mover, do you have any problem?

DR KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: We support the amendment, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes amendments to clause 2:

(i) Immediately after sub-clause 1, insert the following:
“1(a) the National Consultative Forum shall have a vice chairperson who shall be a person nominated from members of the National Consultative Forum by the majority opposition party in Parliament.”

The justification is to provide for the post of vice chairperson.

(ii) Sub-clause 2 should be redrafted as follows:
“(2) The chairperson and vice chairperson shall be persons who are members of a political party or organisation and members of the National Consultative Forum.”

The justification is the consequential amendment of sub-section 1(a) above.

(iii) In sub-clause 3, the committee proposes to insert the words, “and vice chairperson” immediately after the word, “chairperson.”

The justification is that it is also a consequential amendment.

(iv) In sub-clause 4, the committee proposes to insert the words, “and vice chairperson” immediately after the words, “chairperson.” The justification is to provide for the removal of the vice chairperson. 

(v) Immediately after sub-clause 4, the committee proposes the following should be inserted and the Bill be renumbered:

“(5) a person appointed representative of the forum under section 22(a) shall cease being a representative of the forum upon a political party or organisation withdrawing him or her as such.”

The justification is to enable a political party or organisation to remove a member from the National Consultative Forum.

(vi) In sub-clause 5, the committee proposes to insert the words, “or vice chairperson” immediately after the word “chairperson” and the justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

(vii)The committee proposes that in sub-clause 6, we insert the words “at the rank of at least chief magistrate” immediately after the words, “judicial officer” and delete the words, “Chief Justice” and replace them with the words, “Principal Judge.” 

The justification is:

a)	To provide for a category of judicial officers who can preside over meetings of the removal of chairperson and vice chairpersons.
b)	To provide for the appointment of the judicial officers by the Principal Judge.   

(viii) In sub-section 7, the committee proposes that we insert the words, “…or vice chairperson” immediately after the word, “chairperson” on the second line and insert the words “…at a meeting held for the purpose” immediately after the word, “appear” on the third line.

The justification is that these are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I just want you to look at No.5, “A person appointed representative of the forum under section 22(a), shall cease being a representative of the forum…” Don’t you think it should be: “Cease being a member of the forum?”

MR TASHOBYA:  I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I really feel uncomfortable about the creation of the vice chairperson in this concerted forum. Because we could only put a clause, which states that: “Members within the consulted forum in the absence of the chairperson can pick a member amongst themselves to chair in that particular time.” This is because in the absence of a chairperson and the vice, the meeting cannot be called. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You want to leave it fluid; you want it that I chair today and if the substantive is not there another person chairs the following day?

MR OPANGE: No, this is a consultative forum, Madam Chairperson. In absence of the chairperson, so long as there is a quorum, one of them can be nominated to chair the discussion. 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the concerns of my colleague, but probably I would suggest an amendment that: “In the absence of both the chairperson and the vice chairperson, the members can elect amongst themselves a person who can chair the meeting.” Otherwise, the amendment suggested by the committee has got a reason because when you look at the substantive clause, it talks of a chairperson designated by a party with majority membership in Parliament. So, if you do not provide for the post of vice chairperson nominated by the Opposition, then you will be creating a very slippery ground. It will be difficult for us to harmonize the position. So, I think that it is fundamental that we retain the proposal given by the committee, that is, of the vice chairperson. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, I am not envisaging a situation whereby somebody calls a meeting, because a meeting has to be called by either the chairperson or the vice chairperson, then after convening the meeting, the person who has called the meeting is not there.  I do not envisage such a situation. It looks a little bit clumsy. I thank you. 

DR KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Madam Chairperson, Government stands by the amendment proposed by the committee for very practical reasons. First, the consultative forum is an important organ which must be allowed to operate. And in the spirit of give and take, where the majority party has taken the chair, surely, the other players should have an opportunity to participate in the leadership. So, for practical management purposes, the meeting really needs to be called by the leadership of the forum. You cannot leave it in abeyance that members will be free to select whoever they want as the interim chairperson. 

I do not support the proposal being made by my honourable colleague. I stick to the proposal or amendment as proposed by the committee.  

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I would like to get clarification from the Minister. Supposing the chairperson has called a meeting in good faith, but unfortunately his child dies and the vice chairperson has gone somewhere, what do you do? Thank you.

DR MAKUBUYA: I appreciate the predicament being articulated by hon. Baba Diri but, to use this very example, when we lose a person we bury and pick up the pieces subsequently. So, I do not see a catastrophe, because if a meeting cannot take place today, it can take place tomorrow. This is a very practical reason. Thank you, Madam.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 2(b) be amended as proposed by the chairperson subject to the amendment to replace the word “representative” with “member.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to. 

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.15
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.16
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker and honourable members I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Political Parties and Organizations (Amendment) Bill, 2009” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.17
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this House adopts the report from the Committee of the whole House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that this House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

The Political Parties and Organizations (Amendment) Bill, 2009

4.18
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Political Parties and Organizations (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read for a third time and do pass. I beg to move.

4.18
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As we pass this Bill, I just want to find out from the honourable minister what happens to other amendments to this Bill. We have a standing petition, which was given to the Prime Minister and also to the Attorney-General from the -[Members: “Procedure”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, at the second reading, I called for debate and nobody said anything -

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, I am not talking about amendments to this Bill. I am asking whether you have intentions of bringing other amendments to the parent Act, because there are other amendments that have been proposed. (Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, right from the time we begun this session, we talked of Members being here in the House to follow proceedings. This man is a visiting MP - a visitor. He doesn’t come to Parliament and he comes in now to take us back. Is he in order to come and disorganise us? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be read for a third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT 2010”

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

4.20
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read for a second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, the House will again recall that this Bill was given a first reading sometime in December last year. The object of the Bill is to amend the Presidential Elections Act, 2005 Act No.16, to require the Electoral Commission to declare a candidate elected unopposed where one of only two candidates withdraws or is disqualified for election.

Two, to require a returning officer to compile and submit to the Electoral Commission within seven days after the conclusion of the election, a detailed report of the election within the returning officer’s electoral district.

Three, to prohibit fundraising and donations during the period of campaigning.

In brief, clause 1 of the Bill introduces a new section 19(a) requiring the Commission to declare the remaining candidate elected unopposed, where one of only two candidates withdraws or is disqualified.

The rationale is to give the Commission clear guidance as to what to do in those circumstances.

Again in brief, clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 56 of the Presidential Elections Act, 2005 to require a returning officer to compile and submit to the Electoral Commission within seven days after the conclusion of the election, a report on the election within the officer’s electoral district.

The purpose of the amendment is to facilitate the carrying out of the Commission’s functions in relation to the declaration of results in the preparation of reports in the elections.

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 64 of the Presidential Elections Act, to ban fundraising and the giving of donations by a candidate or the agents of a candidate during the campaigning period. Contravention of this will amount to an illegal practice punishable under Section 68.

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 68 of the parent Act, to make the offence under Section 64(7) punishable under Section 68. The punishment is a fine not exceeding 48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.

The amendments to clauses 64 and 68 are aimed at achieving clean elections.

The first reading of this Bill was made on 15 December 2009. The Bill was duly referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs of this Parliament. My information today is that the committee is ready to proceed with further processing of this Bill. I beg to move.

4.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009.

The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 15th December 2009 and referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 13 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Rule 115 (2). Of importance also was Rule 116(2) which states that the committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill, as it considers fit, if the amendments, including new clauses and new schedules, are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill.

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders and individuals:

1.	The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs/Attorney-General
2.	The Electoral Commission
3.	Uganda Law Reform Commission
4.	Uganda Joint Christian Council
5.	Uganda Law Society
6.	Citizens Coalition for Electoral Democracy in Uganda
7.	Forum for Democratic Change
8.	Peoples’ Development Party
9.	Political Parties Platform
10.	National Resistance Movement Organisation
11.	Human Rights Network
12.	Inter Party Organisation for Dialogue
13.	Inter Party Cooperation
14.	Hon. Erias Lukwago, Shadow Attorney-General and MP, Kampala Central
15.	Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, MP Tororo County
16. Hon. Moses Kabuusu, MP Kyamuswa County
17. Hon. Akbar Godi, MP Arua Municipality
18. Hon. Michael Mabikke, MP Makindye East 

The object of the Bill is to amend the Presidential Elections Act, 2005 and to require the Electoral Commission to declare a candidate elected unopposed where one of only two candidates withdraws or is disqualified for elections, and to require the returning officer to compile and submit to the Electoral Commission within seven days after the conclusion of elections, a detailed report of the elections within the returning officer’s electoral district, and prohibit fundraising and donations during the period of campaigning. 

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that: 
Most of the proposed amendments that were presented before the committee require amending the Constitution. Article 259(2) of the Constitution provides that, “The Constitution shall not be amended except by an Act of Parliament, the sole purpose of which is to amend the Constitution and the Act has been passed in accordance with chapter 18.” 

Some of the proposed amendments include varying the voting age of citizens for national and local government elections, which would necessitate an amendment of Article 59(1) and restatement of the term limits for a person elected as President of Uganda, which would in essence also mean amending Article 105 of the Constitution. 

The proposed provision 19(a) can be manipulated by unscrupulous candidates or their agents or supporters to the detriment of the electorate. This can be done by influencing a candidate into withdrawing from an election or through bribery. The committee, therefore, proposes to strengthen this provision by providing for an appeal process for a candidate who has been disqualified or who has withdrawn under circumstances he does not agree with. 

In addition to the appeal process, the committee proposes that a candidate sponsored by a political party organisation who wishes to withdraw, should have his or her notification to the returning officer signed and sealed by the secretary general of the political party organisation or a person authorised by the political party or organisation. 

The term “fundraising” is not defined in the proposed law. As it is now, it may be used to stop candidates from soliciting campaign funds. Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. 

The report is duly signed. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Chair of the Legal Committee, in your observations you said that some of these matters may require a constitutional amendment. So, which should come first, because from your report, you observe but you do not tell us what to do?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, what it means is that the amendments that necessitated constitutional amendments were not considered by the committee. 

4.31
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence that the debate on this matter be deferred. I find several anomalies. Rule 913 is very clear and I want to read: “Minutes of proceedings are to be brought up with the report of the committee...” 
I am among the people who presented a position to the committee. 

IPOD which is the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue, and which brings together all political parties including the NRM, presented positions which the members of IPOD adopted. Most of these issues have been left out in the committee report and I find this report not conforming to the rules. The rule is very clear; it says that minutes of proceedings should be brought up with the report of the committee. Really, the chairman should have been fair to bring all these minutes and our submissions together with the report; but to bring a report which is so shallow, that leaves out important issues which were even agreed by the members of the NRM and members of the Opposition, is unacceptable. Therefore, I am seeking for your indulgence that the debate be deferred to tomorrow so that we can have more dialogue and conclude this matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, I am also a bit uncomfortable, especially on your observation, because I am not sure whether we should proceed with this without moving for a constitutional amendment. So, can we defer this matter and get some advice tomorrow? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] So, debate on this is adjourned. 

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I am not trying to challenge your ruling, but I am seeking clarification; because first and foremost, I do not know why the committee referred to the constitutional amendments when actually they were not contained within the Bill itself. I do not know why he mentioned it really. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, in their deliberations, they realised that certain parts of the amendments would require a Constitutional amendment and that is why I asked what they want us to do first; amend the Constitution or deal with it? And he said he was not yet able to handle that. So, let us defer this matter for consultation. We can handle it tomorrow. 

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 4.35 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 April 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)
