Wednesday, 16 April 2008 

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala
.
PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I again welcome you. I have just received sad news of the demise of hon. Geofrey Ekanya’s father. It occurred last night at Nsambya Hospital. The burial will be tomorrow at his residence in Tororo District. I think as we normally do, we should observe a minute of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday I had informed you of the tentative programme for the burial of hon. Manuel Pinto – the funeral arrangements. There have been some changes. The organising committee has announced the changes in the funeral programme as follows: Wednesday, that is today, there will be a celebration of hon. Pinto’s life at Hotel International by the Rotary Club of Muyenga at 6.30 p.m. The late Manuel Pinto was a member and I think the Charter President of the Rotary Club of Muyenga. Actually on Saturday, the club of Muyenga performed a cleaning exercise of the area around Wabigalo and hon. Pinto participated in it.  

Then tomorrow, 17 April 2007 there will be a requiem Mass at Lubaga Cathedral at 10.00 a.m. after which the body will be transported to his home in Muyenga, Kironde Road. 

On Friday, the body will be transported to Kakuuto in Rakai District. On Saturday, 19 April 2007, the funeral starts with service at his ancestral home in Kakuuto at 12.00 noon and the burial will take place at 2.00 p.m. 

Transport has been organised for staff members going for the burial. The mini bus will depart from the North Wing at 8.00 a.m. on Saturday, 19 April 2008. Those are the announcements. 

2.37
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I had approached you yesterday to allow me raise this matter in Parliament as a matter of national importance. It is a matter that affects my constituency but apparently, I think it may affect the whole country. 

A lady from my constituency told me that vaccination outreach sessions, which have been conducted in villages, are no more; even at health centre IIs and health centre IIIs there are no vaccines. When I contacted my district director of health services, she told me it was a national problem. That a branch from the Ministry of Health – is it called UNEPI or something – which provides the vaccines has run out of vaccines. That means that our children are going without immunisation. They used to be immunised against the five killer diseases – I am now told they are eight. This is a serious problem to the country and I have not heard any comprehensive statements from the Minister of Health about this issue. We all know that Uganda has been very vigilant in immunising children. Most districts have been awarded for leading. 

I would like, therefore, to know the right minister to inform us of the status - are we about to get the vaccines? What is the magnitude of this problem? Is it only affecting my area and other areas are okay? Thank you so much.   

2.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE, URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Tumwebaze for raising this question. It is not true that the country has run short of vaccines; what has happened is that there was interruption in the supply or procurements so to say, of gas. This matter is being put right and I think at an appropriate time early next week I will come here with a statement regarding this very issue. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Alright.

2.40
MS SUZAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I have been sent by my electorate, the people of Ssenge village. Ssenge village has got so many land problems and secondly, it has no government primary school. The whole village has got only one private, primary school. However, they are finding problems with the African Hearts Institute Organisation. This school started in 2003 and it is situated on one acre of land. However, when these people came in, the African Hearts Institute, they purchased a big portion of the village and right now they want to evict the school. They are saying that they are giving them two options; they either get the Shs 10 million that they want to pay them, or this African Hearts Institute takes over the school without any pay. 

This is the only school in the village - the next nearest school is about three miles away - implying that children in that area are not able to go and attend those schools. Secondly, there is a swamp around and when it rains, the whole place floods such that these children cannot be in position to go to these schools. 

However, these residents have sent me; they need help from Parliament because they do not want to lose this school. This is a school, which caters for orphans whereby 50 percent of the children in that school do not pay school fees, and then the other 50 percent pay very small amounts, which parents cannot afford in other schools and by virtue of the fact there is no UPE school in the area, this is the only school that helps them - (Interruption) 

MS KABAKUMBA: Guidance.

MS NAKAWUKI: Mr Speaker, I seek your protection from the Government Chief Whip because she is too much on my case. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think it is clear. What you need is intervention maybe not by Parliament but by the Executive because this is the Executive’s work. I think you have alerted the Executive about the problem, I do not know whether there is any immediate reaction or not. [Mrs Kabakumba: “Not yet.”] Not yet? Should we take it that the immediate action will be to investigate and take action? 

MS NAKAWUKI: Further information, Mr Speaker. This school is called El Shadhai Nursery and Primary School, and actually they had an option; they wanted to be paid so that they buy themselves out, which these people declined to do.

THE SPEAKER: No, then what I can say is that let the Executive investigate and take remedial action. (Mr Kawuma rose_)- I do not have any other intervention. You did not notify me, unfortunately. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance regarding the questions for oral answer, which I presented, and which had appeared on the Order Paper. I am seeking your guidance on this matter because one of the questions demanded an answer from hon. Rukutana regarding all people working in Iraq. And today as I was reading in the papers, I saw some people complaining of ill treatment and how they lose their money as they go out to work in Iraq. I do not know when this question will appear. The good thing is that the minister has given me a copy of his answer. 

Secondly, last week there was another issue concerning the education sector. You promised that it would be dealt with last week on Tuesday but I am surprised that yesterday, it was not there nor is it today. But particularly, I am concerned – those two are very significant – but with this one, people are coming out and they are complaining about ill treatment in Iraq and already the answer is – 

THE SPEAKER: In Iraq?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: It was concerning Ugandans working abroad particularly in Iraq. Now there are complaints and they have appeared in the papers and hon. Rukutana is already with the answers.  

THE SPEAKER: And who is supposed to handle people in Iraq?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: I beg your pardon.

THE SPEAKER: Which minister is supposed to handle this?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Hon. Rukutana is here. [Hon. Members: “Yes, Foreign Affairs.”]

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT & INDUATRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that a number of people - I think about 10 - sometime back raised some complaints regarding their employment in Iraq. We set in motion a mechanism to investigate and address the complaints. To a large extent, the complaints were addressed but some of the people were not satisfied. These are the people who have been going around in the media – I also saw in the papers that a petition was logged here in Parliament. But to the best of my knowledge, the ministry tried to resolve the issues but of course some people were not satisfied and we advised those who were not satisfied to take other measures like going to court. 

It is also true that hon. Sebuliba Mutumba raised some questions. I had earlier given answers though unfortunately I understand he came here and said I had not given answers. I volunteered to give an answer again and he has it, and I gave a copy to the Clerk and I am ready to answer as and when the matter can find its way on the Order Paper. 

THE SPEAKER: But incidentally, which ministry is responsible for the recruitment of people to go and work outside the country, like Iraq? What is the policy?

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Mr Speaker, it is the private sector but there is a department of external employment in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which is under my ministry. So the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is responsible. 

THE SPEAKER: I see. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Should we expect it to be slotted in tomorrow such that we get a substantive –

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not possible tomorrow because we agreed yesterday that we shall not have any other item tomorrow other than the Local Government (Amendment) Bill. Maybe next time, but not tomorrow. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Well, apparently I do not see the Minister of Education and Sports. She was the one to make it [Mrs Kabakumba Masiko: “We skip it.”] we skip it then. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE MANUEL PINTO

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Kasamba.

2.48
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Mr Speaker, allow me to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay glowing tribute to the late Manuel Pinto. Under rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure, this motion comes without notice given the fact that death does not give notice. 

“WHEREAS Parliament learnt with profound shock and disbelief of the death of the late hon. Emmanuel Pinto, which occurred at his home of residence in Muyenga on the 14 April 2008;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Manuel Pinto diligently served this country as a Member of the Sixth Parliament and was a renowned debater, perceived by many to be a good legislator and organiser;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Manuel Pinto while Member of Parliament served on the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and was notable for his diligent service to the committee;

AWARE THAT the late Manuel Pinto left Parliament to become Director of the Parliamentary Professional Development Unit;

AND FURTHER AWARE that the late hon. Manuel Pinto served as a Cabinet minister from 1993 to 1995 and was the first Director General of the Uganda AIDS Commission from 1990 to 1995;

AND ALSO AWARE that the late hon. Manuel Pinto was a Member of the National Resistance Council from 1989 and a Constituent Assembly delegate from 1994 to 1995;

NOTING THAT the late hon. Manuel Pinto served as the Chairman of the Africa Committee of the World Organisation of the Scout Movement;

COGNISANT of the fact that the late Manuel Pinto has been managing a five-year project on deepening democracy in Uganda and was due to take up another donor-funded project under Parliament;

APPRECIATING that the late Manuel Pinto indeed dedicated his life to serve humanity and therefore deserved recognition of this august Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
1.	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, friends, the people of Kakuuto County and the nation as a whole upon the loss of this illustrious son of Uganda;
2.	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contributions made by the late hon. Manuel Pinto in the political arena and in the Civil Service both at local and national levels; 
3.	That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants the late hon. Manuel Pinto eternal peace.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Bahati. Proceed.

MR KASAMBA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, we did not have the opportunity, as the procedures of Parliament dictate, to have the body of the late hon. Manuel Pinto brought within the precincts of Parliament but allow me to lay on table the true picture of the late hon. Manuel Pinto as a sign of the man that I am going to talk about.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let it face there.

MR KASAMBA: Hon. Pinto was born on 25 December 1942. He studied in a primary school called Nazareth Primary School, which is found in Rakai District, Kakuuto County. Remember, he was born on Christmas day and he studied in Nazareth Primary school, which is found in Kyebe sub-county where we are going to lay him on Saturday. He also studied in Busubizi Teachers’ College. He was a teacher for sometime before he joined the business world where he worked in a petroleum industry, specifically with Esso Company for quite a while. 

In the 1980s, he went to exile in Nairobi and records have it that he also participated, on the external wing, to mobilise and participate in the liberation of this country. When he came back in 1989, he was elected as the NRC representative of Kakuuto County, Rakai. This was the time when Rakai and the entire Uganda had been declared to have HIV/AIDS and the first case had been identified way back in Kasensero in 1982. When the NRM Government came to power, it took up a policy of declaring HIV/AIDS as a pandemic for the country. Hon. Pinto worked very hard to fight and mobilise communities and the district leadership in the fight against HIV/AIDS. 

In 1989/1990, hon. Pinto together with other daughters and sons of Rakai District initiated what we called Rakai Development Association (RDA). Together with hon. Elly Kayanja and hon. Maria Mutagamba, they initiated a development arm to ensure that they mobilised communities in Rakai District to fight and strive for the development of the district. 

Hon. Pinto had a selfless commitment for the vulnerable. He was also the founder member of the Orphans Community Based Organisation (OCBO), an NGO which is working very hard to fight for and support the plight of orphans in Rakai and Uganda in general. 

At the national level, hon. Pinto together with a few other committed Ugandans established a famous organisation called UCOBAC. This was an umbrella body, which organised community-based associations to improve and advocate for the plight of orphans in this country. 

When hon. Pinto went to Nairobi, he met with the Danish Ambassador, by then the Embassy of Denmark was in Nairobi. He talked to the ambassador and interested him in visiting Uganda and specifically Rakai District. By then I was a development worker in Rakai. We received the Danish Ambassador and he visited several projects and assessed the situation, which was prevailing in Rakai. He was touched. When he went back to Nairobi, the process for establishing the Danish Embassy in Uganda was initiated then. 

Rakai has been known for quite some time as regards development programmes concerned with trying to fight the crisis of HIV/AIDS and DANIDA did a lot to put up infrastructure in terms of roads, schools and capacity building on so many fronts. Since DANIDA opened its offices in Uganda, we know what they have done on so many fronts such as good governance and improving so many areas of development in this country. The genesis of DANIDA or the Danish Embassy coming to Uganda was the humble contribution of hon. Pinto. 

Hon. Pinto and Brig. Elly Kayanja went to the United States in the early 1990s. While there, they met a Ugandan who was then working in the headquarters of World Vision. Many of you here in this Parliament know what World Vision means to the lives of vulnerable communities in this country. This Ugandan happened to have come from Rakai and he had vowed never to come back to Uganda. They pleaded with him and requested him to send experts to come and assess the situation in Uganda. Since the 1990s, many of us know what World Vision has done for this country. When you go to Northern Uganda or Rakai, there are so many area development programmes, relief programmes and post conflict issues, which are being handled by World Vision to ensure that the plight of the vulnerable are taken care of. I commend the efforts of hon. Pinto and hon. Elly Kayanja. 

During his term on NRC, as a Constituency Assembly delegate and during the Sixth Parliament, hon. Pinto served with a lot of commitment, vigour and he was a man who wanted accomplishment. As the first Director General of the Uganda AIDS Commission, hon. Pinto mobilised all that was required at community, district, national and international level to ensure that the fight against HIV/AIDS becomes a major concern of everybody. 

As a Member of the Sixth Parliament, hon. Pinto served on the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. He was part of the sub-committee that investigated the railway wagons that were to be purchased in Zambia. He also checked the excesses of the fuel abuse in the Railways Corporation. 

Those of you who were in the Sixth Parliament remember his commitment and vigilance to ensure that there is transparency and accountability. Hon. Pinto served as a Minister of State for Internal Affairs during the Sixth Parliament and during his tenure; he worked to ensure that the welfare of the prisons, police and the entire security of this country is taken care of. We commend his timely input. 

In 2001, hon. Pinto retired from elective politics of Kakuuto County and I became his successor. When I came to this Parliament in 2001, I came unopposed because of the joint effort we had in the district. Hon. Pinto became the Director of the Parliamentary Professional Development Office (PDCO) from 2001 to 2004. He worked tirelessly to train incoming parliamentarians on parliamentary etiquette and also train and recruit professional staff of Parliament. I commend the contribution that hon. Pinto made towards the improvement of the parliamentary system. 

From 2005 to 2007, hon. Pinto became the coordinator of PDCO, which we all know, and he worked very diligently to strengthen the development office by coordinating the development partners of Parliament. It is during this period that the Parliamentary Strategic Development Plan was initiated and launched and hon. Pinto made substantial contribution to this process.  

He was a serious supporter of the youth and the young generation. He initiated and supported many youth programmes. Most prominently, he has been a scout and a very devoted supporter of the scout movement in Uganda and in Africa. 

Hon. Pinto was a committed, God-fearing citizen. He was a strong believer and supported very many Catholic developments. He was never segregative in his religious beliefs. 

Hon. Pinto had a family with children and I would like to convey my sincere condolences to Mrs Maria Pinto for the loss of her loved one. 

Mr Speaker, as I wind up allow me to express this concern as we send off our senior citizen, hon. Pinto. It is on record and research has proved in Africa and in Uganda as a case in point that the fatal loss of former parliamentarians is so high. To mention Uganda’s case, we have hon. Kezimbira Miyingo whom we lost immediately after elections; hon. Wesonga who died in a motor accident; hon. A.K. Lodou, who died before being sworn in and now hon. Pinto. There are many others on the list. This phenomenon is very disturbing and worrying. I am also told that hon. Jacob Oulanyah has been in a very critical condition. We need to address this phenomenon as active parliamentarians to ensure that as you wind up your active service, you don’t lose out and die suddenly. 

On 14 March 2008, Parliament recognised distinguished personalities involved in the fight against HIV/AIDS for the last 25 years. This was held in Kasensero, Kyebe sub-county. At this juncture, I would like to sincerely thank you, Mr Speaker, the Committee on HIV/AIDS in Parliament and H.E the President for having honoured Kasensero, Rakai and Kakuuto County in particular and allowed it to host this occasion. Hon. Pinto was not recognised as one of the national, prominent persons I had pushed for. During the event, I saw hon. Pinto was stressed and disappointed. Having put in a lot and having been the pioneer Director General of the Uganda AIDS Commission, he was not recognised. 

About two weeks back, hon. Pinto had an accident on the Kyapa-Kasensero road and his red vehicle, the land cruiser almost overturned. It is rather unfortunate and tragic that hon. Pinto died in a motor accident at home. Hon. Pinto has been a committed and very eloquent senior citizen of this country and we have lost him. I pray to this Parliament to resolve and pay glowing tribute to our departed one. 

Hon. Pinto, may the Almighty award you for the good deeds and exonerate you of all the misgivings. I beg to move and commit this motion to this House for debate and passing. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Kasamba.

3.08
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for the opportunity to speak about a man with whom I have served at the Uganda Scouts Association for the last eight years where I volunteer as the Chairperson of the Uganda Scouts National Board. We remember hon. Pinto in so many ways: as a family man, as a great scout leader and above all as a friend of young people. 

Manuel valued so many good things but above all, the gracious gift of his wife Maria. During his career, he made so many friends with so many people but there was only one person he usually joked with and whom he said could make him lonely by just leaving the room. Hon. Speaker and Members, today we want to honour his wife Maria for the love and support she gave this man and the whole nation grieves with you, Maria and your family at this time. 

As parents, guardians and leaders, we ask ourselves very fundamental questions about the future of our children. Some of the questions that come to our minds everyday that passes are: shall we raise these children into responsible citizens? Shall we raise them into people who love their country and children who serve above self? Shall we raise them into people who will be helpful to their neighbours and people whose hearts will be after their creator? Does our education system help us to instil good values into our children? These are fundamental questions that we ask as parents and guardians. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Pinto loved and worked long and hard for the value-based system of education called scouting; a system that trains and nurtures young people with values of trust, honesty, love for God, country, neighbour and values of self sacrifice. 

Mr Pinto has been a scout for 58 years. He joined the Scouts Movement in 1950 at Nazareth Infant School in Rakai District as a club scout. Over the years he climbed the ladders of scouting to become the Africa Representative to the World Scout Committee and the Chief Scout of Uganda in 2003 up to the time of his death.  He was a role model and a friend of young people. Because of his dedication, commitment and passion for scouting, the World Scout Movement awarded him the highest award in scouting, the Elephant Award, in 2001. He was the only one in Uganda with this award. 

At the Uganda Scouts Association, he is remembered for having spearheaded the making of its constitution; he raised funds to support street children and before his death, he, together with many members at the Secretariat of Uganda Scouts Association were working on a project to put up a multi-storied building at the scouts headquarters. He has also been fundamental in amending the Boy Scouts and Girl Guides Act of 1963, which we hope will come to this Parliament in the next session. 

Mr Speaker, we have said on this Floor before and we have urged the Ministry of Education to take advantage of these over 600,000 young people who are organised in scouting, and the Girl Guides; young people that have gained values for love for their country. I am happy to note that the Minister of Education has been a great Girl Guide all her life; but she has kept a deaf ear to our appeal. I want to take this opportunity to appeal to the Ministry of Education, at least to allocate some limited funds to the activities of scouting and Girl Guides so that we can take advantage of these young and energetic people who are organised in these associations. 

Lastly, as we accompany him on his last journey home on Friday, we are grateful and very proud of the people of Kakuuto and Rakai District who raised him and nurtured him into the kind of wonderful man who served our country diligently and we shall always remember him. I thank you.

3.13
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I beg to support the motion and on behalf of government we wish to convey our condolences to Maria Pinto, the children and the nation at large upon the loss of hon. Pinto. 

I discovered Pinto essentially in Parliament where he was extremely articulate and used to animate Parliament and the mass media. He was also very well organised. Indeed a few days ago he approached me because he wanted me to give a keynote address at a workshop, which will be dealing with deepening democracy in Uganda. He came along with a number of distinguished ambassadors and we brainstormed regarding the critical issues, which inhibit and/or facilitate the realisation of democracy. I am still writing the paper I shall be giving but I shall greatly miss him and I shall include a number of points he gave me. 

We have heard that he was also a Minister of State for Internal Affairs; a Rotarian and served in other capacities. Rotarians are not rich people. I happen to be a Rotarian but I am not rich; we are simply other regarding. Hon. Pinto was other regarding and used the connections he had to uplift the quality of living of his constituency. 

Before he died I discussed with him the demands of being a Member of Parliament. He objected to the commercialisation of politics. A Member of Parliament has so many heavy demands and we tried to look for solutions and one of his solutions was to get projects and when he carried out those projects he was not getting money from his own pocket although that is inevitable when you want to be an effective Member of Parliament. 

Government has already tabled a Bill where we shall give financial assistance to political parties. We hope that this measure is going to reduce the financial burden, which honourable members of Parliament bear. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

3.18
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, in the late afternoon hours of Monday this week, we all did receive with great shock and disbelieve the news of the untimely death of our colleague, a senior brother, the late hon. Manuel Pinto. 

The late Manuel Pinto personally got known to me in 1990. At that time he was a Member of the NRC but I got to know him in a special way when his enormous contributions in the voluntary work brought all the childcare agencies in this country together to form the organisation known as UCBOC, which in full is Uganda community Based Organisation for Childcare. Hon. Manuel Pinto was the first chairman and he was deputised by the late Fr. Kasangaki from Toro. 

The late Manuel Pinto, during his term of office as chairman of this organisation, was known and regarded as a result-oriented manager. It was through his efforts that this organisation and the numerous childcare agencies that fell underneath, were able to receive the first ever grant from UNICEF to support the community based initiatives to help the orphaned children, especially those of and as a result of the HIV scourge. I am sure many of these organisations that have closely worked with hon. Pinto will greatly miss him because he has been a pillar in that regard.  

The late Manuel Pinto is further remembered by me although I was not in Parliament, but I kept my ears to the ground concerning contributions that were being made by renowned legislators. He was one of those who very virtuously fought in the anti-corruption crusade. And his contributions up to now can still be traced in the Hansard of this House especially when there was that heated debate initiated by the late Basoga Nsadhu on the state of affairs of the management of Uganda Commercial Bank under Dr Mwine.

The remarkable contribution that hon. Manuel Pinto made then was to attest that this is a man who meant well for this country; a man who meant well in the sense that his appeal was for everybody to be contented with what he legitimately earns. 

I further got to work closely with the late Manuel Pinto when he was Minister of State for Internal Affairs. A few months back, we were here talking about the NGO Registration Statute. The late Manuel Pinto was the brain behind that initiative so as to curtail the number of numerous briefcase NGOs that mushroomed in this country as a result of global intervention to contain the scourge of HIV and at the same time to provide care for those affected and infected.

His contribution in as far as this statute is concerned has to a very great extent brought sanity in this country in the sense that now government knows who the legitimate NGOs are; who have got what; who have got where to work and who can be seen by way of the services that they deliver. And that invariably takes into account the security of this country because in the world of today, many organisations can disguise their presence as benevolent organisations whereas their primary intention may be different. 

We will greatly remember the late Manuel Pinto and he will have died in vain if we did not cherish and continue with the project that he had initiated; the project for deepening democracy  in this country. Uganda belongs to us; we patronize Uganda; Uganda is our mother and, therefore, the need for all the various political parties in this country to work in harmony and not to look at each other as enemies but as opponents, is important. I am sure his personal input has been lost but the spirit that he has left behind in this project and his input in the conceptual framework is something that I appeal all of us to emulate and seriously implement. 

On behalf of the Opposition, therefore, I would like to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and the people of Kakuuto and Rakai in general. We have lost a dear citizen; a citizen whose contributions have gone into records - will never ever be once again echoed by him. 

There are two people whom I used to meet in the precincts of this Parliament whom I never used to call by name; one is our colleague, hon. Dombo; I will never call him Dombo. And at no time did I ever call the late, “Pinto”. I would always say, “God be with you,” taken from the Biblical name Emmanuel. That is how I used to refer to the late Pinto. Even our colleague here will attest to the fact that I do not call him by his name. I always say, “How are you, God be with you?” That very warm relationship is no more. It is the Almighty that gives and it is the same Almighty that takes. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

3.25
MAJ. (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We lived a very interesting life at Bukasa Zone, Makindye. Myself, Manuel Pinto, Paul Etiang and Deo Rwabita lived in the same village. Some of us left but because the late Pinto had his home there, he stayed in Bukasa Zone, Makindye and he was a very good neighbour. I am sure those who still lived with him in that zone will really never forget the wonderful family and wonderful person as a neighbour in that area.  

When I was appointed Minister of Lands and Housing, I was pleased that as former Minister of State for Internal Affairs, I had to leave that seat and hon. Pinto was appointed as Minister of State for Internal Affairs. But I will not necessarily remember him for these two. I will remember him for 1990 when he was the NRC Member for Kakuuto. We got information from him that at Kasensero, where River Kagera joins Lake Victoria, there were decapitated bodies floating all the way from Rwanda and floating on River Kagera up to Kasensero, joining Lake Victoria. 

We had to rush to Kasensero and to mobilise NGOs; we mobilised the Red Cross and volunteers in Kampala. We spent almost two weeks, working day and night with hon. Pinto, trying to remove bodies form Lake Victoria and trying to create a place where we could give these victims of genocide a befitting burial. And that place today, Kasensero, where there is that mass grave, is the work of the late hon. Pinto. He worked so hard, day and night, on that lake with myself and other volunteers, to try to recover these bodies. From that time I began to respect Pinto so much for his tireless efforts to give a decent burial to these victims of genocide in Rwanda.

So, I agree with all the contributions of Members about his voluntary work, about whatever but for me, it is this incident of the burial of these genocide victims from Rwanda and the mass grave, which is there forever. May God rest his soul in eternal peace! I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.29
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to the late hon. Manuel Pinto. Permit me first, on the behalf of the people, particularly the youth and especially the scouts of Soroti District, to convey our sincere condolences to the family of the late hon. Manuel Pinto.

On 29 March 2008 we were privileged hosts of the Founder’s Day in Soroti District and as chief scout, the late was in Soroti. He spoke to the young people and he left a very serious impression in their minds. Since the other day when he passed away, we have had calls of, “Is it true the chief scout has passed away?” The young people are downcast and it is so saddening that hon. Manuel Pinto just passed away like that. And as the last beneficiaries, I suppose, I do not think he has been on any other official scouts duty of that magnitude - we share the pain and we pray that the family finds solace in the loving hands of God.

Again on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission and indeed the Parliamentary Service, we also want to record our condolences at the demise of Manuel Pinto who has been part of this institution both as a Member of Parliament and as a technical and very experienced person. The Parliamentary Commission misses hon. Pinto especially the experience, the touch he brought to his activities as a very dedicated and a very committed person at the service of the Parliamentary Commission. We will miss him. The fact that hon. Manuel Pinto did a lot of good works in this commission, working out strategic plans and doing a lot of capacity building, is something that comforts us and we hope that his good works, his example, his legacies, his commitment and his forthrightness will continue to be an example to the new staff, to the old ones and to provide comfort for all those who have worked with him.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to comment on his role in terms of making linkages for the deepening of democracy programme. We in the political parties found in the late hon. Manuel Pinto somebody who we would consult at any time. Whether he met you on the road he just told you, “Now we are having this programme, what is your view?” He had the opportunity, the will and desire to do his work there and then. He had a political tolerance and maturity enough to interact freely with me in the Opposition as well as those in government. 

Mr Speaker, in an era where people still think being in the Opposition is bad, losing a man like hon. Pinto is a very painful thing. A lot has been said about him; his leadership qualities; his role as a role model and many of the great things he has done. I am praying that the good Lord comforts his family. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.34
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for providing us with this opportunity to celebrate the life of one of our beloved members of this society and for giving me this opportunity specifically to pay tribute to the late hon. Manuel Pinto.

I knew hon. Pinto when I used to follow debates in Parliament on television. He used to interest me as an individual and I got closer when I was elected by the people of Makindye West as a Member of Parliament. I contacted one young Rotarian by the names of Timothy Serunjogi attempting to request whether hon. Pinto would be in position to give me time so he could take me through the preliminaries of a new Member of Parliament, since I did not know what was supposed to take place in this great House. Pinto accepted unconditionally and I met with him three times.

He gave me a copy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and a copy of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and told me, “Go and read but do not cram these books.” He told me to just be friendly to them. He told me, “In all you will do as a Member of Parliament, do not please individuals. Make sure your conscience is clear and clean; individuals will eventually be pleased with the actions that will follow.” He specifically told me the following and I quote: “Never contribute to a debate where your voice would add nothing useful. Two, never intend to hurt a human being even by word of mouth because human beings take long to heal, but even you take much longer to regain your consciousness.”

I have been quite conscious of what Pinto told me and a few weeks ago, I was with him cracking jokes as usual. For those of you who remember when we were at Hotel African during the induction of the Members of Parliament Pinto said, “You are honourable members and you are given different names in different areas.” One such name that remains so prominent was one that he quoted for us that came from West Africa that Members of Parliament are called “Owogunene”. I will continue to remember Pinto for that word.

Lastly, when we lose our dear ones, we come and say good things about them but we forget they have been holding great offices and positions through which sometimes they find it inevitable to step on toes of others. It is my humble submission and prayer that whoever received a word that was unpleasant or an act that was construed to be cruel from Pinto, please, forgive him so he can face the Almighty with a cleaner file. I thank you.

3.38
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to the motion. I support the motion. 

In paying tribute to the late hon. Manuel Pinto, I think all of us view him in different dimensions. There are those who had the opportunity to be with him in Parliament but some of us had the opportunity to serve with the late hon. Pinto in the Uganda Scouts Association. 

I first met him way back as a young scout in 1996 at the national camping site in Kazi where Lira District emerged the winner. Afterwards, we were honoured to represent Uganda in the East and Central Scout Jamboree in Nairobi, Kenya. Uganda again won. I remember one word of wisdom when he was briefing us before we left for Nairobi he told us, “You are all young people, never give up in life.” He told us he took that principle from the former President of America, Abraham Lincoln. I have mastered it since 1996 to date when I am paying tribute to the late hon. Manuel Pinto.

As the chief scout of Uganda, I personally knew the late Pinto as soft spoken but very objective; very articulate; very clear headed; result-oriented and he was not stingy with knowledge. Above all, he inspired and mentored many young people. Just as I refer to hon. Kirunda Kivejinja as the political encyclopaedia, in the scouts association we used to refer to the late Manuel Pinto as the encyclopaedia of scouting ideology in Uganda. 

As a nation builder, the Uganda Scouts Association will miss him. As a father, we shall miss him. As a mentor, we shall miss him. The Bible says no one knows the day; no one knows the hour and the time. He has gone and I believe to be with the Lord. May his soul and the souls of the innocent pupils who died at Buddo rest in eternal peace! Thank you.

3.42
MRS MASIKO KABAKUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Mr Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to the late hon. Manuel Pinto. I got in close contact with hon. Pinto in 1996 when we were together here in the Sixth Parliament. As a young legislator, I admired the way hon. Pinto would defend the position that he was convinced about and put government to task, but also when it came to defending the government position, hon. Pinto would leave all of us convinced with no extra questions. 

As you may be aware, hon. Pinto has served this government in various capacities and indeed the Movement. He was part of the external wing in the 1980s in Nairobi during the liberation struggle. He held positions in the Movement system of government as you have heard through NRC, CA and the Sixth Parliament. He was the chairperson of the Elders’ League in the NRM district committee of Rakai. He also has been on the NRM senior cadres’ team. 

Last year, hon. Pinto was involved in organising a workshop that was intended to build consensus among parties in Uganda. That workshop was funded by the EU and it was convened by you, Mr Speaker. He went to great lengths to explain to all parties, including the NRM and others, the importance of having consensus as we struggle to modernise our country and indeed the Secretary-General of FDC has alluded to this. We are going to miss hon. Pinto’s skills; we are going to miss his guidance; we are going to miss his jokes and the way he would soften when even the going got tough. 

The last time I saw hon. Pinto was when we went to Kasensero for the commemoration of the first victim of HIV/AIDS and in the usual style, he laughed and said, “Princess, I am now fully retired,” yet when duty called, he was ready to come back to work. But alas! He will not be around to fulfil all the objectives that were intended to be fulfilled in the strengthening good governance and democracy programme. May the Lord rest the soul of hon. Pinto in eternal peace but also sustain the bereaved.

3.46
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to say a few words about the late hon. Pinto whom I personally did not know much about except when we met last year when you delegated to me the responsibility of chairing the steering committee that organised the workshop on strengthening multi-party democracy in the country. The late Pinto was the head of the technical team with whom we had the opportunity to organise and steer this workshop to its successful end. 

I would like to confirm that I found the late Pinto a very patient man and as you may be aware, we had a lot of difficulties, first of all, in convening this meeting because it involved all the parties yet not all parties agreed on the agenda and the way it should be handled. But the late hon. Pinto talked to everybody; he talked to me as the chairman and said, “Uganda is for all of us, we must sit down and agree for the good of this country.”  

One thing also I discovered in the late Pinto was that he was a person of humility. This is a person who had been a minister and a legislator for a very long time, but I found him a very polite, a very courteous person who went so low to the level of an ordinary person when conducting his work.  

Mr Speaker, I would also like to confirm that he was a person who valued relationships. He is a person whom I did not know, whom I interacted with for a very short time. But since the time of the workshop which lasted a week or so, he would call to remind me that we have a commitment to the people of Uganda to convene the second workshop to follow up what we had been on in Munyonyo. I can say that as a steering committee and as Ugandans, we shall miss his contributions.

May I also add that he was also a man of with a big heart, a man who cared for those in need, those in want; he was a Rotarian as alluded to by the Prime Minister. In fact, he was the Charter President of the Rotary Club of Muyenga and tonight at Hotel International, there will be a meeting of all Rotarians to commemorate and remember his life and prepare for his burial. So, Rotarians and others may go for that meeting. 

Therefore, on behalf of the people who were organizing with him this conference and on behalf of my people of Kajara, I want to convey our condolences and pray that his family be helped and strengthened by God in this most difficult time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.49
MR SILVER BAHANE (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to the late Manuel Pinto. I came to know Pinto at the time when he was the Minister of State for Internal Affairs and later, when I worked in Rakai as a District CID officer. He was very helpful and I remember at one time when I met him at his residence, he gave me his telephone number and asked me to always contact him if I find any problem with doing my work. It is very rare to get such a person because I know most politicians and other big officers in government want to show the airs. But he was a very humble person. 

As my colleague has said, Sir Pinto, as he was popularly known was not only the Charter President of Muyenga Rotary Club, but also a Paul Harris Fellow (PHF). For Members who do not know who a Paul Harris Fellow is, it is a Rotarian who gives to all the nets about Shs 1 million at once. 

He loved sharing and maybe for Members who do not know, Rotary Club Muyenga has had so many income generating activities in the country. So, we shall miss him as a very wonderful Rotarian.  

Mr Speaker, so much has been said and I pray that the Good Lord may rest his soul in peace.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.52
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I last met Manuel Pinto at Kasensero and I remember, as I arrived, he left his chair and invited me to take it. This concludes a very long relationship with hon. Pinto. 

We first met in 1979. Like very many distinguished members of the public life in the Democratic Party, we joined the struggle together and Pinto was a self-made man. I think the highest formal education then was at Busubizi Teacher Training College.  But the eloquence with which he spoke, I think be shames even some of us who went up to the university for formal education. The eloquence, the logic and the knowledge expanse, you would think he had been to many universities. 

On top of that, he is a person who had no complexes. For Pinto, who comes from Minziro Kasensero, coming up in the Ugandan political life, maintaining his background and his home and yet rising to the very highest in this country is an example of people who are self-made and yet without complexities. And, I think the gentleman was a nationalist – let me mention one thing. He helped us develop this Parliament as an arm of government. In the history of this country, one of the greatest strategies was for Parliament to be sidelined - in all former government establishments! But Pinto fought tooth and nail to make sure that Parliament becomes central. We were together here in the NRC and subsequently he made up his mind that Parliament becomes an important arm of government. And he has died doing exactly that. 

One of the greatest tributes that we can pay to Pinto is to make sure that we parliamentarians respect Parliament, develop the role of Parliament and ensure that Parliament continues to serve this country.  May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. As we are proceeding with the item, I received the following communication:  This is from Uganda Parliament Press Association; it is addressed to me: 

“Condolence message:
We have learnt with great shock of the untimely death of the esteemed former Kakuuto MP, Manuel Pinto, and the tragedy that befell Buddo Junior Primary School. 

The Uganda Parliamentary Press Association grieves with the families of Mr Pinto and the 20 innocent girls who perished in the deadly inferno. We sincerely extend our heartfelt condolences to the family of the bereaved. 

The UPPA will always remember the late Pinto for his friendliness, openness and love for the country. He was a patriotic who championed democracy in our country. For our own benefit, he spearheaded the effort to help us improve professionally in the work we do and was very instrumental in sourcing funds for training programmes for the journalists. His memory will for ever be imprinted in our hearts. 

May the soul of the deceased rest in eternal peace.”

Signed by Emmanuel Gyezaho, 
President Uganda Parliamentary Press Association.

The other one is from Civil Society Capacity Building programme:

“The management, staff and family of Emmanuel pinto, through the Speaker. 

Condolence message:

It is with great shock and sadness that we the Programme Management Unit of Civil Society Capacity Building programme learnt of the sudden passing away of Emmanuel Pinto. The civil society capacity building programme worked together with Pinto and greatly benefited from his vast experience and wisdom. We came to know Mr Pinto as an advocate of awarding space to civil society in the process of policy engagement.

Our last contact with him was at the presentation during the consultative meeting for Members of Parliament and leaders of civil society organization, held in Jinja in June 2007, where he brought his foresightedness and intellectual ability, thus enriching our deliberations.

We are also sad on behalf of civil society in Uganda, which has lost a pillar and a leader in the sector and one of its prominent crusaders for democracy. 

We will miss him dearly within civil society and in Uganda as a whole. We grieve with you in this time of great loss. May his soul rest in eternal peace.”

Signed by civil society capacity building programme

With this I want to put the question on the motion moved by hon. Kasamba on hon. Pinto. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion agreed to)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE AUDIT BILL, 2007

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to move that the Bill entitled, “The Audit Bill, 2007” be read for the second time. An Act to give effect to Article 154(3) and 163 of the Constitution by providing for the Office of the Auditor-General; to provide for the appointment, tenure and removal of the Auditor-General; to provide for the staff of the Office of the Auditor-General; to provide for the auditing of accounts: of central governments, local government councils, administrative units, public organisations and private organisations and bodies.

To establish an audit board to perform specified functions relating to the Office of the Auditor-General; to empower and give the Auditor-General rights of access to documents and information relevant to the performance of his or her functions and, Mr Speaker and honourable members, and for other related matters.

4.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gaudioso Tindamanyire): Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Audit Bill was laid before Parliament for the first time in August 2007 and was committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Mr Speaker, under your wise consideration, I received a communication from you that the Public Accounts Committee joins my committee so that we deliberate on this Bill.

We met and considered this Bill. The Audit Bill which is meant to strengthen the independence of the Office of the Auditor-General will also improve parliamentary oversight and supervision of the Executive. It will go a long way in making the Office of the Auditor-General independent in matters of finance and staffing and make the Auditor-General an officer of Parliament enabling him to enjoy parliamentary immunities in all his publications before Parliament.

The Bill further empowers the Office of the Auditor-General in doing his work and gives effect to Article 154(3) and 163 of the Constitution.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the staff of the Office of the Auditor-General at present are public officers appointed, promoted and disciplined by the Public Service Commission. As such, the office is not organisationally and operationally independent and is not able to recruit or retain the calibre of staff it requires.

The Office of the Auditor-General is not able to perform effectively owing to the financial budgeting constraints it suffers due to lack of financial autonomy. The committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, the Auditor-General himself and his staff and the legislative counsel.

The working documents the Members were availed are the National Audit Acts on New Zealand, South Africa, United Kingdom, Austria and Kenya. Study tours were also made to the National Audit Offices of England, Scotland, Kenya and South Africa.

Most of our recommendations are therefore based on the well established information that Members got from the keen interest they put on this Bill.

Mr Speaker, let me make some observations on some key clauses in the Bill. The Office of the Auditor-General is not organisationally and operationally independent as earlier highlighted in this report. It is therefore recommended that a law comes into force at least within three months after publication of this Act. This in our view will allow the financial implications of this Bill to be incorporated in the next budget.

In clause 3, while the Bill provides for the Auditor-General being a body cooperate with perpetual succession, which comes with a lot of advantages that go with autonomy, such as ability to attract quality workforce, to own property and enter legal relationships, the idea of being sued is dangerous and needs to be well handled.

Parliament should insulate audited reports issued by the Auditor-General with privileges accorded to parliamentary reports. Otherwise, the Auditor-General’s time would end up being wasted in courts and he will have little time to do his work.  

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, clause 5 talks about a five-year term as suggested in the Bill. This does not provide the requisite security of tenure. Further, the provision for contract renewal would serve as his independence as that would influence his loyalty to the appointing authority in a debate to get his term renewed. A ten-year non-renewable period would be most appropriate. 

On clause 7, the committee notes that in the Constitution of Uganda, Article 167, there is sub-section 12, which requires the Auditor-General to vacate office if he or she is under sentence of death or a sentence of imprisonment exceeding nine months without an option of fine imposed by a competent court. That had been excluded, but we have suggested including it in this Bill.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, in clause 14 the committee observed that there has been a problem in auditing the Treasury Memoranda to establish whether the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have been adapted. It is the committee’s view, therefore, that this be taken up by the Auditor-General and a clause has been proposed in the Bill to provide for the Auditor-General to audit the Treasury Memoranda and provide progress reports on the recommendations of Parliament on the Public Accounts Committee reports.  

It was also apparent that the audit of the investments that government enters into with private companies, that is, where government is not a majority shareholder have either been poorly done or not done at all. The committee proposed that a clause be added to enable the Auditor-General to audit such expenditures as a fulfilment of the requirements of Article 163 of the Constitution.  

On clause 14, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, in tandem with the world and global developments, provisions have been made to include and accommodate gender and environmental audits. Environmental audits are already being undertaken by the Auditor-General, but need to be backed by an enabling law.  

On Clause 18, the committee notes that public schools and institutions are currently being audited by auditors appointed by the board of governors. The committee noted that a lot of funds are being provided by the Ministry of Education and Sports and therefore need to be audited by the Auditor-General. It was further noted that the current Education Act contradicts the Constitution, which empowers the Auditor-General to audit all public funds. A provision is, therefore, being included to enable the Auditor-General audit all public funds.

The committee was concerned on clause 29 that there was no provision to ensure that the audit board is gender sensitive. It is recommended that a provision be put in place in line with appointments of all other public bodies and boards to ensure that women are catered for.

In clause 31, the provision giving the board the role of recommending to Parliament an auditor to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General was not acceptable to the Members. This can be performed by Parliament itself. It is, therefore, proposed that this clause be deleted from the functions of the audit board.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, in clause 33, the committee is of the view that the Auditor-General should not raise loans because this is a very stressful venture. It is recommended that all loans be raised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and appropriated by Parliament.  

We also looked at the title and propose that this Bill be a Supreme Audit Act or a National Audit Act as the practice is in the Commonwealth.

The committee will also move an amendment for the establishment of a body within Parliament named the Public Accounts Commission. This body will compose of Members of Parliament who are also Chairpersons of committees of Public Accounts, Finance, Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, and the Committee of Budget and other Members as will be appointed by the Speaker. This body will, among others, be responsible for making recommendations for the approval of Parliament of the Budget of the office of the Auditor-General and recommend, to Parliament, the auditor to audit the accounts of the Auditor-General and any others as stipulated in the report.  

I want to conclude by thanking the minister for having brought this Bill and the committee will be moving amendments during the Committee of the whole House to some clauses in the Bill. Most of these amendments have already been discussed with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and agreed upon. However, there are a few areas of disagreement, which I hope the House will resolve. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and members of the two committees for the report. Maybe before we start the debate, I heard you talking about securing the independence of the Auditor-General. It is necessary that he is independent; he should not work in fear and I think that is why we have these provisions under Article 163 of the Constitution. This Article stipulates how the Auditor-General is appointed and the reasons for removing him/her from office.  

Then Article 11 provides thus: “…the Auditor-General may retire at any time after attaining the age of 60 years and shall vacate office on attaining the age of 70 years…” Do you think these provisions were envisaging a situation of a contract of ten years? Suppose you appoint the Auditor-General when he is 45, would you say you expect him to go at 55 when the Constitution says that he may retire at 60 and shall retire at 70?  Don’t you think this is actually meant that the Auditor-General, once appointed, either looks at 60 or looks at 70 rather than looking at ten years? 

I am saying this because there is a problem with a contract. Suppose you are not happy with somebody’s performance, you may not renew that contract. This is the problem of a contract; it has some in-roads of independence. I am only raising this because you are saying that the Auditor-General shall be appointed on a contract of ten years, solid. But this I think waters down the provisions which you have read, but since the Auditor-General is here, I think we can continue with the debate as people think about making it ten years or leaving the provisions as they are. That was my immediate concern but we can start the debate while you think of the answer. 

The debate is open. No debate? Okay then. Can the Attorney-General assist us on this one? You see, with the Judiciary there are judges who have been on contract; the expatriates. Some people think because they are on contract, they are cautious in doing their work because they may want to have their contract renewed. This is the problem of the contract term. Well, since there is no debate, I think I should put the question - 

4.16
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, after hearing your quotation from the Constitution, surely this is a matter which requires some thought. It cannot be just taken like that. You had called upon the Attorney-General but he appears to still be studying this matter. We should not be stampeded into the Committee Stage without having heard his side of this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Ok. Then we can debate if there is a debate. What you can do if you are not sure is to leave the provisions as they are in the Constitution because you should never make a law that would water down the provisions of the Constitution. But of course somebody, an appointee, may say, “I want to be on contract.” That is different. If the person concerned says, “I can only serve you for a limited time.” But initially if he does not ask, you cannot say, “I am offering you this job on contract.” (Mr Odit rose_)- Take your time.

4.17
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think this is an area, which definitely requires the interpretation from the Attorney-General. But in the course of ensuring that the Auditor-General’s office secures that autonomy and security, I think that is what prompted the committee to propose this recommendation. I would think, therefore, that if we hear from the Attorney-General we could propose that the proposed amendment be subjected to the Constitution so that whichever is seen appropriate can be brought on board.

THE SPEAKER: If you are not sure, you leave it as it is. Yes, hon. Butime.  

4.18
COL. (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I imagine that during the interaction with the Auditor-General, Members from the Auditor-General’s office and the committee, there must have been somebody who originated this ten-year period of the Auditor-General’s term of office. Perhaps the sitting Auditor-General himself may have wanted to serve -

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but you must address this to the Constitution. 

COL. (RTD) BUTIME: Yes, and I am really surprised that the chairman did not look at the Constitution before he came to propose these ten years. But there are so many accountants in Uganda; young people, appointed Auditor-General at 45 and they have to vacate office at 55 when you are really brilliant, still serving and you have the confidence of the appointing authority. I do not see any reason why I should be knocked out simply because I have served for ten years. But this is a matter of debate. I would personally prefer and propose that like the Chief Justice and the judges, you can go on for as long as you are still capable, in the good books of the appointing authority and you can serve as Auditor-General for more than ten years, 15 years and so on. That is my view. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think what we should do is that let us take some time to think about this. There is a statement by the Minister of Education which she was supposed to have made earlier. Now the minister is ready with the statement. I think as she is making her statement, let us ponder over this matter then after she has finished, we continue with the debate or if there is no debate, we go to the Committee Stage.

Can I put the question to the second reading because apparently there is no general debate? 

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE SPEAKER: You have? Ok. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.21
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): I think the chamber attendants should be distributing the copies. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, you might recall that yesterday we made oral reports to this House about the tragic incident, which happened at Buddo Junior School. What I have to present today is a written statement from the report, which we have so far received. I would like to say that the country is in shock and grief over the tragic incident, which befell our young children at Buddo Junior School on Monday, the evening of 14 April 2008.

As investigations continue to establish the actual circumstances that could have led to this huge loss of life, let me ask the Members of this House - I know we did it yesterday and probably we should not do it again - each one of you during your prayers should pray in a special way for the parents of the deceased and/or other stakeholders to gain courage and strength to face this tragedy.

The background

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, Buddo Junior School has brought up many high profile Ugandans and many good citizens in Uganda. The school, which is in Wakiso District, is located about 12 kilometres along the Kampala-Masaka road. The school has an enrolment of 1,356 pupils, all boarding. The headmaster is Dr Livingstone Ddungu who took over from Mr Kayongo William barely two months ago during the recent transfer. 

The tragedy took place during the night of 14 April 2008 when fire gutted one block of dormitories accommodating 61 pupils, all girls. The dormitory had four compartments: 

1.	Nassolo
2.	Ssangalyambogo
3.	Nnalinya 
4.	Ssabaganzi

All the 18 deceased pupils were from the Nassolo compartment. Mr Speaker, these young children were all burnt beyond recognition. 

The building was formerly a classroom block with large windows only on one side and narrow wooden doors on the other side. This made the evacuation exercise very difficult and thus the loss of so many lives. 

The school has matrons and house mothers and it also has night watchmen. 

What was done?

When I received the information at about midnight, I contacted the Police and made several telephone calls to mobilise people for support. The following morning, the hon. Minister of State for Primary Education, Peter Lokeris, lead a team of Ministry of Education and Sports officers to the scene and they were at the school by 8.30 a.m. The minister conducted a meeting at the school to try to organise the people in addressing the issue. I am indicating in the list that leaders, politicians and the Police were at the scene. The Inspector General of Police was there in person; the representatives; the LC V Chairman; the President of the Red Cross; the Wakiso CAO; the area MPs, hon. Susan Nakawuki and hon. Seninde; the Regional Police Commander; the Acting DEO and staff of Wakiso; chairman of the school management committee; the chairman of PTA; the Commissioner, Primary Education; and the head teacher Buddo Junior. It was a multi purpose meeting to address the issue at that time.

What did the head teacher say about what happened? The head teacher said that on the fateful day, the school held a joint PTA and school management committee meeting focusing on school renovation and plans for term two activities.  

He went on to say the school had been without power for a week and this caused a delay in serving supper to the pupils on that day. However, a generator was used and serving went on up to 8.00 p.m.  

Thereafter, the head teacher went to see his doctor at Nakulabye from where he was called and told that the school was on fire. He then called the former head of the school, Mr Kayongo, to assist. Mr Kayongo drove to the fire brigade station and took the firemen to the school but it was too late to save the situation.

The Police and firemen extracted and took the bodies to the city council mortuary.

Meanwhile, the Regional Police Commander, Central region and his team spent the night at the school trying of course to put down the fire and to handle the situation, which was chaotic at that time.

The head teacher reports that a total number of 17 children were dead and, therefore, 17 bodies were extracted from Nassolo dormitory. They were burnt to ashes. The 18th child died later at Mengo Hospital. I have distributed the list of those who perished in this fire.  

The Police and the school are yet to confirm the case of two missing children. I went to the school early this morning. I was there by 6.00 O’clock and when I looked at the list, I learnt that it is not so clear whether the children numbered 19 and 20 are still alive, missing or dead. That is why there is that testimony that the Police and the school are yet to confirm.

The deputy head teacher, who was on site while resting in his house located within the school compound, heard an alarm at about 8.00 p.m. He peeped out and saw that the dormitory was on fire. He called the head teacher and Police, before joining the others to fight the fire. The fire was very intense on the western gate of the dormitory and people found it difficult to rescue the children inside. 

As I have said earlier in the statement, this was a classroom block and, therefore, it had windows on one side and doors on the other. The housekeeper, known as the matron, had left earlier to go and rest. She had not left any kind of lit fire in the dormitory, like candles or a lamp. She had not locked the doors to the dormitory. Because by yesterday there was information that probably the kids were locked in but I went there this morning to confirm some of this information and I was told that the doors were not locked from the outside.

The deputy head teacher goes on to say, “Electricity was ruled out as the source of fire because the building had not had electricity for a week.” 

Reports that the children saw a faint glowing bulb were disputable because there was no electricity. The origin and identity of the two adults killed in the fire is not yet known. But I would like to add that one of the reasons why I personally went there at 6.00 a.m. today was to get more information about these people. I have asked the Police to find that out. The preliminary information I got from the Police is that these two bodies might have been put in the mortuary at the same time as the children’s bodies were delivered. But I want to go on record that the Police are investigating exactly who these two adults are who were in the mortuary at the time when the bodies were also kept there. 

The deputy head teacher says the matron had this morning collapsed due to shock and was in hospital receiving treatment.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, a number of people who came to the rescue of the children or who turned up that morning had several comments to make. And here I would like to report on the comments from the Inspector-General of Police. 

I would like first of all to commend the Inspector-General of Police and his team who worked so hard to try and save the situation but of course there was a lot that could have happened, which did not allow them to save many lives. According to the IGP, he had sent adequate police officers to the scene on hearing the news at 9.00 p.m.  He reacted immediately. He had instructed the CID to start criminal investigations in connection with the murder or the fire; corruption and mischief; I think the idea there is that he wanted to know what was exactly behind this so he engaged the CID immediately.

He went on to say that there is need to build capacity at local levels to fight fires of this type. He regretted, of course like everybody else, the loss of lives and property in that incident. However, the Inspector-General of Police identified four possible, collective, contributing factors as follows: 

1.	Lack of fire safety provisions in the building;
2.	No fire safety provisions in the building;
3.	Congestion of children; 
4.	Poor management of the dormitory wing; and 
5.	Electrical installations, which are old.  

He advised the Ministry of Education and Sports to critically address the above issues.  

He recommended the following:

1.	Taking standard safety measures in dormitories and schools; 
2.	General sensitization about dangers of fire; and 
3.	Fire drills and other disaster drills for all schools.  

Mr Speaker, I will lay on the Table this afternoon the circulars and statement I made in 2004 when similar incidents were happening in schools, for our records in Parliament. A lot has been done about this, a circular went, but I will lay it on the Table here for record at this institution also.

Interventions

While my colleague the Minister of State for Primary Education was there trying to manage the situation, a welfare committee comprising of the Ministry of Education, the head teacher, the Chairman Uganda Red Cross, a representative from the Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Disaster Preparedness was set up to take care of the children who could not leave immediately.  

The office of the Prime Minister has already provided for the following: hygiene kits (20 boxes), clothes (20 bales) and blankets (50 packets). We thank them for that good hand rendered to the institution.  

The Ministry of Education and Sports is availing 0.5 million (Shs 500,000 only) to each of the bereaved families to assist in the burial arrangements. Of course this includes transport and so on, and this applies only to families, which have managed to identify the bodies.  

The District Education Officer Wakiso was to ensure that the school is secured until the investigations are concluded.  

Way forward

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the school was closed for an early break on 15th April because we are closing schools or breaking off for holidays on the 25th and we thought in the circumstances that prevailed at the school, the best we could do was to send the children for early holidays. Announcements through various media houses were made to that effect.

Identification of the dead bodies at the mortuary and plans for burial are continuing. I want to say that this might take a few days since it involves taking DNA tests and parents will be advised to collect the bodies after proper identification has been made.

Mr Speaker, I have spent the whole morning today with the Inspector-General of Police and his team and they confirm that nobody can easily tell who his or her child is and it is only the DNA tests, which will help the parents and the bereaved families to take their bodies. Rather than just dishing out the bodies, it is advisable from the Police point of view that thorough DNA tests are made. The bodies have been moved to the refrigeration chamber and this process is going on and, therefore, the parents or families will be advised as and when the bodies are ready for taking home.

The school management committee will be represented at each burial. They are working out a representation at each and finally it was proposed that a memorial service will be held on Friday 18th April at the school. The details of this service will be announced.  

Conclusion

The IGP has already embarked on full scale investigations into this case. I, therefore, call upon the honourable members and indeed the entire country and the bereaved families to be patient and remain calm until the cause of the fire has been investigated.  

I would like to again thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda who found time in his busy schedule this morning and visited the school. He spent several hours at the school, inspected the site, talked to a few of the survivors/the children and addressed the people who were gathered there. I would like to thank him for that gesture and we were very motivated by his turn up at that school this morning.

I would like again to thank you, Mr Speaker, for your personal visit to the school where you expressed your condolences and showed your solidarity with the bereaved community and families. I thank all the MPs of the area and other Ugandans who turned up to express their condolences and show solidarity with the bereaved families.

That is as much as we have so far been able to put together but as I said earlier on, I would like to lay on the Table two copies of what we, as a ministry already passed out to the schools at a time in 2004 when there were so many fires in the schools. We worked together with the Police and other professionals and they advised us to send circulars on what schools should do in case of fire; or to prevent fire. Mr Speaker, I submit. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honestly, yesterday the minister made a statement, though not a written one. Apart from the fact that this is written, everything was said yesterday and contributions were made yesterday –(Interjections)- are there different contributions that are going to be made today?  

MS NAKAWUKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to give the honourable minister some simple information. She made a statement on the issue of locking the dormitory from outside. I happened to be at the scene yesterday and I talked to different pupils who sleep in that dormitory and I was informed by those specific pupils that actually it is the school policy that they lock up the dormitory from outside. Now the school is automatically scared of liability and negligence about locking the pupils in, otherwise that is the way it is done.

Secondly, she talked about the two bodies, which were found; the ones she said they are investigating about whether they were just found in the mortuary. Mr Speaker, these two bodies were actually found in the dormitory when the Police was trying to rescue the children. So the investigation should be conducted around how they got into the dormitory and not otherwise. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see the problem of opening a debate on this matter, which is a subject of criminal investigation, may really undermine the efforts of the CID. We would rather get an investigation rather than just simply contributing on this one when you undermine the investigations which we need. As I said yesterday, the Social Services Committee will definitely also play a part in this one.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the honourable minister for this report. I just want to ask the honourable minister for this report. I just want to ask her to try and establish whether the school is insured because we cannot rule out the possibility of parents wanting to go to court. And if that happens, is the government the one to meet the costs or the school? We need to establish that because if the school is not insured, I think it should be the policy that at least we should look into that as a serious issue.

Finally, I know clearly that the Ministry of Education has got set standards on which they base to give a license to a school. But I just want to add that the ministry should also put in consideration that before a school is given a license, especially if it has to have a boarding section, it must have emergency doors on the dormitories, it should have a standard number of beds per given square meter in a block and also the wiring network should also be checked thoroughly before a school is a given a license to operate a boarding section.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But what do we do? Do you want to prejudice the criminal investigation? It is important that this matter is being investigated! 

4.47
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is not my intention in any way to delve into issues that will undermine the investigations that may be put up. However, the minister’s statement leaves a lot to be desired and I am forced to raise just one or two questions.

I was at the scene on the night of the fire. Like many Members know, my father is hospitalized in Mulago and when we received the information that Buddo Junior was on fire, I accompanied one of the parents who rushed to the scene and I was at the school by around 11 o’clock in the night. First of all, the scene was very chaotic. For sure I saw a parent who had come wrapped in a towel and in a blouse. The situation was terribly chaotic! The Police tried to do a good job inside, but also outside there was a very huge problem. Even if there was an opportunity to rescue a few children to be rushed to the hospital, the management of traffic outside was poor. At one time all the traffic came to a standstill because as the parents moved in, wherever a parent got space is where they left their vehicle and ran into the school.

One of the things, which surprised me, however, is that when we arrived, the gate had been locked. And uncharacteristic of me, I tried to mobilize parents to break the gate because I wondered why they were preventing parents from entering. In as much as I would appreciate that it could be for fear that some people in the neighbourhood could have wanted to come in perhaps to steal - that is what I suspected - but there is a growing pattern that is emerging. That is why I stand and I want us to prevent it as a Parliament. 

We always come here as Members of Parliament and we hear lamentations from ministers. You find the Minister of Works failing to put regulations in place, coming to sympathize with people who have died in an accident, when the Traffic Act has been suspended by the very ministers! This is painful, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Education is talking about regulations and flashing a memorandum, which they have given to the schools; how has it been implemented?

It is painful for a parent to take a child to school and the only thing you can pick are ashes.  So, can the hon. Minister of Education tell us, is there any form of supervision and inspection of the schools? What is the minimum standard of space that must be set?  

When we go to many of these schools, there are double-deckers and triple-deckers. But when you go to many schools where the deckers have been crammed together and it is a triple-decker, you would doubt and imagine how a child who is squeezed in the middle can ever breathe on earth. The minister is telling us we have regulations; what about regulations if they cannot protect the life they are intended to do? Do we have an inspection department, which can ensure that the rules are followed? 

Buddo Junior School is one of the oldest schools. When you read the newspapers today and you read the comment of the Inspector-General of Police, he made a very harsh statement. He said, “This is criminality. How do you convert a classroom into a dormitory?” The dormitory was locked from outside. The information we got at the scene that night from the children and the people who were there was that it is the school policy. Actually, the parents said that the children are locked inside. When I asked, “How? Do they have urinals inside?” They said all students are required to have buckets where they ease themselves because they are locked in the school. Mr Speaker, these are challenges.

Finally, as I sit down, you would wonder how public institutions work. If a minister can stand on the Floor of Parliament and say, “It seems the bodies were brought into the mortuary at the same time”.  Is a mortuary any place into which somebody just carries bodies without accounting for them and saying where they come from? Is this how public institutions operate? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have heard radio announcements about this. The explanation has been - I just followed it that when the Police was called in, it had found this body. I think there was a murder and they had put it on the same vehicle they went with. This has been on radio. Whether this is true, this is why I have told you, you are prejudicing the investigations, because what you are really saying, these are matters of general police work. Why do you really prejudice the investigations of this particular case?

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I do not want to delve into those matters but if this did happen, it should be public information. Because the Police should have records, then it should not be an issue of guessing or perhaps because it must be factual with records. 

We send out condolences to the family, but also ask the minister in her statement where she said that they are going to contribute Shs 500,000 to the families who will be able to identify their bodies; Mr Speaker, we come from an African context. Whether they will have identified the bodies or not, families will hold vigil in their respective homes. Is it not possible to make this as a gesture from the Ministry of Education to all the families that lost their loved ones? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.51
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to pass on my condolences to the parents and the Budo community of course to which I belong as a grandchild.  

One of the reasons given as a cause of this - much as we should get into the investigations - is congestion. Now I want us too as Parliament to look at ourselves as the parents. It is us as parents who actually push the head teachers to congest the schools. And I can see all of you here who have gone to head teachers and especially all of us who are influential, some of us even go to the head teacher and say, “You know your job is in my hands, I am a Member of Parliament, I am a district chairperson; how can you not give me a place?” I think we really need to be serious! The head teachers are in a very tight corner, we are going to say they congested the school but that is out of their control in most cases because of the threats that they get from us as parents.

Hon. Dombo said you go to a school and you see this congestion there, why do you continue then to take your child there when you have seen the situation? We are also responsible as parents and really we need to think seriously and support the head teachers and teachers on this issue. There may have been a few mistakes, but we also as parliamentarians need to help fellow parents and not to push the teachers in this area. There are times when we find - having been in that position, I even meet colleagues here who do not want to talk to me because I never gave them places -(Interjections)- it is true and what I was doing is not to congest the school. We need to be very honest and yet we are human beings. You cannot assist everybody.

4.54
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are various clarifications that I would like the minister to make. 

Number one, we have received conflicting information about the exact number of children who were in the Nassolo dormitory. Some are saying the number was approximately 86 and what we have here is 61. I am inquiring from the minister, as per the school records, has the school administration cross-checked to see the exact number of children who are there? Are the numbers tallying so that we can get the real number of those who died and those who are still missing?

Secondly, I expect Members of Parliament to be appreciative of the contribution of this school. I have been made to understand that next month they are celebrating 50 years of achievement. The school has been there for the last 50 years and the school has indeed contributed tremendously to this country in the area of education. What happened the other day should be taken as an isolated case because all those years, the school has been running well and many of us are very proud of Buddo Junior School. 

My conviction and opinion is that this was not an accident according to the preliminary investigations that have come out. I want the minister to clarify. When you read the remarks of the Inspector-General of Police, he has pointed out areas to strengthen but has not pointed out any possible cause of this fire. They have ruled out electricity and it is very possible that if this was an organised kind of fire, even if all safety measures were in place, things would not have changed. 

Finally, I will concur with hon. Kavuma that politicians exert a lot of pressure on head teachers especially in government schools. Not only we as politicians, but even the ministry itself does this. There is what we call the supplementary intake where head teachers are sent a list of many children and those children are coming from big people instructing the headmaster of Buddo, for example, to admit 90 students as supplementary. So, the ministry should also look into this -

THE SPEAKER: Is it the congestion that caused the fire? 

MR SEBAGGALA: When you look at what the Inspector-General of Police talked about in trying to find solutions, congestion was talked about and if we are to eliminate congestion, these are the areas we must look into. I will request the ministry to strengthen the inspectorate department and not to act only when there is a crisis and that is when the whole ministry team goes to Buddo and other areas. Let this inspection be routine so that we can curb the level of fires in our schools.

4.59
MR SAMUEL ABURA (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you, though with a very sad heart, for this statement. The Minister of Education and Sports has given us a report of detailed recommendation. The fire cases of gutting life and property are rampant. Unless the government comes up with a sound policy of fire fighting, the fires will finish our lives. 

I would like to give a small supplementary opinion on page 5 where somebody identified a few things. Those are the best measures to address the fire. When this fire broke out, everybody was running for the Police and how far are the Police from the scene? Twelve kilometres! And the Police have got inadequate facilities; very slow fire engines could not reach that place. I would concur with somebody who said we should embark on capacity building. Let us not zero in on the Police only. Let it be in the schools’ scouts club, be it in the prisons and other institutions of government so that it becomes a complex of fire fighting effort. 

Fire is not just a fire you see. It has so many dimensions; there is a gas fire; there is an oil fire, like the one, which could have burnt these children and there is an ordinary fire. This particular fire would have been put out with the right chemical, because every fire is designed for a special chemical. And now the Police, which are called upon all the time, have never budgeted for these chemicals as a standby in case of these sorts of fires.

THE SPEAKER: But you see, yesterday a lot was said about fire and the Police and now it is coming up again. It was especially emphasised by the Shadow Minister of Defence – about fire systems and so forth. So I appeal that this debate should be concluded. Hon. Kawuma is a principal; I think he wanted to make a contribution – or you have not finished? Please, finish.

MR ABURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was a bit scared when I heard that this is a repetition of the speeches of yesterday. However, I have said that apart from the recommendations, government should come out with a policy. Apart from the investigations, what policies are we going to put in place concerning fire? As for Kampala, we are yet to see another big fire, which will come, especially in these mushrooming petrol stations that are not planned. So, I am saying that be serious on this issue of fire. Thank you.

5.03
MR MOHAMMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to convey my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families, the parents and the whole nation for this big loss that we have suffered. A lot has been said, and my standing up may not be to contribute to the cause but I have some pertinent observations that I wish to make and to give the Ministry of Education some information. 

A few weeks ago, fire gutted Kisubi Junior School and this is about the third incident in the recent past. A lot of property was lost but fortunately there was no life lost. 

Talking about Buddo Junior School, it is not the first incident of fire gutting that school. I wish to make these observations, Mr Speaker. I have been in active teaching service and when you are applying to register a school, there are prerequisites that you must satisfy before a licence is issued. 

We all appreciate the education services that we are giving to the Uganda Government, but I think we should not forget to mention the neighbouring countries that are coming here to get education services. On the checklist for those who intend to register, there is no pertinent provision for meeting fire precautions. The Civil Aviation Authority annually makes a fire mockery exercise before it is given that licence to operate. I am a member of the Uganda Red Cross and we have been partnering with the CAA to do the fire mockery exercise. And when you now look at the rate at which developments are taking course not only in areas of education but generally - when you look at the mushrooming complex structures today with many people operating therein, what is their capacity to handle fire outbreaks?

Sometimes you get worried when travelling in a traffic jam – as my colleague here was saying, there is almost a new petrol station coming up in every section and yet we have heavy traffic jam in Kampala. Supposing there is a fire outbreak or a terror attack, what is our capacity to handle such disaster? 

The Minister of Education and other relevant ministers should ensure that we get water hydrants on the roadsides. At one time fire gutted my building in Entebbe and it took three hours for the fire truck to go and refill. We need to have the hydrants in the city centres and along the highways. 

The other unfortunate thing is that as we are talking about all these problems – recently we had the disaster of floods in the North and we all appreciated the lack of policy response to disaster response. There are private service providers for fire extinguishing; what is the legal framework to compel these providers to respond to such fire outbreaks –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should task the relevant committee to take this subject as an emergency rather than using this statement to deal with this. I think they will do a thorough job. Let us do so. Let us end this debate here. Hon. Minister, you wanted to make final remarks?

5.09
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members for your contributions, advice, recommendations and observations, which I have noted. 

Hon. Latif Sebaggala wanted us to ascertain the numbers in the dormitory. I was there for about five hours this morning to find that out and I got the list confirmed as 61 out of which 20 are believed to have died. But then as I said in the statement, the school and the Police still have to confirm the 20 because they are two children whose files I looked at and who are believed to be - either they ran away under stigma and in chaos or they cannot easily be accounted for. So, since I was there with the Inspector-General of Police, I told him that it is now his team and the school to go further into this matter even if it means carrying out so many DNA tests to find out whether the bodies of these people just perished and there is nothing to trace. So there are two on the list, which has been circulated. There are two children who cannot be easily accounted for.

Because of the fire as hon. Sebaggala said, it is exactly what we are trying to preserve so that the professionals, the Police, finds out exactly what happened. Right now I can say this or that, but they are investigating. I have appealed to the IGP that when the report comes out, the public should know exactly what might have been the cause. 

Otherwise, the other comments are all taken. They are very useful and indeed we are going to continue working on these issues.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to seek a clarification. I am really feeling very remorseful and irresponsible as a teacher because the children are given to me as a teacher to train, to nurture and protect. I am asking: are there any psycho-social support arrangements for these families? When I heard this yesterday, I almost collected my two boys from a boarding school to take back home. And they are in a school, which is not affected. 

Are there some arrangements to help these families to think that it is not going to be happening the next day? The ministry should really do something to counsel the parents. Otherwise, the children will be kept away from schools one of these days.

The second clarification I would like from you, honourable minister, what is the statement of your ministry on this? Have you said something to the public? This is a very big disaster. Are you just saying it to us in Parliament? Are you going to make a national statement? Are you going to tell us? Because when you banned coaching, you went on radio and said, “Coaching is banned”.

Are you going to air serious statements from the Government of Uganda now that we are closing in two weeks’ time, ordering all the schools not to use triple-deckers? Are you releasing such a serious statement? Madam Minister, I will be really comforted if you assured me this was going to happen. Thank you.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, allow me to respond to the honourable member’s comments. This morning we had members of the school management committee and the PTA and the school administrators working out modalities for counselling the parents so that they take heart; they do not withdraw their children and they continue with the trust, which the school has enjoyed for over 50 years now.

For the public statement, I am happy to say the media centre wrote to me yesterday. They wanted me to hold a press conference today but I told them I was still involved in finding out and ascertaining - so tomorrow, I am going to find time to have a media conference so that I can tell the country what facts have evolved so far, and of course send condolences. And from here, right now I am going to Mulago to the mortuary where I understand many parents have gathered, to inform them more about the DNA tests and why we want to do them so that we get them understand the situation. I thank you. (Ms Nakawuki rose_)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am raising a point of order about hon. Nakawuki. Right from the beginning I thought that the minister had concluded but she is insisting on giving information. Is she in order to proceed giving information when the minister has finished? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter has not ended. As I have said, the Committee on Social Services in charge of schools should take up this as a matter of emergency. And if actually it is the wish of the committee even to include the Committee of Internal Affairs because Internal Affairs is the one in charge of fire and so forth so that you come out and we debate this one; otherwise, we cannot exhaust everything in this debate. We started it yesterday, we have done it today and I think that is the end of it. 

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Mr Speaker, you have guided this House that this subject is under investigation by Police and that any debate accrued from here could jeopardise it. Now we have ordered our committees to also do the work, the investigation, won’t it prejudice the work of the Police?

THE SPEAKER: I have not talked about investigations. I have just said general policy of preventing the occurrence of such incidents and how schools should be guided. 

Attorney-General, are we in position to find out your position about the matters raised? Let us get that issue of contract first and then we can move on. 

5.17
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you may have noticed that I have been stepping in and out to try to establish the perimeters of this issue. I have not been able, in the time given to me - I proposed that we stand that issue over and deal with others first. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can we have some debate on the report? 

5.18
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the committee in some of their recommendations but I just want to seek some clarification in far as some recommendations are concerned. 

One of the biggest challenges we have had under the Auditor-General’s office - there has been a complaint of facilitation. The budget has been so limited that the Auditor-General has not been able to recruit enough staff and has also not been able to conduct some of the required audits on time because of the costs involved.

But one of the recommendations that has been made by the committee is that all public resources -which I would strongly recommend wherever they are - should be audited by the Auditor-General including public schools that exist wherever they are. 

If you computed - it is unfortunate that the Minister of Education has gone out, but if we inquired about the number of public schools that we have in the country and gave a minimum figure of the audit fees that would be required.. If the Auditor-General is going to conduct the audit or to ask private firms to conduct the audit on his behalf, are we going to make sufficient provision of funds to ensure that public schools and all organisations are audited by the Auditor-General? Wouldn’t it be, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, sorry to interrupt you, but why do you say that you think he cannot cover that? If you read Article 163 (3), what does it say? It says: …”Audit and report on the public accounts of Uganda and of all public offices including courts, the central and local government administrations, universities and public institutions of like nature, and any public corporation or other bodies or organisations established by an Act of Parliament….” Isn’t this enough umbrella to enable him do this? If the public schools are of public accounts, is he prevented from auditing them?

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I doubt whether they should, but I was wondering whether there couldn’t be a better way of having provisions within the Act to ensure the principle is captured as reflected in the Constitution in relation to its practitionability. I am saying this because although that provision does exist, although there hasn’t been an enabling law, I am sure the Office of the Auditor-General, even without those schools, has failed to operate basically because of an insufficient budget.

Mr Speaker, I want to find out from the committee chairperson, in order to marry the provisions within the Constitution, whether we cannot require the public schools to submit to the Auditor-General an audited report so that the burden of financing such audits becomes part of the fees that such public schools charge from the public. This would enable the Auditor-General to – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Dombo. The reason the Auditor-General is being suggested to audit as the law says is not that he goes there to audit by himself. What he tries to do is to remain responsible for that audit. So, he can appoint anybody to audit, but bearing in mind that the responsibility remains his. That means he remains responsible and accountable for the audit. That is basically the reason.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think when it comes to the provisions of the Bill, we shall make proposals to see how what I had in mind could be proposed for Members to debate. Otherwise, in principle, the issue I was raising was about the ability of the Auditor-General’s Office, even when we give it mandate to contract, whether they can meet the bills or we can put in the legislation requiring that all public schools do submit an authentic audit report to the Auditor-General’s Office so that the funding, although the responsibility is on the other side to crosscheck, will remain the responsibility of the institution.

The other clarification I want to seek, Mr Speaker, is until now there has been a very big debate on the mandate of the Auditor-General’s Office only to audit public corporations where government has got majority shareholding. There is a recommendation in this report that I strongly support, which says that wherever public funds occur, irrespective of the provisions of the percentage of ownership, the Auditor-General must really have a hand to ascertain what exactly is happening. However, I just want to find out whether there are no other legal provisions in other Acts that cater for such a requirement. The purpose is to harmonise the provisions of the various sections of the law in order to avoid future contradictions that will require interpretation.

Mr Speaker, I strongly support the report. Thank you.

5.24
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County-West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to join other honourable members in supporting the report of the committee and I am particularly very happy with clause 14 of paragraph 5.5 as indicated on page 4.

Mr Speaker, it has been a habit of this House, especially the committee of PAC, to look at the reports from different government departments and make recommendations; but these recommendations go to ministries and they just keep there as long as the minister can always wish.

Mr Speaker, through the auditing process, by the time an audit query comes to a level of Parliament, that query can be taken as a serious one. I am saying this because normally in the auditing process, you have a chance to meet the Auditor-General, make clarifications on what he is raising and if there is room for correction, you do correct that. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for coming up with a recommendation that this time round we put it in the law that once we raise recommendations, we give them specific time so that the ministries can implement these recommendations. I am happy with this recommendation.

I know that I should have probably met the committee on the issue of the board. What we are trying to do by establishing this law is to make the Auditor-General as independent as he can so that at the end of the day, we give him the authority to take the necessary decisions that he thinks are right in the fight against corrupt, but also in terms of his mandate.

Mr Speaker, to have a board above the Auditor-General, puzzles me. I do not know whether it can be put to debate at this time, but it dilutes the independence of the Auditor-General. My opinion is that, we delete the clause on the board and leave the Auditor-General to be independent. Why are we putting the board above the Auditor-General? Who will be the final person in this case? Will it be the Auditor-General, the board or Parliament? This is a dangerous clause. I know that some countries have adopted this practice, and I have not reviewed how it has performed, but I think it is a very dangerous clause and dilutes the whole essence of the law. Therefore, I suggest that we delete this clause.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that I am also happy with the report of the committee on the fact that we include in this Bill a clause that mandates the Auditor-General to audit all institutions that receive funds from government, whether is majority or minority. I am saying this because I know that a lot of things have been happening under the cover that the Auditor-General cannot audit some of these institutions because we do not have majority shareholding. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.  

5.28
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee chairperson for the good report and I stand to support the report and the recommendations therein. 

We all must agree that the Office of the Auditor-General must be strengthened in order for us to have transparent management of public affairs. When I look at what the work of the Auditor-General is, I compare his work to the pathologists in the medical profession. We define a pathologist as a doctor who interacts with the patient usually one hour or one minute after the patient is dead. 

Therefore, we need to strengthen the Office of the Auditor-General, but also for him to be effective and for us to see the strong fight against corruption and transparent use of resources, we must strengthen all the other requirements to prevent corruption. I think it is important that as we strengthen the Auditor-General’s Office, we do also strengthen other sectors that deal with governance and management of resources. If we do not do so, his work will remain in vain. 

So, as I support the Bill, I just want to call upon the government to reassure us of the commitment to fight corruption in this country. It is one of the biggest problems we are facing today in the centre but also in the local governments where cases of corruption are becoming entrenched and rather rampant. We have, for instance, even received reports from Members of our Public Accounts Committees in Parliament that people complain that Parliament is very harsh on witnesses who come to Parliament. I think as Parliament we should get strong. So, as we strengthen the Auditor-General, let us also strengthen our own institution as Parliament and other bodies that are charged with this responsibility of dealing with governance and corruption issues. 

There is an issue which was raised on auditing resources especially funded by others. I know I have worked with donor programmes and I wanted clarification, perhaps from the chairperson, on how we treat this. Yes, donor funds are usually brought and implemented in partnership with government. The Auditor-General at times appoints private auditors to audit some of these resources but you find that these programmes pay the auditors. The issue of paying auditors should also, therefore, be clear because it can bring an element of being compromised as auditors. If the person you are auditing, as a body or as a project is paying you how can we be sure that you will produce a very competent report? 

Therefore, as we strengthen the Auditor-General’s Office through legislation, let us also facilitate the office with adequate resources so that the Auditor-General is able to also support, financially, the firms he appoints rather than the people who are being audited  to avoid being compromised in the process of doing their work.

I also want to appreciate and thank the committee for their recommendation on page 4 because this has been one of the challenges we have looked at where government enters into partnership with private firms and government takes say 49 percent shares or 45 percent and then the Auditor-General is not allowed to audit the resources which are invested in these firms. I think more often we have thought there is abuse of public resources and the Auditor-General has not been able to audit some of these resources. For example, we were in partnership with the Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort facility and I recently read in the papers that the government was withdrawing its shares. I do not know how true it is but it was reported in the media. Sometimes we feel that perhaps Ugandans lose a lot of resources, a lot of money, because the Auditor-General is not allowed to audit some of those resources. 

I therefore want to commend the committee and thank them for that recommendation that even when the shares are below 50 percent, the Auditor-General should be able to access the records and carry out the necessary audit. I thank you very much and I want to support the work of the committee. 

5.34
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for being very clear in this report to which I have been closely associated. I only seek some clarification on one item; this major amendment which has been introduced, the Public Accounts Commission. 

In the main body of the report, on page 6, there is indication that the body will comprise of Members of Parliament who are chairpersons of the committees of Public Accounts, Finance and Economic Development, the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authority and State Enterprises and Local Governments Accounts and the Committee on Budget. But looking at the final amendment, that is the new part five which has been brought in by the committee, I do see the establishment of a Public Accounts Commission which is totally different from what was proposed in the main report.

Also, the committees which had been proposed are totally missing. This is a serious smuggle of an opinion which I think the chairperson should be able to explain to us. Otherwise, short of that, I think they will not be consistent with the main body of the report and the amendment which is being proposed. I just want to seek clarification on this because our quiet diplomacy with the chairman has failed to produce results. I wanted clarification on that subject, sir. Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: It is a clarification in addition to what he has just said. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Similarly, the committee in the main body of the report for clause 3 observed that the idea, of the Attorney-General’s Office being a body corporate and can sue or be sued, is dangerous and needs to be well handled. They suggested that the Auditor-General enjoy some immunity. But when you go to the amendments proposed, nowhere do we get anything to that effect. 

5.36
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of the Public Accounts Committee and I was part of the committee that handled this issue. But-(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If you are a Member of the Public Accounts Committee this report was jointly worked out by the two committees. So, I think I should give opportunity to others who are not Members of the committee.

MR EUKU: Mr Speaker, I have stood up to respond to a question on the amendment that – (Interruption)

5.37
MR ACHIA REMIGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the committee on a number of recommendations. I also have three comments particularly related to clause 3 on page 3. And I think it is important that the Auditor-General’s Office is given the privileges and empowerment that are embedded in our Constitution, particularly that the Auditor-General’s Office is allowed to be autonomous, independent and be protected from frivolous suits that may ensue as a result of the various reports and recommendations that they make to Parliament. Because once we open this, we may create an impasse in the work and the importance of the reports of the Auditor-General. 

As honourable Members have said previously, by the time the Auditor-General makes recommendations to Parliament for redress and for clarification, it is a serious matter that might have gone through a number of stages in terms of seeking clarification from the respective offices. So, I think it is very important that the Auditor-General’s Office be protected from these issues. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Achia for giving way so that I can seek some clarification from him. It is true we will want to cushion the Auditor-General so that he can be able to work without any fear or favour but at the same time we also noticed that the Auditor-General, as an office, is an arm of government. And we have seen how government institutions also treat the public with impunity. Are we going to have some provision somewhere whereby if the Chambers of the Auditor-General mishandle members of the public that they can also be brought to book? That has to be there otherwise we will have actually given ourselves to him. 

You see, you can give these powers now but the person whom you have might not be the gentleman who is in the strangers’ gallery. He may be a different person. How can we just surrender ourselves that now we should cushion him we say, “This man is immortal; this lady is immortal; this institution is immortal”, and we cannot bring them to courts of law! I think that would be dangerous unless if we have a provision for a safety valve. Please, kindly assist me to understand that.

MR REMIGIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank hon. Wadri for seeking that clarification. I think there are other provisions within our laws where an individual who is aggrieved can seek redress in courts of law. If you think you have not offended the law but the person of the Auditor-General, as an individual and you have a case against him as a person, we have our laws and you can lift the veil and go for the person. I think that is really different from the work and performance of the person of the Auditor-General as he represents that office. That is my understanding.

Mr Speaker, I want to go further. On page 5, I would want to associate myself with the recommendation of the committee with respect to Clause 29. [Mr Oduman: “Information”]. Can I just develop my point so that I can take information later on? The committee recommends that there could be a possibility that the audit board may not be gender sensitive but I am perturbed, and they go on to recommend that a provision be put in place in line with the appointments on all public boards to ensure that women can be catered for. I do not know why they think women will be the only ones who will be discriminated against on that audit board. What if it is the other way round? We know our laws and so on but what if it is the other way round? We are talking about equality of opportunity and equality of access to these kinds of public boards. 

I probably think that they should have just said that both men and women are represented according to the provisions of our laws on that audit board, rather than going ahead to conclude that actually it is the women who are going to be disadvantaged in terms of representation on that committee. I think in terms of specification, there is already a mindset that whoever was making the recommendation was already gender insensitive. 

Probably as we progress, there will come a time when men will probably be more disadvantaged than women. I think what we should worry ourselves with here is that both parties are represented and we should not really throw in this issue of gender without thinking about capacity, without thinking about experience with respect to whoever is in that office whether it is a woman or a man. We must worry ourselves about capacities and whoever is disadvantaged should ensure that he is represented in that audit board. 

MRS SEMPALA: Is the Member in order to talk about an issue of affirmative action that is in our Constitution; to say that it is not necessary on such a sensitive proposal. Are you in order?

THE SPEAKER: Implicitly, he is criticising the provision.

MR REMIGIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling. I was merely really critiquing the idea that it is women who would be disadvantaged. It could be the other way round. 

Mr Speaker, I would also want to agree –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of procedure. Yesterday, hon. Remigio Achia stood up and contributed yet he belongs to that same committee. And again today he has stood up; he has contributed and he is still holding the Floor and yet he is a Member of PAC –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is he a Member of the committee?

MR WADRI: Yes, he is a Member of PAC –(Interjection)– I am sorry, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

MR REMIGIO: Mr Speaker, I will take that as a compliment. I think the honourable member prefers me to be –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR REMIGIO: Finally, Mr Speaker, I would also want to associate myself with the recommendations of the committee with respect to Clause 33 on page 6 that, “The committee is of the view that the Auditor-General should not raise loans…” I think our constitutional provisions and various laws are very clear that the mandate to negotiate and to look for money to support our programmes in this country is with the Ministry of Finance, with the oversight function being exercised by Parliament. 

To request the Auditor-General to go ahead and start running around the world looking for money is not really in the best interest of this country yet we have given a full mandate to the Auditor-General’s Office to be able to oversee the proper use of our resources. I think this would not be right. I would really want to associate myself with the committee that this particular clause is deleted and the Auditor-General’s Office be allowed to perform its audit role to the best extent possible. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.47
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. I am going to be brief. Mine is on the establishment of the Public Accounts Commission. I think this is redundant; we do not need it. The Office of the Auditor-General – let me say the Auditor-General reports to Parliament. When we set up a commission of Members of Parliament to make recommendations to Parliament, then the very members of the commission to come here and debate, then it is redundant because we shall be repeating ourselves.  

So, the best would be to let the Auditor-General report to Parliament like it has been and it is handled by the committee in charge. If need be, we can beef up that committee by the chairpersons of the said committees instead of again creating a commission that is part of Parliament; it comes and reports to Parliament then again it is sent to the Committee of Public Accounts to make recommendations again to Parliament. We will be repeating ourselves. 

Even what has been happening is that committees where chairpersons are members of the committee sometimes cause problems to the performance of other committees. We have the Budget Committee; when the Budget Committee is meeting, other committees do not meet. So, let us simplify our work, let us not harden our work. 

I want to support the committee in the issue of the Auditor-General also auditing the Treasury Memoranda. This is very important because what has been happening is that even after we have passed the Budget, the figures that are passed by Parliament are not the very figures that the Ministry of Finance puts down in its budget. So, this will go a long way to help all the institutions that get money from the Consolidated Fund. Because it has been happening that even the institution of Parliament, after passing the budget of the Parliamentary Commission that is not what the Ministry of Finance puts in the budget. That is why sometimes you see supplementary budgets are sometimes brought on the Floor of the House when the Parliamentary Commission has not even applied for a supplementary budget. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

5.49
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this and say that this law should have come yesterday. One of the reasons or one of the causes of inefficiency in the public sector is that most officers in charge have no power over the staff. The staff are recruited somewhere and they are posted to you with their package and conditions of service. So, when you are an immediate supervisor that becomes a problem. Considering the sensitivity and importance of the Auditor-General’s office, this is most welcome. 

I vividly recall during the Constitution amendment process when we were bringing back the CAOs from the districts, one of the reasons was that the central government is giving a lot of funds to those people but they do not have power over them because they were decentralised. So, this is very important. I commend it.

Two, the issue of insulating the Auditor-General from court proceedings; I do not feel comfortable with it because when you look at the privileges he is going to have and he is an officer who can own property, who can sue, how can you sue and you are not sued? Besides if government can be sued, why not an office? I strongly feel that he should not be insulated from court proceedings. Apparently it appears as if we are talking of the individual but it will be an office. Because if he is a department of government, the Attorney-General is here, we are denying him some work. He will do the work. 

Thirdly and finally, is the issue of the Public Accounts Commission. I think in formulating this law we are trying to avoid or to do away with a lot of bureaucracies, which are a hindrance to the efficiency of work. If we talk of the Public Accounts Commission, aren’t we creating another bureaucracy? Such a bureaucracy; does it not also come? Are you not talking of a budget because I have not seen of a commission without a package? Are we curing or we are adding more burden? 

I am proposing that this Public Accounts Commission should not be there. Let us move like we are moving because much as the Auditor-General’s office is going to be independent or semi-autonomous, still it is an arm of government. It will also fall under and be provided for in the normal machinery of government other than creating more statutory structures and bureaucracies with even membership, which is not permanent. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker for the opportunity and I thank the committee.

5.53
MR NDAWULA KAWEESI (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have got a very simple observation to make about page 5, clause 14 where the committee is saying that the Auditor-General is doing environmental audits. I want more information on this. We passed a law, the NEMA Statute of I think 1993, which gives that authority to NEMA to do the environmental audits and every year they publish the environmental audits. So, I wonder whether the Auditor-General is doing it.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, you are asking the meaning of this term?

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Yeah, “Environmental audit.” The meaning of environmental audit as in impact and assessment that power has been given to NEMA. So, I wonder why we should have, under the law of the Auditor-General, another clause like this. I will need some clarification from the chairman on that. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, now can we get clarifications from the chairman and minister and then see how we proceed? 

5.54
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Gaudioso Tindamanyire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Dombo -

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you start with the last one?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: I will come to it, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. (Laughter)

MR TINDAMANYIRE: The practicability on the autonomy that is given to the Auditor-General is to ensure that all the funds that come out of the Consolidated Fund account are audited. 

The modus operandi, the way how the Auditor-General does it is not questionable and his independence is guaranteed. That one also goes to answer the question my brother, hon. Bahati asked about the management board. All we are talking about, or what government raised about the board, was on the advisory role that the board plays in the present management structure of companies.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, if you can recall in 2001 there was a company which went burst because the chief executive was also the chairman of the board. In other words, there was no separation of the duties of the advisory role as a board, and the execution. So here we are talking about a management board, which is being created just to advise the Auditor-General in his performance. But when it comes to the audit process, the Auditor-General is not influenced in any way. We are separating and we should get them as two issues that we are talking about.

Hon. Baryomunsi talked about the payment of professionals. When you ask the Auditor-General to audit, for example, you said he will be paid. He is doing it as a professional person and as an experienced person and so he will be paid. We have captured that money and we have put it that all that money will be taken to the Consolidated Fund account. And if you see in our subsequent recommendations, when we go to the Committee Stage, all that money received will go to the consolidated account. 

Hon. Odit asked about the composition of the commission –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Just to clarify what I said that you have donor projects, for instance, and these programmes are in partnership with government and therefore the Auditor-General also audits some of these programmes and because of the human resource capacity in the Auditor-General’s office, sometimes he appoints private auditors and I know for a fact that some of these programmes budget and pay these auditors. I was looking at the issue; if the programme is paying the auditors, how independent will they be? Wouldn’t it be better that money should come from the Auditor-General’s office to pay the private firms, which do work on behalf of his office. In reality they are being paid by the programmes, which they are auditing, and sometimes it raises questions of independence.

THE SPEAKER: But this is indicated in the Constitution that the Auditor-General can hire; that is Article 163. He has power to engage private auditors to assist him or her in the performance of his or her functions. If he uses a private person to enable him or her carry out the duties, the question of payment does not arise definitely. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Dr Baryomunsi is saying that instead of the organisation paying directly, it should be the Auditor-General; which is very important. What he is saying is that the Auditor-General will appoint and remain responsible and accountable for the audit. That means he should be the one to negotiate the audit fees with the person going to audit so that the other organisation pays the Auditor-General and the Auditor-General, from his resources, pays the hired auditors. That is very important and that is how it should operate. The Auditor-General should negotiate the audit fees and whichever the budget in that donor fund, it should be passed to him, which will go to the Consolidated Fund while he negotiates with the firm he is going to appoint. The reason would be to avoid compromise of those external auditors if they are paid directly by the donor group.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: I think my brother, Dr Chris Baryomunsi, you have got the gist of what we heard. 

Hon. Odit talked about the composition of the commission. We were talking about the commission as a house. When we talked of the Auditor-General being an officer of Parliament, we were trying to create a house for this Auditor-General and specifically what are we looking at? We are looking at an essence where his budget will be submitted. Towards the end, we found out that the Leader of Government Business has to be on that committee for the ease of reference, since his budget will be a direct charge to the Consolidated Fund account. When you see those changes, all Members agreed and that is why you did not see any minority report and almost 17 people have all signed.

THE SPEAKER: What has been the current position about the Auditor-General’s budget?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: The current position is that the Auditor-General’s budget is submitted to Parliament through the Ministry of Finance and this law is creating the independence of the Auditor-General. In other words -

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem with him sending his budget directly to Parliament and it handles it? Eventually whether it passes through the Ministry of Finance, there is a structure here which handles it. Isn’t there? 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: That was the suggestion of the committee and if the committee of the House deems so, then -

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall consider it at the Committee Stage. 

MR ODIT: I think I agree with the trend of the debate. It might not be necessary for this new structure, but if the chairman was serious to follow my concern, looking at the establishment of Public Accounts Commission, you would see that you established it with the following membership: “Shall be; 
a)	Composed by the Leader of Government Business in Parliament or a person appointed in writing by the Leader of Government Business;
b)	The Chairperson of Public Accounts Committee of Parliament;
c)	The Chairperson of Parliamentary Committee on Finance;
d)	The Chairperson Committee of Budget;
e)	And any other three Members who shall be appointed by the Speaker.”

The other one which you had proposed is not completed now. That is the concern.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Thank you, hon. Odit. I think that will be taken care of at the Committee Stage. 

Hon. Epetait talked about insulating; what we are saying here about insulating him/her in clause 3 is actually about the reports generated by the Auditor-General to Parliament. Those are the reports that are meant for Parliament. I will give you an example: assuming the Auditor-General gets a job to audit foreign firms and he gives an opinion and assuming the client is not satisfied, he can sue the Auditor-General. We have not insulated it and when you go further in our changes, look at the proposed sections 48(1) and (2); we are specifically insulating the reports that are generated to Parliament for the consumption of Members of Parliament. Otherwise, the Auditor-General can decide to go and make a contractual obligation with somebody. If he does not fulfill his obligations, he will be sued. But when he makes a report that is to be consumed by Parliament, we want to insulate him in that capacity. 

Hon. Remegio Achia talked about the gender sensitivity; I think it has been taken care of and hon. Lumumba talked about the commission. I think I have said we are trying to get a body that will be a home for the Auditor-General. If we do not get that one, it will still remain a wonder that when the Auditor-General makes his reports, before they get to PAC, where will they be? Who will be able to say that the budget made by the Auditor-General is recommended for Parliament as a direct charge to the Consolidated Fund account?

THE SPEAKER: We shall deal with that at the Committee Stage, please.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Hon. Bikwasizehi had talked of the insulation of the Auditor-General and I think it is the same as hon. Epetait. I can now allow the minister to give some clarification on a few other points.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the minister says he is going to handle it – okay environmental audit!

6.06
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I think the Constitution empowers the Auditor-General to audit everything in Uganda. Now, what are environmental audits? Environmental audits are those in respect to the environment. The Auditor-General does not need to be an environmentalist to audit the environmental reports. What happens here is that he is going to own the reports from NEMA so that they become part of his audits and have them reported to Parliament. So when he is presenting his report, the environmental reports of that year will be owned by the Auditor-General.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “The Audit Bill, 2007” be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you must have seen that there are a number of amendments proposed by the committee, which we have to consider in the Committee Stage. And you are aware that yesterday we agreed that we should not have any other business tomorrow other than the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill. I had also undertaken that committees will be considering the budget next week – that we shall not have plenary next week. 

In view of that position, we realise that we cannot have this tomorrow because of the undertaking we made yesterday. So I am appealing to you to sacrifice two hours on Friday so that we can go through the Committee Stage in respect of this Bill. Then you can go home and analyse all the proposed amendments and come here on Friday at 10. By midday we would have finished so that we clear both the local government and this one, so that next week you can be free to sit in the committees. That is my appeal to you. Is that acceptable? 

HON. MEMBERS: Aye.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Therefore, this brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. – because we agreed to work in the morning, and we shall refer to this one on Friday at 10. The House is adjourned accordingly. 

(The House rose at 6.08 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 17 April 2008 at 10.00 a.m.)







