Thursday, 17 April 2008

Parliament met at 10.20 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I appreciate that you have many engagements today. First of all, there is a requiem mass at Rubaga Cathedral for hon. Pinto. Also, hon. Ekanya lost a father whose burial is today. I know that at Munyonyo they are opening the Greater East African Community Ministers’ Meeting and I know that the Secretary General of the Commonwealth is here. I have just met him and he may be meeting other stakeholders. However, we agreed that work has to be done especially since Monday to Friday next week we shall not have plenary to facilitate you to consider the budget. I appeal to you to concentrate on this work so that we can finish it. Tomorrow, we agreed that we shall work for two hours to consider the Audit Bill so that you are released. 

Another thing that I want to put on record and remind you about is that, I have received communication from the IGG that most likely because of an oversight, you have not filed the declarations to him as required by law. For those who declared two years ago, every two years you must renew; that is, maintain what you said, add or subtract as the case may be. I am therefore advising those who have not done so to get the necessary forms, fill them and file them. I have talked to the IGG. It is an oversight that has been realised and I appreciate that you have been busy and that maybe two years is a short period so you never knew but the two years must have ended on 31st March. Please, file in your declarations as soon as possible.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2007 

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister and the chairman presented the report and it is only the debate remaining. If you have any contributions, please make them now otherwise I shall be constrained to put the question so that we go to the committee stage, which is the most important. Since I see no one standing –(Interruption)

10.26
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this amendment Bill but I have some few observations to make on page 2, the second paragraph on exemptions, which states, “The Local Service Tax will not be levied on those exemptions from (a) to (i).” 

I would like to comment particularly on (a); peasants are those people engaged in subsistence or occasional economic activities. I wanted to propose another category of people who are almost peasants and these are the boda boda cyclists. I am requesting this because these people live from hand to mouth so I propose that they be included on the list of exemptions on page 2. 

Secondly, I think that the issue of collecting this tax is going to be a very big burden to the local governments. I don’t know and I need your guidance whether it is possible that after we have passed this Bill, we could give the responsibility of tax collection to Uganda Revenue Authority so that we remove the burden from local governments because it is a bit tricky and they may not have the capacity. Therefore, I propose that as we pass this tax, we think about how we can bring in the Uganda Revenue Authority so that after they have collected the tax, it can be remitted to local governments. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague is requesting us to include the category of boda boda cyclists. As we all know, this is a recent phenomena as we have not been having these people in our society. Some of us also think that they are in transit and are not a permanent phenomenon. I want my colleague to clarify whether he thinks that these people are going to be in our society permanently.

MR KALIBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was just proposing this because on page 2, on the exemptions, we have peasants and they have said that these are people who are engaged in subsistence or occasional economic activities. I have interacted with these people and I know how much they collect everyday. They live almost hand to mouth. I was just proposing that they also be ranked under peasants or they can be ranked under (c)? I am being guided here that they can be ranked under (c) which caters for sole petty artisans and jua kalis. So, I thought the boda bodas could also be exempted, Mr Speaker. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Ochieng.

10.31
MR PETER OCHIENG (NRM, Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to thank the minister and the committee for this report. But this is a Bill that will directly impact on the greater section of our community and I want to inform this Parliament that normally when we have such kind of laws, we pass laws here that we think and are satisfied that will help the wellbeing of our society for a better tomorrow and the future. 

But there is an element of regulations of these laws. I for one would like to put my dissatisfaction to the regulations more especially of the Local Government Act, and more so the most recent. The reason why I want to put this displeasure is that in the beginning - before this most recent - in that regulation was a requirement that since these monies and many other monies go straight to the sub-counties, at the sub-county level we were supposed to have a checkpoint for the monies there and by so doing, the old regulations had provided for another signatory from the community at the sub-county level. 

Mr Speaker, when this was removed in the new law, I have heard a lot of problems in accountability in almost all my sub-counties and at the district in general. I do not know the reason why this was removed and we risk having all this amount of money collected by the public, by the sub-counties and the town councils, which money may not live to its name as a local service tax. 

When most of these sub-counties collect money, they just spend it at source; they do not inform the LCIII chairmen, they do not inform any body and those councils do not know and they are all now at arms and saying, “Yes, what we have done is done; you do not have to ask us about anything because the new regulations say you do not have to be party to anything.” Before that, Mr Speaker, when they needed to do anything at that level, they would sign as a sub-county accountant or a sub-county chief but there was a requirement for an additional council-supported signatory and when this was removed, like I said, it is a big nightmare.

The second issue here, Mr Speaker, is the definition of “petty”. I know possibly they will try to put this in the regulations but normally when we leave here, we go by the report and the Bill and when you reach there you find that everybody has his own definition of “petty”. When you talk about “petty vendors” in the village like this tax is supposed to be, they will have their own definition and most of our villagers may not have that capacity to challenge and at the end of the day - like you know, people have already started seeing that there is a reintroduction of graduated tax – it causes unnecessary explanations. I want to be assured that these things are going to be done in a manner that they are intended for and not to be disorganised by those who implement them at the village level. 

Mr Speaker, I support the Bill. I think this will help but only if it is carried out in a proper way and in a proper form. I thank you. 

10.36
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and also the ministry, particularly for attempting to bring proposals on how local governments can be funded better. I think we have a big challenge in this country; we did take a decision to decentralise governance and we have seen creation of very many local governments both at the districts and also at the lower level governments, but we have a persistent challenge of how to fund these local governments. Therefore, I want to appreciate the efforts by the ministry in trying to see how best we can fund the local governments. 

However, I do feel that this is not necessarily the best way we can move forward in funding the local governments. I do appreciate the contribution these taxes will make but I do not think the gaps will be filled. So, I just have some few observations, which I just want to make with regard to funding of local governments in this country. 

First of all, when you look at our national budget, we spend about 70 percent at the central ministries and institutions at the central government level and only about 30 percent to the local governments and yet we have dissolved and decentralised service delivery up the tune of about 70 percent. So, we are spending like 30 percent to implement 70 percent of the services and activities. So, there is something wrong with the way we are allocating resources in the country, and that is a fundamental issue which we must address as a country. Where do we put our resources? So, we need to look at the budgeting process and the budgeting framework, we recast the national budget to ensure that resources can go to the local government level so that the districts, the sub-counties and other local governments can get adequate funding. Unless we do that – we can introduce taxes but it will remain a very big problem. 

The other problem we have in the country is that, we have a tendency of over-projectising programmes in the way we budget and implement them. You will find that we have line ministries but we super impose projects on them. You look at the Ministry of Agriculture with a very lean and thin budget and then you bring NAADS. It comes as a project, and you find the project is more resourced than the parent ministry and that has its own challenges. You get the Ministry of Health and the Global Fund project, which is more resourced than the parent ministry which should be strengthened. Therefore, we have to look at the way we are designing programmes and the way we are building institutional capacity to be able to deliver services and programmes in this country. 

Mr Speaker, some of us have talked to local government leaders in this country including leaders in your district in Masaka where we went on one of the visits about this tax, and most of the leaders in local governments have strong reservations on it – the Local Service Tax and also the Hotel Tax. 

A district like Kanungu, which I represent, has told me that they do not have taxable wealth to talk of. Therefore, this tax will not be applicable to some of the poor districts and therefore we cannot rely on the taxes which we shall collect through this new tax to be able to fund local governments. So, it will not be the solution to the funding gaps in the local governments in Uganda today and it is a very big challenge in most of our districts. Lower local governments especially at sub-county level are almost not functioning because there is no more money being remitted from the district to the lower local governments and therefore, they are not having council sittings and the work which is supposed to be done by councils is not being done. Therefore, it is a very serious issue which we must address as a country. 

I just wanted a clarification from the chairman or the ministry whether the ministry undertook an assessment to study the viability and whether this tax will actually be practical?  Because we had the graduated tax which was being charged and for some reasons it was abolished. So, how sure are we that the challenges which the graduated tax was facing will not be the same challenges we shall face when we are collecting this tax? For instance, Mr Speaker, one of the problems was that the cost of administration of collecting this tax was so high. So, how sure are we that the cost of collecting this tax will not be as high as was for the graduated tax which we abolished?

So, I just want to propose, Mr Speaker, as I wind up, that we should not look at this tax as the solution to the local government funding gaps but probably as a country we should increase the grants to the various districts. The unconditional grants should remain and maybe we put a static figure for all the districts and then what the district collects in terms of taxes can just be additional. So, a district which is rich like Kampala will definitely collect more taxes and then we shall give it a certain a mount of money which cuts across all districts, and then they will have over and above that in terms of taxes so that a district like Kanungu, like Kisoro which have difficulties will still get unconditional grants from the centre and whatever they are able to collect will only add to what government has given.  

Otherwise, if we think that we shall not release unconditional grants to districts and that they will raise money through these taxes, some of the districts will have very big problems and some of them will even probably close. So, I just want to caution the ministry and all of us as Parliament that we should take the funding challenges of districts as very serious and we recast the budgeting process in the country to ensure that more resources go to the districts. I thank you very much.
 
10.44
MS PATIENCE NALUBEGA (Independent, National Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take it from my colleague, Dr Chris Baryomunsi. First of all, I want to appreciate the Committee on Local Governments for the report. I would also say that the Local Government Service Tax will not be a solution to the problems in the local governments. 

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because I have been in local governments; before I came here I was a councillor in a district and I was an executive at the district but the problems of local governments are very many. It is until we realise that we need to do much on the national budgeting to address the most priority areas in the local governments, even if we put Local Government Service Tax, the problems in the districts will not end. 

When we are budgeting here, the sectors that need more attention are not given the right attention that they need.  And those are the sectors that the local governments are fighting day and night to see that they cater for them.  The health sector is under funded at the national level and at the district level; the environment, education are all under funded. Mr Speaker, I believe that this service tax will not help the districts and it will even be very difficult for the districts to collect the tax. 

Secondly, there a lot of imbalances in the districts; look at a district like Mpigi where I come from, Mr Speaker. The level of a peasant in my district cannot be compared to that of a peasant in hon. Otafiire’s district. (Laughter) And if we are going to base this taxation on the peasantry, I think Mpigi should even be spared because we are purely peasants. If we are talking about people in gainful employment, they do not pay taxes back in their districts. They come and build in Kampala and they will pay tax to Kampala District; they will build in Wakiso and pay tax in Wakiso District. Their taxes will not be reflected in Mpigi District and yet they are residents in Mpigi and they are in gainful employment. 

Those in business; Mr Speaker, if you take a walk in Mpigi District, there are only market vendors.  What are you going to collect from them and yet they are already exempted? Now, if my district is going to base on taxing business and gainfully employed people and then hotels, in Mpigi there is nothing like a single hotel, even a small lodge in Mpigi cannot accommodate 100 people. Now, where are we going to get the tax? We need to be realistic; we know that there are already imbalances in the way the districts are set. So, you cannot tell me that I will collect tax and Bushenyi will collect tax and we shall be competing to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. We are not on the same footsteps, Mr Speaker. 

I believe this Local Government Service Tax is not ideal for the districts. I strongly say that we should maintain the graduated tax compensation. When we were abolishing the graduated tax, there were reasons and people said, “No, we should continue paying the tax,” but because of our political interests we did not listen to those voices. We abolished it and now we are bringing almost the same thing that is going to be painful for local governments to implement. Why are we burdening the districts, Mr Speaker? 

We are a government here and we have allowed decentralisation and for it to prosper, and for it to be implemented, we must make sure that we put in place tools that will support those local governments but not to give them a burden. I appreciate the minister’s effort to see that local governments can stand on their own but this is not how they are going to work; they will automatically fail.

Mr Speaker, day after day we are creating districts; a sub-county is going to be apportioned into districts and you tell it to collect Local Government Service Tax, how? A sub-county where there are only maybe 10 people in gainful employment, those are the ones who are at the district level and they are already paying where they are housed in Wakiso, in Jinja. This is not ideal! Look at the way we have been implementing the equalisation grant, even Bushenyi receives equalisation grants, which I do not receive in my district. That is already an imbalance. Are we basing on priorities or we are just giving bonuses? We need to be realistic – [Maj. Gen. Otafiire: “Bushenyi does not get.”] - Maybe Bushenyi has got off now but I know when I was still in Mpigi, Bushenyi was getting equalisation grant and I was not getting it. 

Even the unconditional grant we must have affirmative action in it; if Bushenyi is getting this and it is maybe highly modernised, there are many people paying taxes and Mpigi does not have a single person to pay tax, then we should get affirmative action in the way we are facilitating districts but it should not be a uniform figure even when it comes to graduated tax compensation. We should cluster districts, we should know how much we are giving those which are badly off,  and then how much we are giving those which are fairly off. Mr Speaker, I do not support the Local Government Service Tax. I think it is not ideal for the districts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I want to welcome members of Mukono District Council, the councillors, led by the chairman and speaker. You are welcome to your Parliament! (Applause)  Yes, let us have hon. Ndeezi then I come to you.

10.51
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Central Region): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I, however, wish to remind you of two important points that I believe should be taken into account if this new tax is to succeed. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in truth, we are trying to collect the shortfalls or the problems caused by the abolition of graduated tax. This is the reality and it is the truth. Also you know that graduated tax is a victim of the search for votes during campaigns. Politicians will say, “If you elect me, I will abolish graduated tax.” The other politician will also pick it up as an important thing. At the end of the day, we ended up rushing to abolish graduated tax without taking into account the actual implications because at that time, we were busy searching for votes. It is our human right as politicians to search for votes, but where is the guarantee that this new tax will not be a victim of a similar scenario?

We have committed certain offences when we are seeking for votes. I was thinking that we should bar politicians from talking about taxes when they are seeking for votes. This will make it possible for us as politicians not to interfere with the taxation regime in place. I have an amendment to this effect and I hope the chairman and the Members will support me. The idea is to make debate about taxes not part of the vocabulary of our campaigns.

Secondly, you are aware the collection of taxes in this country lacks a human face. When you give people the power to collect taxes, they assume that you have given them power to treat other human beings like beasts. This has been going on since time immemorial and, therefore, I appeal to the responsible authorities and the Minister of Local Government to ensure that the implementation of this tax actually puts into account the fact that we need human beings as tax collectors dealing with those who pay taxes. Thank you very much.

10.54
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I strongly oppose the Bill on various grounds. When you look at the report where the Minister of Local Government was trying to respond to some of the queries and concerns of the stakeholders, in paragraph one, the minister said that the stakeholders and the general public have been sensitised through a series of radio talk shows across the country and now the public is more aware of the provisions of the taxes. This is not true. We have talked to various local leaders and indeed most of them are very ignorant about these taxes the minister is talking about. 

Secondly, I want to know whether the chairperson of this committee interfaced with district local leaders because in his report it is nowhere mentioned that the most important stakeholders were consulted. When you look at this local service tax -(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, honourable member. I just want to inform you that on page 3, the report says that among the stakeholders who were met by the committee are the districts of Namutumba, Budaka, Bukedea, Kumi, Manafwa, Bududa and Mbale. But I am also wondering as a person from western Uganda why the committee thought that the only districts to consult were those from eastern Uganda and, therefore, for some of us whose regions were not consulted, we feel probably our views are not there.

THE SPEAKER: I think you spare the chairman of this embarrassing question.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, the local governments both urban and rural have an association called Uganda Local Government Authorities Association (ULGAA) and UAAU. On page 3 (b), we have the Uganda Local Government Association and it embraces all local governments in Uganda. And then we have the Uganda Urban Authorities Association. The eastern consultation was just part of the normal process of consultation but we really consulted without discrimination and completely impartially. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD.) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What the chairman did not explain completely is that ULGAA actually reaches LCIII chairpersons. We had consultation with the stakeholders up to LCIII regionally. As I speak, today hon. Hope Mwesigye is in Mbarara addressing the members of the western region ULGAA and that includes LC IV, CAOs, speakers, and everybody within the local governments. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KALIBA: Maybe I need guidance because the honourable member is saying that there was no consultation, but I thought when this Bill came out, as legislators, we were supposed to go back to our constituencies and consult our people. I contacted the District Local Council of Kabarole, the Fort portal Municipal Council and the division councils. Actually, they were in agreement that they support this Bill. 

Well, I know it is a grain in the ocean but when we pass this Bill, it does not mean that other grants will stop. The conditional and unconditional grants will continue, but this is really in addition because as you know the under funding of local governments, we have been sitting on a time bomb. I seek the indulgence of all of you honourable members that we pass this Bill so that we can close that funding gap in local governments. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, for the information. But what I am talking about is effective consultations, and indeed you have ably stated that you consulted some districts and your constituency - and we also did consult our people –(Interruption) 

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I would like to inform you that what is depicted in the report is contrary to what ULGA holds; ULGA does not support the Local Government Service Tax and if they are basing their consultation on ULGA, then they have given us the wrong report. I have a document from ULGA and we have also held meets with ULGA; they have asked Parliament to help them to retain the GT compensation and that they do not think the local governments can operate with this Local Government Service Tax. 

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to tell the chairman and the minister that when they emphasise that they used ULGA to consult the districts, then they have to change their report because ULGA has a contrary view on the Local Government Service Tax. I will bring the document on Tuesday because I did not come with it but I have it.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, for that good information. Mr Speaker, as a representative of a city constituency, I feel this Bill is totally unfair. I have heard some of my colleagues representing rural constituencies supporting it, but others are not in agreement because there is no way this Bill is targeting the rural peasants; this Bill is targeting urban dwellers. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at the taxes being shouldered by urban dweller, you wonder! Income tax, trading licence, garbage fee, toilet fee and parking – all those taxes are targeting urban dwellers. So, when you bring this Bill to add on the already existing burdens, then I feel it is not fair for us the legislators to bring in taxes that are going to be a burden to our constituents. 

Finally, the ruling government knows that GT was abolished for various reasons. And now, government is trying to find means how local governments can get some revenue that can replace what was collected from GT before it was abolished, but this is not a clear way for local governments to operate. 

Mr Speaker, I am not from the ruling government, but let me tell all the Members of the ruling government that if you support this Bill, then you are making our work a little bit easier as the opposition. Indeed, I do not support this Bill and it must be on record that I have strongly objected to this Bill and I will not support it.

THE SPEAKER: But if it is helping you, why don’t you welcome it? (Laughter)

11.05
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable members that have deliberated before me. I stand on this Floor today in such a position where I cannot say whether I support or object to this Bill. It is only sincere that the honourable committee of local government came up with such a resolution in order to find a clear reason why the GT was abolished. It was abolished because it had a lot of loopholes. 

When you look at this Bill and its objects, you notice that it leaves a lot of loopholes even before it is passed in this Parliament. First and foremost, I need some clarity, hon. Minister of Local Government. You came out openly and gave us information that you cut across the board and had all local government leaders involved in that organisation – ULGA, something of the sort. 

Last evening, I received a phone call from the head of Katabi sub-county which is in my constituency and he said, “What is going on in Parliament?” I told him that I also need to ask more questions on this. If you say that there is going to be exemptions for the peasants, petty food vendors, and the artisans, the members of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and members of the Police Force – the manner in which this Bill has been brought to Parliament is likely to bring problems. 

The ultimate problem that we had in collecting GT from the grassroots was the method of collection. People were beaten; people left their homes and settled elsewhere because the method of collecting GT was poor. And no clear reason was given why people were paying GT. 


So, Mr Minister, the ultimate point is the method of work; why have you brought this Local Governments Bill, 2007; how is it going to work as regards our constituencies? Because if you say it is going to be very selective, hon. Nalubega has said that when you go to Mpigi and Bushenyi there will be a lot of space and you will need – this thing is going to be very selective because you are going to find that there is a lot of development in Bushenyi compared to what is in Mpigi, as well as what is in Wakiso.

So our biggest problem, hon. Minister, how is this going to really be effective to our people? Who is going to manage this? Who is going to manage the operationalisation of this Bill? What is the direction of this Bill, hon. Minister? I thank you.

11.10
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and members of this committee for the report. I have read through this report and found very many contradictory statements. I would like to start by saying that it is true, local governments are financially constrained. And it is also true that government has failed to compensate the local governments for the GT that was abolished for reasons nobody knows.

It is also true, as has been stated, that 70 percent of the revenue collected in this country is used in the centre and 30 percent is used at the local level. But we know that the bulk of the productive force is at the local level. So, this is contradictory. 

I would like to deal only with statements on page 2 and page 6. On page 2, in the area of exemptions, we talk of key peasants, people engaged in subsistence or occasional economic activities. All of us know that peasants in Uganda in various areas are not at the same level; we know that. And you are going to put those altogether and exempt them, irrespective of the level of income? In the exemption also there are these members of the Uganda defence forces. Again members of the Uganda defence forces, while on active duty - I did not understand that. I hope it will be explained by the chairperson of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Incidentally, when you say members of police or members of the defence forces; supposing he has a banana plantation in his village of origin, what happens?

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Mr Speaker that is another question. All these people may be doing gainful employment while on duty as we are. So, what mechanisms have you to differentiate members of the forces who are actually concentrating on their duties and those who are engaging in other activities? 

The other point, which I would like to bring -

THE SPEAKER: Then you should clarify this and say, “For you to develop your ….” Don’t you think so? You should clarify what you have brought up so that it can help you make your contribution.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, when we talk about this category of exemptions, we are talking about these people as individuals on their monthly incomes and salary. But if they are engaged in other businesses, which are not part of the salary, then that item is taxed. For example, if somebody has a hotel, he has a lodge; then it will be taxed.

THE SPEAKER: But he is clarifying a point where somebody wants to know, to continue.

MR WOPUWA: And two; on (g), it was a typing error; it is the Uganda local defence forces. The LDUs, when they are on duty and are being paid a salary for being on duty as LDUs, they do not pay this tax. But if they are engaged in business outside the normal routine related to their job, then they pay and it is those entities that are taxed. Thank you.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Mr Speaker, I think there is a loophole. This should be defined in the law so that it is clear because if you leave it like this, it will be assumed that they are exempted. 

The other thing, which I would like to get some clarification on, is unemployed people and people living in poverty. What mechanism will you use or what yardstick will you use to differentiate between people who are unemployed and people living in poverty? There are actually, you know, I sympathise with the youth. There are many outside there who are unemployed but they are healthy and they could be used effectively in production but we have no mechanisms of employing them in production. Are you going to exempt all those instead of finding ways of giving them gainful employment particularly in the farms? 

I would like to go to page 6 now and share the concerns of the committee. Bullet 3 on that page is saying that the introduction of this Bill will be seen as a re-introduction of Graduated Tax. I would like to agree with this but this one will be discriminatory because Graduated Tax was covering everybody who could have some income. 

Again on the same page, the tax is looked at in principle as a double taxation of salaried workers and those workers in the market. These are already paying taxes in various forms and if you want to tax them again, wouldn’t that be a disincentive for them to work harder? You know, I believe in constructive jealousy and not destructive jealousy and this Bill is actually going to introduce what we call destructive jealousy in our community. 

The other thing, which I would like to point out here, is that in the case of unemployed persons and peasants, the Bill exempting them will promote or encourage laziness. I share the same concern. You exempt somebody who could gainfully be employed somewhere and of course that would be a discouragement to be unemployed and I do not think that will be the best way of assisting those people who are walking on the streets. 

Mr Speaker, on the basis of these anomalies and contradictions, I think I would not like to support this Bill. Thank you very much. 

11.19
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I first of all would like to thank the committee for having delivered to us a report. But on the onset I would like to have my stand registered that I am here to oppose this Bill. 

This Bill, in own mind, has been brought up in bad faith; it is a stab to the backs of Ugandans. A few minutes back, I heard hon. Ndeezi condemn politicians and suggesting that politicians should not be part of any explanations on issues to do with taxes. Unfortunately, it is the same politicians who, two years back, when they were canvassing for support from voters, came up to say: “We have abolished Graduated Tax.” At that time there were only two countries in Africa that were still charging this obnoxious tax; it was Uganda and Malawi and for once we were happy that we had been struck off that list. However, we are being reintroduced onto it through the back door. I think let us appeal to our conscience and think of what the people who entrusted us with the responsibility of leadership will think about us. Won’t they say that we are giving something with one hand and taking it away with another? 

One of the reasons why Graduated Tax was abolished was - among other things - the difficulties that government and the lower leadership in administration faced in its collection. Many times what they collected was in turn used for paying allowances to themselves. So, it was not serving any purpose at all. During that time, when a person was to be assessed for the amount of taxes to be paid, the Gombolola and parish chiefs, with the local council officials and the chairman at that level, would walk from house to house to establish how many cows and goats were in that person’s kraal, how many orange trees were in his garden; what size of the cassava field the person had and what size of Matooke plantation the person had. All those parameters would be used to assess you. I do know how this tax is going to be different from Graduated Tax? 

I am saying this because when I read the Bill I realised that even when you have got a garden of Matooke, say one acre or two, you are still subject to being taxed on that –(Interjections)- yes, you still get taxed on that. And even when for example a person now goes for the commercial production in say, mangoes and oranges, this person will be asked to pay tax. Have we adequately explained ourselves to the people?

 According to this Bill we are boasting that we consulted the Uganda Local Government Association, but who is the Uganda Government Local Association? This tax is in their interests because it is through it that they will pay their allowances. So, how is the ordinary peasant or farmer who has two or three acres deep in the village going to benefit? 

Many times people refuse to pay taxes because of lack of adequate returns. We have seen local governments from LC III to town councils; to municipal councils – people will readily pay taxes if they see the usefulness and the plough-back of the taxes into the provision of services for their welfare. Many times these resources are raised, but with the endemic corrupt practices and tendencies in our institutions of governance, nothing is ploughed back. So, how do you expect a person to willingly come out and pay taxes?

The Bill further says that this a one-year tax of either Shs 5,000 or to a maximum of Shs 100,000; I am looking at a situation – I want to use my friend Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, former Minister for Local Government and now in charge of disaster preparedness, as an example. Professor has a residence in Kampala and, I believe that he also does not live his life entirely dependent on salary and other remuneration from this Parliament. I know that he is a fish farmer in Rukungiri –(Laughter)– he is the most progressive fish farmer there. I know that bit –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere does not come from Rukungiri. Maybe he has a business there –

MR WADRI: I am sorry, he comes from Bushenyi. He is a progressive farmer there because when I visited that place less than a month ago, his name was positively talked about as being the most progressive fish farmer. I know that he also grows tea and he may be doing one or two other things in Kampala. When you talk about somebody being assessed for Shs 100,000 per year, is it the person or the establishment of that person? Are you going to say that because he is a progressive tea farmer, this is how much he is going to pay in as far as tea is concerned?

THE SPEAKER: No, if Prof. Kabwegyere is a resident in Kampala, the local government concerned will deal with him from here. And he has another activity in Bushenyi or Masaka, the local governments in those respective places will deal with him accordingly. So, it will not be that because he was assessed in Kampala according to his salary, he should not be assessed for his goats or cows and so on, in Bushenyi.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, that is where I was coming to in the sense that in the principles of economics –(Interjections)– I am being threatened that otalipa (you will pay) – you know Gen. Kahinda is always behaving that way. I know that he is tickling me to talk more. 

Anyway, in principles of economics, high taxes stifle savings –(Interjections)- yes, if all you have has been removed from you, what else do you have to save? High taxes stifle consumption. If you are being taxed so heavily to the extent that you have nothing in your pockets, can you afford that one extra Bell beer? I am now referring to my friend Gen. Kahinda –(Laughter)- so at the end of the day when there is low saving, there is low consumption and at the end of it all the standard of living of our people will continue to deteriorate. And here we are saying yes, Bona bagagawale! Unless you are saying that we should start to preach Bonna baavuwale; and if we start to preach Bonna baavuwale then they will get poorer because of this excessive taxation.

Mr Speaker, I am also perturbed in my head. Assuming today –(Interjections)– hon. Munna Masaka, what is it now? (Laughter)

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, hon. Member, and thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to give information on the comment he is making as far as tax is concerned vis-à-vis its effects on the people who pay it. Tax means transfer of money from one group to the other. Tax could be to government by the people and government can use it effectively to improve the standard of life of the people.

MR WADRI: Hon. Munna Masaka, if you listened to what I said a few minutes back –(Interruptions)– yes, but that was at personal level. You know there are personal relationships we have with some people here. So, when we make references to them, they do not feel so jittery. Anyway, Hon. Sauda Mugerwa, what I am saying is that earlier on I said that people are not willing to pay taxes because they do not see returns. I also said that many of our administrative offices are riddled with corruption. So, even if the people pay, the returns do not reach them. I mean it. What is it? At the end of the day their standard of living will still continue to be low. 

The point I was trying to make at the time you rose up to give information was the issue of the Graduated Tax compensation. What happens to it? Assuming Parliament today went ahead and passed this Bill, God forbid! What will happen to the GT Compensation Fund that has already been budgeted for and which is supposed to replace Graduated Tax? At what time will it be phased out? Or is it going to continue to be double taxation; double source of revenue for the local governments? –(Interjection)- yes, I can take it.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I just want to give hon. Wadri information that in this Bill we are proposing an amendment to include a transitional provision of Shs 45 billion at least for the next three years until the new taxes take off. In the new financial year, as indicated at page 26 of the budget framework, there is already a provision of Shs 45 billion incorporated so that those local governments that are doing well, even those that are not doing well will have a base to start on as we pilot the tax. So, it is already catered for and I thank you for thinking about it.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you very much for accepting information. By the time Graduated Tax was abolished, the money coming from Graduated Tax throughout the country had at one point reached Shs 85 to 90 billion. So, even the compensation of Shs 45 billion is under what might be squeezed from the population using the methods of Graduated Tax. Having said that, let me say that the figure of Shs 45 billion has been more or less the same over the last two or three years. This does not seem to recognise that there is growth, particularly when hon. Wadri succeeded in pushing for the creation of a new district, which he hasn’t quite accepted and cannot agree on where its headquarters should be. So, if you bear that in mind, even the Shs 45 billion that has been talked about is really less than what you should get if the economy had expanded enough to keep the tempo of development and the services you must deliver - including creating a district for the honourable member.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I take exception of what Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere has just said in his last sentence; there is no way a district can be created for Wadri. What proportion of land does Wadri have in order to create a district for him? Anyway, that was just a by-the-way. I want to emphasize the point of creating laziness amongst our people. Certainly when people get to know that once you have more than two acres you are to be taxed, they will resort to invisible trade, especially those along the borders. I am saying this because our borders are porous. Those who come from along Lake Victoria and places like Busia, Mbale, Kapchwora, Kasese and so on, can confirm that. People will resort to invisible trade, which will make it more difficult for us to collect even the little that could have been realised.

When I look at the type of goods and services to be taxed - there is one important undertaking, which is a hot cake in Uganda today. There are those farmers who grow and export flowers in this country –(Interjections)- yes! That is hot business. You attempt to enter it and you will see the resistance. But these people are not being taxed; we know the insurmountable income that comes from the sale of flowers. Every other day, planes are ferrying exported flowers. Surely, why are you so segregative in terms of who should pay and who should not? 

A poor coffee farmer with coffee wilt; a poor banana farmer from Mbale, Mbarara and other places like Buganda, whose gardens as already being wiped out by banana wilt is being by this tax; squeezing blood from a stone! And those who have blood in them you do not want to squeeze them. So, what kind of tax regime is this? The amendment I am making, though it will be at a later stage, is that we should not be restrictive if we want to say that this tax regime means well for our people. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that tax collections are not the most gratifying undertakings that a person makes and the chairman of this committee knows this. He went through it when he was a chief administrative officer. I know that many of your officers were beaten and humiliated. We know of the infamous Bukedde tax riots; we know that in Busoga administrative officers were cut with pangas while attempting to collect Shs 3,500 from the people –(Interjections)– yes, only Shs 3,500 but the amount, which is involved now is more. So people will certainly resist this thing. 

I do not know how the General will cope with it –(Interjections)– I must tell you what the feelings of the people are. There is no point for us just to be here in Kampala, talk to white collar bureaucrats and politicians and say we have consulted the district leadership. This Bill, as I said earlier, is a stab to the back of Ugandans; it is in bad faith and actually makes Ugandans lose trust in government. People will think that government is not serious. It says one thing today and as soon as it gets what it wants, it forgets about you –(Interjections)– it is not in my interest, Mr Speaker. 

So, I Kassiano E. Wadri, MP Terego very vehemently oppose this Bill. I thank you.

11.37
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much the committee for the report. I stand to oppose this Bill. 

First of all, when you look at the report of the committee you realize that it is insensitive to the people and the plight of Ugandans. During the time when this Bill was being considered, workers demonstrated and brought a petition to Parliament and, Mr Speaker, you assured them that this petition would be considered alongside the Bill. There is no reference whatsoever to that petition in this report.

At the time of the demonstration, many workers did not show up because they thought their leaders wanted a peaceful demonstration and they were saying that government does not listen to peaceful things; they had wanted a violent demonstration. The committee is now saying peaceful demonstrations are not allowed and recognized; they can only listen to violence. I am saying this because people came peacefully, gave in their petition and it is not talked about. 

Secondly, this is a Bill that is un-researched. It is a Bill that brings a lot of contradictions. We all know very well that local governments are well funded, but this Bill is not resolving that mischief. The report at page 4 argues thus: “While introducing decentralization systems in Uganda, political, legal and administrative decentralisation moved faster than financial decentralisation.”  

We know very well that the reason why decentralisation fails in most of the countries is because of lack of funding. It might be either direct funding from the national resources generated by the central government, or particular legislation. Various scholars have argued that the most serious failure of legislations catering for funding of local governments is being ambiguous; a situation where local governments are not given enough power to generate their resources. When you look at the Bill, we are suggesting that we get funding or revenue from sectors that are already being taxed. You cannot talk of taxing workers or people who are gainfully employed and whose income is already being taxed through Pay as You Earn. 

While answering that question of double taxation the committee argued on page 7, “Double taxation means charging someone twice for the same service(s). This is not the case for Local Service Tax because two taxes are being levied for services that are provided by Local Governments and not any other entity.” The committee does not appreciate the report that decentralisation is just trying to transfer services to the local level. These services were at one time being handled by the central government. 

It is as if with decentralisation we came up with new services like hospitals, schools and whatever things we are talking about. Before decentralisation these were being handled by the central government. Therefore, we cannot appear as if by creating local governments we created new services. What we were supposed to have done would have been to allow local governments to take up taxation measures.  

If we are talking about income of workers, let them take the whole Pay as You Earn not just a small portion of it. Let us just administratively say that all Pay as You Earn goes to local governments but not that a big portion of the Pay as You Earn goes to the central government and a small portion to the local governments. 

These local governments are going to live in constant struggle because the workers will continue to fight against this tax. We can be here as honourable members and pass it, fine, but we must be sensitive to our people. One time the honourable minister was saying, when he was responding to the workers, that 5,000 is small. Is Shs 5,000 small to a worker? 

I know that whereas the majority of the workers in this country pay Pay as You Earn and all their allowances are taxed, we in Parliament, our allowances are not taxed and, therefore, we do not feel the pinch of Pay-as-You-Earn -(Interjection)-  yes, this is a fact. We have mileage, we have all these and they are not taxed. We pay Pay-as-You-Earn on only our salaries. All other allowances are not taxed because of us being in power so we managed to engineer something and we were exempted. But the workers have all their allowances taxed and therefore we must be sensitive to this type of situation.

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, I am saying the truth and, therefore, I will not be able to –(Interjections)- I ask for your protection. 

We are talking for workers who support taxation and who are committed to taxation. At the time when we had Graduated Tax, actually the workers had brought a petition to this House saying that Graduated Tax should not be put on the workers because by the time Graduated Tax came, people were not involved in income activities and the regime at that the colonial government came up with that primitive Graduated Tax. When Graduated Tax was abolished some measures were put in place and the Minister of Local Government accepted to compensate. 

Around that same time there was an increment in the percentage of VAT from 17 to 18 percent and the reason was that money generated from this would go to local governments. What went wrong? Why did the central government not remit this money to local government?  

Workers in this nation, apart from paying Pay-As-You-Earn and other taxes, are going to pay taxation –(Interjection)- because of time I am not going to allow that. I have already been warned that I should wind up. Because of the gaps in health care provision, for instance, right now we are in advanced stages of coming up with a law where workers are going to contribute to their health care through what is going to be called the Social Health Insurance Scheme. The reason behind this was that there are gaps in health care provision whereas these workers pay tax and they are also supposed to benefit from health care services like any other citizens. So, they are now going to start contributing 4 percent of their money to health. Therefore, we are going to have a proportion of workers coming out of this so that they would not again also strain us when we are allocating for health because we shall not be catering for them; but they will be catering for themselves.  

But again we are saying these same workers paying Pay-as-You-Earn are going to pay a Local Service Tax. I think this is unfair! This is not being sensitive to the people; this is not being wise and I think that really citizens of this nation will not accept this type of situation. Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.  

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As workers, as members of our constituency, we appeal to the Parliament to support local governments effectively through more serious means and not by laws that are going to be ambiguous or laws that are going to bring controversy or laws that might not solve the mischief that we are trying to solve. Thank you very much.

11.48
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairman of the committee for a good report. However, I have a few concerns that I would like the chairman to help me understand clearly.  

On page 20 in his report and more specifically on point 5.5, the Chairman and the committee tend to show reservation on the categorisation of commercial farmers. However, in his recommendation on page 22 where he talks of commercial farmers, in 6.4, he does not come out clearly to help us understand why he had those reservations, and what recommendations he had.

On page 20, bullet No.1, the report says, “The definition of commercial farmers is inappropriate …” On the second bullet it says, “The usage of acreage as a basis for assessment of tax is not appropriate as it does not take into account the quality and the economic value of the crop ….”

Bullet No.3 again says, “The acreage considerations do not take into account the effects of weather and other vagaries …” and he goes on again in the last bullet, “The ownership of land also has to be taken into account as they are several land tenure systems ….” But in his recommendations in the report, he is silent. So, I need to be helped to be able to discern what I would base my decision on. Should I support this report or not based on those reservations he had on commercial farmers? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.50
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the chairman for the report. I would like to implore honourable members that as we talk ill about this Bill, let us ask ourselves, “Where do we really get resources to run government institutions?” And on several occasions we have interacted with the local governments and the blame is that we are not mindful of financing local governments. There was a recent meeting, which we attended with the LC III executives, and His Excellency the President. The LC IIIs were really against the institution of Parliament because we are very insensitive in financing these local governments. 

When we come up with ideas against this Bill, the question is, “Where do we get money from to finance government?” Because I know that most of the resources we get, say through government, through loans, are resources from taxation from developed countries. And in a way, I think what is lacking is that it is we the politicians to ensure that whatever little tax is collected must be utilised. Otherwise, the way I look at it; looking at UPE, looking at USE and other projects, the moment we say that we should totally not have taxes - this very institution was the one complaining that Graduated Tax was demeaning to humankind. 

I remember the late hon. Okulo-Epak, when he presented the Private Member’s Bill of abolishing Graduated Tax, most of us supported him. Mr Speaker, I would think that we as leaders need to ensure that whatever little is sent to local governments is utilised. And I am very sure that if we have involved everybody, of course they are going to task us the politicians as to why we are not putting in place – why we are not giving services to them. Because where we have touched, the elites, these are people without fear or favour who will put us, the politicians, to task on why we are not providing services. 

So my request is to ensure that Members look at Uganda vis-à-vis other countries because to me the resentfulness of the people is because the little money that we send to local governments is not utilised. 

I think we should ensure that this Bill is properly implemented. First of all, we need to have real information on who is employed and who is not employed. And this one calls for another issue of us having the national identification. This is something that is very serious and we as government have glossed over it. National identification is important. That is how we shall know how many people are employed and how many people are unemployed. 

And for somebody to reason that because you are going to tax employed people, you will be creating laziness in the unemployed. I think the essence of this was that we abolished GT to ensure that we could give people time to mobilise resources and get the ability to pay because the tax base is created by government by ensuring that people are very well organised. But the point I am putting across is that we must have the national identification because that is how we shall have proper records and know who is employed and who is unemployed. 

The other issue in as far as this Bill is concerned is that we should have tough tax government inspection and this should be the task of local governments because I have noticed that in local governments, there are others that are getting some revenue but there is no transparency whatsoever. And when it comes to co-funding, they always under declare. So, the Ministry of Local Government should put in place a mechanism of government inspectors, in terms of taxes, to go and create a link between local governments and the centre because to me the moment these taxes are collected and they are implemented, I am sure the people will have that culture of taxation and knowing that when we pay we get resources. 

But the reason we have resentment over taxes is because whatever is even sent - I will hasten to add that whatever we send from the centre, if 40 percent reaches the final recipient, then that place is a lucky one. So, there are a lot of loopholes between the central government and what goes to the real beneficiaries -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. James Kubeketerya for giving way. I have very attentively listened to your lamentation about the misuse of taxes. Even last year during the budgeting process, VAT was raised from 17 percent to 18 percent to provide for the replacement of Graduated Tax. I think it will be useful, through you, hon. James Kubeketerya, to request the chairman and the Minister for Local Government to liaise with Finance. That 1 percent of VAT is quite a lot; how much has been collected? Has it been remitted to local governments so that we really find out whether it is justifiable for us to again increase taxes when we are already catering for local governments? Sir, I request that at an appropriate time the two in the Front Bench help us. Thank you. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, the minister and the chairman have heard hon. Wadri; I do not need to mention that. 

As I wind up, I would like to mention that when it comes to taxes, you know very well that last financial year the Minister of Finance scrapped taxes – this was road licences and he said it would be hidden within the consumption of fuel, and it is as if we have never had any road licence tax. I think the only problem we are suffering from is having a lot of traffic jam because everybody now drives. 

So, the point I am putting across is that as the new taxes come into force, Ugandans should know that whatever resources we get, whatever borrowing - yesterday we were even borrowing and we were accusing hon. Omach of bringing another borrowing request. We are saying that most of what is borrowed is from taxes. What is most important is for us leaders to show accountability on what we have got from the taxes. The moment we do this then I am sure that come the second year of this tax, we will find people more willing to pay the tax.

However, I do not buy the idea of hon. Lyomoki who said that Parliament and members of Parliament do not pay taxes. I think hon. Lyomoki is not aware of the environment he lives in because from whatever members are paid, there are a lot of taxes deducted. He is aware of this but I think it is a matter of shedding crocodile tears and trying –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I was winding up. I would like to end by supporting this Bill but urging that we must be accountable and we should have proper follow up from the centre to see how these taxes are going to be utilised. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.59
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by questioning the methodology the Ministry of Local Government used in coming up with these amendments. What is the intention of the tax? Is it to help local governments to perform better? Is it meant to modify, improve on Graduated Tax, which was abolished and replace the gaps that our local governments are facing? 

We know that local governments are not experts at taxation and that is why Graduated Tax faced a lot of problems. The intricacies that are involved in taxation can only be handled by experts and that is why I do not understand why Uganda Revenue Authority that is our tax collection body is always bypassed when it comes to local governments. They collect a lot of money and it is not on behalf of Government but on our behalf and on behalf of the citizens who are also the residents whom local governments serve. 

I will use the example of businessmen and women who are saying that this tax should be incorporated in trading licenses. We know that we have had issues with service provision in local governments. Kampala, in particular, bears the burden of paying the highest percentage of taxes in the whole country. However, they expect services to be provided by the local government and KCC. 

I will take an example of Kikuubo, a place where there are more than 100 shops. These 100 shops pay a minimum of Shs 50 billion in taxes to URA. To a layman or to that businessman, he or she has paid taxes to have services from Government. He or she expects their road to be repaired because of paying Shs 260,000 trading licence to Kampala City Council. The same people who pay Shs 50 billion to URA also pay Shs 26 million to Kampala City Council and Kampala City Council is meant to repair their roads. So, these imbalances –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this morning I passed there and I saw machines–

MRS SEMPALA: Unfortunately, this has been with a lot of concerted effort between the traders, KCC and the ministry. However, because of the traffic and the heavy merchandise that goes through that road, in a year that road will break down and they will expect it to be repaired maybe after six years. So, I think that before we dilly dally- we are evading the real truth. I am saying that URA receives the taxes of these same people who expected services from local government. 

I wonder why there is no synergy between ministries. Before we tax commercial farmers, what is the input of the Ministry of Agriculture? Has it been consulted? Is it in agreement that that tax should be applied to the farmers? This is Cabinet and it is the same government. Therefore, we expect the Ministry of Agriculture to bring a statement and its analysis of this tax on commercial farmers. We do not expect the Minister of Agriculture, after a while, to come back and say, “We do not have services and our farmers are complaining because the Ministry of Local Government imposed this tax”. 

We hope that before this Bill is considered seriously, ministries and bodies concerned with tax collection as well as the sectors that are to be taxed comprehensively come up with a report so that we can consider it before debate.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will end this side and move to the other side after hon. Nsubuga.

12.04
MR MATTHIAS B. NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose this Bill. The day before yesterday, I was one of those people who requested you to push this Bill to today so that we can have bigger input in it. Yesterday, I travelled to Masaka, met the district leaders and consulted them about this Bill. I am very glad that the chairman of this committee put the concerns of the stakeholders very clearly. However, when he was stating the recommendations of the critics from the Ministry of Local Government, everything seems to have been ignored. 

Mr Speaker, we have to look at the history of this tax. During the colonial times it was called hut tax and every hut had to pay this tax. It later became to be known as Graduated Tax. After the abolition of Graduated Tax, we are now bringing the Local Service Tax. 

First of all, this tax is selective and I will give an example. When you say that the people who are going to pay this tax are for example commercial farmers- I will give an example of some of us who represent rural constituencies. I can tell you that in my constituency, including that of the Speaker - because I know it - there are no commercial farmers; we only have progressive farmers. You cannot tax a progressive farmer because I know that the farmers that he would call commercial in his constituency are the current pineapple growers. I am sure nobody -(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, even these small farmers are already being taxed very heavily. In the case of commercial crops like cotton, there are more than 13 deductions imposed on them for every Kilogram of Cotton, imposed by CDO and this money is passed on to the ginners and exporters associations. 

Secondly, there is what they call cess even for coffee, tea and cotton at that very low level. So honestly, I do not see how these small people in the villages can survive again with this additional taxation. Thank you.

MR KABWEGYERE: Further information. I would like to thank hon. Nsubuga for allowing me to also make a contribution. One clarification I am seeking from him [MR WADRI: “Not information?”] no, it is a clarification but also information- (Laughter)- there are two aspects; the clarification, first, is how do Governments get money to provide services if they do not collect taxes? But secondly, the information I wanted to give him is that what he has actually been talking about is a very illustrative description of the poor economy that you have; that you have progressive farmers and not commercial farmers, if you do not tax them then you do not have an economy. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague hon. Mathius Nsubuga, that arising from the various types of taxes that our farmers suffer having been enumerated by hon. John Odit, in yesterday’s paper, I read that the Speaker distributed clonal seeds worth Shs. 20 million in Kyanamukaaka and those farmers are going to suffer the same brand of taxation if this thing is passed. (Laughter) That is the information I wanted to share. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, hon. Mathius Nsubuga for giving way. Mr Speaker, the additional information I wanted to give to hon. Mathius Nsubuga is that in his submission, he has actually differentiated the new tax from the Graduated Tax because the biggest problem of the Graduated Tax was the regressive nature. It was not a progressive tax. The moment you were a human being of age, you had the brunt of a tax especially men. But this time round, there is an attempt to bring in force a progressive tax and you have rightly said that progressive farmers are targeted. 

The other clarification I want to seek is that as a country which wants to develop and as leaders of this country, we know that taxation has never been popular even in the biblical days, but it is our responsibility as leaders to sensitise our people and even make sure that the money accruing from taxes is well used. We are not going to have a country which is going to expect services from donors who are also getting money from taxpayers. 

I would like to seek clarification: How do you expect our country Uganda to finance service delivery without broadening the tax base and without encouraging our people to be progressive even when the colonial government used the poll tax to encourage people to be productive? I thank you so much. 

MR NSUBUGA: First of all, I would like to thank honourable colleagues for the information given. I am not opposed to local governments or to taxes but what I am opposed to are these over-taxations to the rural people we represent. For example, Mr Speaker, before I came to the House, I was working with a city local government yet I was born, grew up and represent a rural constituency. I know the difference between a rural constituency, a peasant in the village and somebody in the urban centre. I will give an example, in my constituency, I do not even have an urban centre; I only have trading centres. Mr Speaker, what urban centre do you have in Kyanamukaaka other than a trading centre?

When you talk about local hotel taxes – because you are now saying that we shall derive this tax by taxing commercial farmers, I do not have a commercial farmer in my constituency. (Interruptions)- Listen, I said I have progressive farmers and they should not be hindered from progressing by this tax. My colleagues have given you examples of constituencies where there are cotton farmers, tea farmers, and people who are trying to come up. If you tax them, they will go down. 

Secondly, we have people coming up with small lodges of three, four or five rooms in a trading centre and you are calling these hotels -(Laughter)- You want these people to be charged? No, I think those of us who represent rural constituencies must wake up. We have to look at the realities. I am not opposing this for the sake of being on the opposition side. I know my local government has to raise money in order to give services, but how does it raise this money?

Mr Speaker, today in my constituency or in anybody’s constituency in the rural area, a packet of salt of one Kilogram is now Shs.1200. You are now giving a tax to this very person – (Interruption) 

MS MUHANGA: Thank you hon. Nsubuga, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I think we are getting into trouble as leaders who have been elected into this House, on which way to go. What I see members raising is an issue of personal interest other than national interest. Why am I saying so? People fear to say their voters should be taxed and in all their speeches, this is what I am getting. 

Hon. Nsubuga, I have been to your constituency; you cannot say that people are poor to the extent that they cannot pay tax. Yes, people are not doing well but they can pay that little tax because of the services they will get, and if we sensitise them - people go to bars every evening to drink in your constituency in trading centres. Where do they get the money to drink? If they were really very poor, they would not drink as much as Shs. 5,000 per day. 

I have people in my constituency who have SACCOs with Shs.8 to Shs.60 million - rural women in the village! I could not even believe last weekend when I visited them. People have Shs.60 million in the village and you call them very poor? The money is there but the packaging - and Mr Speaker, if I get a chance to give my own- I think I shall give the way forward. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let him wind up. 

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much for the information. Mr Speaker, I get perturbed because in this Bill, we are saying that we are going to charge commercial farmers. Is it the terminology? Unless we say that every able-bodied person or every household – because if you say that you are charging commercial farmers and I tell you that I do not have a commercial farmer in my constituency, then what are you talking about? 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the reason why the Graduated Tax was abolished was because they said it was barbaric. Also, the method of collection – (Interjection) - Mr Speaker, I think I have to finish otherwise my time will-

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR NSUBUGA: I am sorry. Mr Speaker, first of all, we have not given the method of collecting this tax because in the villages, whether you like it or not, the same barbaric method that was being used to collect Graduated Tax will still be the same. How are you going to collect it unless these askaris at the Gombolola headquarters and district headquarters will have to go in the villages and in fact instill or even use worse methods of collecting this tax?  Can the minister or the chairman tell me what method they will use to collect this tax, which is not similar to the previous one we had in the collection of Graduated Tax?  

Mr Speaker when you talk about the money that is going to be used to collect this tax, for example, my district used to get about Shs 2 billion from the Graduated Tax. When you assess today because what you are talking about that this tax is going to come from commercial farmers, from hotels and lodges, anything else? Nothing! Now do you expect Masaka to collect Shs 2 billion out of this? 

Sometime back there was a law on radio and television- and that tax was good but surely many people - and how far did the government go to implement this? This law will be passed but I can assure you, Mr Speaker, that our intentions to raise taxes for local governments -because local governments are our basis as Members of Parliament. It is true some local governments cannot sit because they do not have money but is this the right method we can use to raise the money? Because we can pass the law and then leave it to local governments other than saying for us we passed the law and it is up to you to collect, which is impossible. 

Mr Speaker, another tax I am opposed to is that we should not mix words. Some of us know a bit of English. When you say that the professionals, I give an example of those of you who are in professional businesses like lawyers, you pay your fee to your legal body or society. You pay to the local council where you are operating for a trading license. Now you are telling me at the same time, that he has to pay another tax, which is Local Service Tax and yet the trading license goes to the local governments because the local governments in the area are the ones who are charging the trading licences. We should not use words like these days when you use “corruption” and yet it is “thieving” but you are using it in the same way to mean the same thing. 

Lastly, I would like to talk about the taxation, which I have seen in this Bill. Some body earning more than Shs 130,000 is taxed and pays Pay As You Earn. It is the very person you are telling to pay what he takes home because what he takes home is the net after Pay As You Earn and other taxes. And we are also saying that he should pay again a Local Service Tax to what he is carrying, which is already taxed. I mean any accountant, or anybody will- this is double taxation, even beyond double taxation, Prof. Kabwegyere, I think this is very clear in your mind that after Pay As You Earn, after NSSF and other deductions whatever you have – (Prof. Kabwegyere rose_) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Pay As You Earn is one tax. There are many taxes that you pay when you reach a certain level of income. Hon. Nsubuga you should be concerned about the level of poverty rather than the level of taxation because if you are saying that a person is poor, okay, how many rich people do we have here in Uganda who should pay the taxes for everybody? What you are trying to do here is to make somebody make a contribution, small but also be able to contribute something for the services that that one is trying to get. But if you want to stand up here as a law maker and say the people you represent should not make a contribution and yet you want the people you represent to have services, you must be contradicting yourself openly and publicly. (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Nsubuga, you are a Muganda and when you get married you take something for the father, something for the mother, something for the Ssenga, something for the brother and yet you are marrying the same girl. So, it should not mix you. 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, as I say to colleagues, I am not opposed to the local governments collecting taxes. First of all, I gave a method of assessing unless this House sets standards and we say for a person with a very big kibanja, for example, those of you who come from Kigezi hardly find somebody with more than five or six acres of land and yet for us let us say in my constituency, somebody may even have 10 acres and yet the value of what he gets from the 10 acres is nothing compared to somebody with one acre in Kigezi. So, unless this House says, okay, let us set standards. I am not opposed to raising taxes for local governments but what method are you using? This is a wrong method; the one you have put here is a wrong method. Thank you very much. 

MR SPEAKER: Let us first hear from her and then come on this side. 

12.24
MS CONCY ACIRO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuru):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleagues. I have stood up to talk about the Local Service Tax, which is on; I am not going to support it, of course. The tax is supposed to be imposed, for example, on the hotels and lodges. I would like to make it clear especially to the committee that came up with this report that if this tax is to be imposed, for example, in Amuru District we only have five lodges and we do not have hotels. So, what are you going to do? And these lodges do not have power; there is no electricity in Amuru. There is also no water, so do we expect visitors to go and sleep there? 

I think even if we are to collect small money from these lodges, it is not going to help our local government and at times the owners complain that customers go and spend nights in their lodges and they do not pay for them. For example, last December there was a soldier who went to one of the lodges in Pabo Camp, spent a night there and refused to pay the bill.  When the owner asked for the money, he shot the man dead and up to now there is no action that has been taken! 

So, I think this Bill is not going to help especially the new districts like Amuru, which does not even have enough facilities. To me the Graduated Tax was even better than this Bill which has come up because I remember when I was young, at least people tried to pay this tax either in cash or they gave their chicken or what they had harvested and in turn this could be converted into cash and it used to help the local governments. 

I think the government made a very big mistake in removing the Graduated Tax because those days, our local governments used to benefit more compared to this Bill that is coming up. I think the government is trying to bring up the Graduated Tax only that they way of bringing it is the problem. You know as a woman, when it is time for labour, you do not pretend that you are not labouring; you go to the hospital so that you deliver. I am asking the government, if you are labouring, please push the child to come out. 

My second point is on taxing the commercial farmers. Let me go back to my relevant experience. Basically, in Amuru, we are only seven commercial farmers and we are growing rice. Out of the seven farmers, there are others who are not growing rice and even if I was to be taxed, for example, last year, I was not going to pay the tax because my rice was flooded. How do you expect these farmers to pay this tax? Like the business going on now between Uganda and Juba  most people are now diverting to planting onions because there is a lot of profit in it. If we are to tax only people who are planting rice, what if all of them refuse to plant rice - like me this year, I refused to plant rice - what are they going to tax? 

In conclusion, I think this Bill is trying to push people who have escaped from poverty back to poverty without providing a solution to the people who are below the poverty line. The people who are working very hard are being taxed more. What are we doing? It means that we are encouraging laziness in this country. There is no one who was born rich. We were all born naked, so, we have to work hard. We should provide proper solutions when we want to set up proper laws for our country. I do not support the Bill. Thank you.

12.30
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support this Bill. I want to begin by saying that hon. Wadri was very unfair to the government by saying that this Bill has been introduced in bad faith. Why do you think it is in bad faith? We are here as leaders of this nation and the attitude of the leaders really impacts a lot on how this nation develops. 

My colleague just asked: How does the government run a country without tax? If a question came up about social services in local governments in rural areas, I am sure hon. Wadri would be one of the first people to shoot up and bring out scathing remarks about those services that are not being provided -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member representing Ruhama. I would like her to clarify to me a simple scenario: You are very hungry; food has been brought to you at table; water served and you have washed your hands and no sooner have you started eating the food than it is removed. How do you feel? I want to equate this with the abolition of Graduated Tax. Many of you in Parliament were elected by voters who said at least we are happy the government manifesto says that Graduated Tax has been abolished; hardly a year after, you are bringing it back in a different form. How do you expect them to feel? 

MRS MUSEVENI: Thank you, hon. Wadri. My colleague clarified on that just a while ago and talked about the difference between the Graduated Tax and this tax. Graduated tax used to tax every male above age 18, whether they were employed or not, whether they had a farm or none, they had to pay that tax. It is this Government that took the trouble to stop that tax because it did not make sense. It was taxing people because they were human beings and that was not fair. So that tax was removed and this Government has taken the trouble to find those Ugandans who are earning something and they are requested to pay something back so that we can be able to run our country and give them services that they need and deserve. How then can we do it if you say this is so wrong? This is done in bad faith! That is not true really.

I do not know whether we remember that many countries tax their people and donate their money to countries such as Uganda. Can Ugandans look at that and be proud of it and want that to continue because we do not want our people to be taxed? I think we can take that as a desperate measure when we are rebuilding our country -(Interjections)- please allow me to finish. 

I believe that whatever we are doing - and I know that the majority of our people are farmers, but if they are earning some income on their farms, I think they should be proud to give something back to the rebuilding of their nation and the running of their communities. I think it gives people some pride when they know that they are responsible for running their country. But if the leaders in this House say that it is wrong to tax our people then it is saying that we should remain beggars or beneficiaries of donors for all time and I think we should be guilty for all that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bucyanayandi –(Mr Banyenzaki rose_)– I said hon. Bucyanayandi – [Mr Banyenzaki: “He is a Member of the committee”] – oh! He is a Member of the committee? Sorry, I did not know that.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, I wanted to clarify something – to strengthen the issue of the agricultural sector because that is the area that is being misunderstood.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you will come later. Since you are a Member of the committee, let me give an opportunity to those who are not.

12.37
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we just need to amend two things in the Bill so that we get in harmony with our constituents and elected leaders. As I said when I was giving information, some of us fear our voters and I believe most people who sat in the caucus and endorsed this Bill now fear that their voters might hear their voices because they are watching and may not vote for them. If we continue like this, we will get no way. 

Mr Speaker, what we need to do is to amend the Bill and harmonise the methods of collect. The methods of collecting this tax is what will determine whether it will or not work.

THE SPEAKER: That will come in the committee stage – that is when we shall be amending.

MS MUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I want to suggest that we leave tax collection to the URA and not involve the local people. After the URA has collected this tax, then we can have all the revenue sent to the local governments. 

We need money at these local governments; even we the leaders are asked many questions and we have a rope in our necks whenever we go to village. People even ask us thing that we are not supposed to do as Members of Parliament –[Mr Banyenzaki: Clarification]– I will not take the clarification from hon. Banyenzaki because I know that even in his constituency; he is very much opposed to this Bill. 

I went to his constituency a week ago and we addressed two rallies where everybody was dead drank. And I asked him, “Are these the people you have been telling us have no money?” (Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker is it in order for hon. Margaret Muhanga, who visited my constituency with – and when we visited my constituents, whenever the people there saw Banyenzaki Henry Ntunguka, they started celebrating immediately. Is it in order for hon. Muhanga to say that the people who were celebrating because they had seen their leader, hon. Banyenzaki Ntunguka – to say that all the people in the constituency were dead drunk, including her?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it would be a problem for me to decide on that point; what seems to have happened - when you welcomed her in your constituency, there was a lot of jubilation and drinking and therefore people turned out to be drunk.

MS MUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. But I did not drink the Muramba because I do not take alcohol and the Lord knows it.

Mr Speaker, I think we should draw a line between those who should pay this tax and those who should not. We said that for the Graduated Tax, you had to pay it as long as you existed. So, I want to disagree with hon. Kassiano Wadri that these taxes are not the same at all. Any man above 18 years paid GT as long as he existed whether employed or not he had to pay it. But this one is going to people who are earning an income. 

Perhaps we could exempt the progressing farmers that hon. Nsubuga talked about – if we are for “Prosperity for All” -  these farmers are trying to earn an income and if we tax them then it may not be the best way forward. 

But if we tax people who are running DSTV, Bibandas, where a lot of youths go to watch football; they pay some money to this person. That person should in turn pay some tax. This tax is paid once in a whole year. Even my old mother who owns a farm with 30 workers – we can exempt the 30 workers, but she can pay the service tax because she is able. She has 150 exotic cows, why shouldn’t she pay. 

So, people need to pay this tax and I think they will work harder to pay the tax. We make them lazier when we say that – I talked about people who drive. Everywhere I go, I ask them, “Why do you drink, where do you get the money”? This is the money they should now put in the tax and they stop drinking and we can have a harmonious Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that we need to change the image but uphold the principle of taxation. I want to some how to agree with hon. Lyomoki that members of Parliament some times seem to be selfish. Why don’t you want your emoluments taxed – that is what hon. Lyomoki said and it is the truth; you have only your salaries taxed; let them tax your emoluments and we see if you will not make noise about it. 

Let me tell you, honourable members, we need money at the local governments and it is very important to have these services given to our people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this should be known, when you raise a point of clarification or information, it is up to the Members holding the floor to accept or not to accept it. If she/he does not resume his sit, that means he does not accept your point of clarification.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I am a member of the committee and I am not talking about this Bill. I am only talking about submissions made by hon. Lyomoki and hon. Muhanga with regard to the taxation of Members of Parliament’s emoluments. 

Mr Speaker, we are not selfish at all and it is very unfortunate. When hon. Lyomoki raised that issue, I went to the accounts section- some of us do not even read what we get. For goodness sake, gratuity is taxed; constituency fund is taxed; basic salary is taxed; medical insurance is taxed - surely, why should Members of Parliament, just because he/she wants to get cheap popularity damage the names of the honourable House and Members? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think it is a fact that Members of Parliament pay tax. If I tell you how much you pay, you would wonder. 

12.44
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report on this Bill –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, but honestly we should be honest with our people; if somebody knows that he is taxed and he comes and says Members of Parliament do not pay tax, it is a reckless statement. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you for that clarification you are making. Maybe at an appropriate time these Members will withdraw their statements given your ruling.

Mr Speaker, I stand to oppose this Bill on the following grounds: When you look at the objectives of the Bill, it has two objectives according to this report:

(a)	The objective of the Bill is to charge on hotel, lodge room occupancy and to be collected and paid by hotel owners.
(b)	Tax is targeting gainful employment, practicing, any profession or business persons and commercial farmers producing on the large scale.  

Mr Speaker, I recall when this Parliament pronounced itself in order to encourage hotel in upcountry towns and tourism in this country, the hotels outside Kampala and Entebbe were exempted of VAT. This was done to encourage tourism in this country. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda has the highest hotel rates in this region. Imposing another tax on these hotels will further escalate the rates of the hotel rooms and thus we will not achieve the purpose for which we had exempted VAT on these hotels. 

On objective (b), I entirely agree with hon. Mathias Nsubuga that we do not have commercial farms in this country. The leaders of this country led by the President and the Vice President have been moving in all corners of this country trying to encourage people to shift from substance farming to commercial farming. Before these substance farmers are convinced to shift, we are rushing in to say, “Go for this kind of farms; we shall tax you heavily.”  

Mr Speaker, when you go on the schedule on page 25 and see the kind of tax being suggested for these kinds of crops, you notice that this bonna bagaggawale is being slashed and thrown into the dustbin. The moment you start taxing matooke plantations of more than two acres above Shs 20,000 - how much are these people getting from these two acres? If you look at the way these bananas are sold, a farmer has to sell I do not know how many bunches of matooke in order to buy one sachet of salt. This is true; a sachet of salt in our constituency is Shs 1,000 matooke is Shs 500, so he needs to sell two bunches in order to buy a sachet of salt which he is going to use for a week. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to give information to Members. If you turn to page 25, there are categories of farmers. They are saying banana/matooke growers below two acres are exempted, two acres and above pay Shs 20,000 per year not per month. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, for the information. This is what I am saying exactly. You are saying that you are going to get Shs 20,000 a year; okay, no problem, but how many matooke is he going to – these are substance farmers by the way not commercial farmers! Sugar cane growers, the tea growers with two acres are here categorized as commercial farmers. 

Last week, the Minister of Finance was trying to popularise tea growing in our districts. Now, before they even start you are telling them, “Attempt to cultivate two acres and we shall tax Shs 10,000 from you per acre. At least let us go back to GT because this is what these people were paying; it was actually less than this yet we saw GT as a burden to these substance farmers. But, a substance farmer who was paying Shs 3,000 or Shs 60,000 - because when you have some trees of banana, some sugarcanes, or some tobacco somewhere, when you add up all these kinds of items, a substance farmer is going to end up paying more than Shs 200,000 or Shs 300,000. Now, what will happen? All these substance farmers are going to end up in prison the way GT was making these people end up in prison. 

When you look at the recommendations which the committee came up with on page 21; when you see how the committee has analyzed the report, for example, on commercial farming, you find that the committee agrees that this is not applicable at all. When you see a recommendation like say 6.3 it says, “The committee proposed that the tax be incorporated in the trading and business license”. This means the committee is recommending that the objective of the Bill is not attainable. 

Recommendation 6.4: “The tax remuneration and assessment committee should be mandated to identify more tax or crops and livestock in their areas of jurisdiction and make up recommendations to the council for the inclusion in the tax bracket.” This 6.4 is almost in the same line with what I have been saying.  

When you look at the general recommendations in bulletin 6.5(3): “A more thorough analysis of the tax needs to be done before it is implemented”, which means it agrees that this is not the appropriate time to impose this tax. Bulletin (4) says, “A transition period of approximately three years -” Now, when you are talking about a transition period of three years, why do you not shelf this and come up with it after three years.  It says government should provide a special fund to be put in 2008/09 national budget to benefit all local governments. 

Mr Speaker, there are some other taxes which are actually being imposed but which would have been much easier to collect and fund these local governments. For example, the Road Fund Bill should come a bit faster because in that Bill, the Shs 200 per litre that we are collecting, which is being now kept I do not know where, if collected for three, four, five years, is enough money to make all the roads in this country and hon. Byabagambi agrees with me here. And it is for that matter that this Road Fund Bill should urgently be worked on.

THE SPEAKER: hon. Banyenzaki, please conclude. So far 17 Members have made contributions. I think what is required is to scrutinise the various items, see which one we accept and which we do not. But 17 contributions have so far been registered.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I am concluding. In conclusion, in their recommendations the committee says, “Methods of collection and administration should be streamlined to avoid misuse of funds by the collecting authorities.” The administration of this tax is cumbersome and even the committee notes this. 

So, Mr Speaker, since my time is over, it is this Parliament that pronounced itself on the abolition of GT, in our last Parliament and the NRM Government of which I am the founder – I am a founder member of that party. (Laughter) I think this Parliament and my party of NRM should not accept because this tax is going to blackmail us again. 

I agree with hon. Wadri that we abolished GT but we are bringing it indirectly and this one is even worse. This one is going to be more repressive because people are going to pay much more than – and I agree with hon. Muhanga that the tax body be the Uganda Revenue Authority, let is be central. [Members: “You are contradicting yourself”] - No, hon. Muhanga is supporting but she did say let URA be the body to collect taxes, meaning that we should not have these local taxes. Let us have central taxes. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2007” be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2007

THE SPEAKER: Now, we are going to committee stage but I think during this lunch time, I advise that honourable members should look at the list of the proposed areas of this tax so that when we come to the committee stage, that is where you would select which one you think should come or which should not come. I think that is what is helpful to the people you are speaking for. In the circumstances, the proceedings are suspended to 2.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 12.58 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.30 p.m. _)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. Should we give ourselves about 10 minutes? Hon. Njuba you think 10 minutes will be helpful? I think we give ourselves 10 or seven minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended at 2.31 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.43 p.m. _)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2007

2.44
Clause 1

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, this Bill is amending only clause 2 of the Principal Act. So, the other areas will be referred to as paragraphs because we are only dealing with one Clause 1(2).

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you have an amendment on Clause 1?

MR WOPUWA: No, Mr Chairman.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would want Clause 1 (a) deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, if you deleted it then what is the purpose of the law? The purpose of the law is to expand the area where taxation can be and that is the purpose.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The reason that I am saying it be deleted is that we are subjecting the hotel owners to so many taxes.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, what you can do is when you say include, you can exclude any tax you think should not be included. This is Clause 1 (a). When you write a letter you say as follows, then you may say (a) should not be as follows. I support or I do not support (b). So, I think when we come to, for instance, we come to local government hotel tax to be charged, then you can object because there may be other taxes but which you do not object. 

MR KASIGWA: Yes precisely –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: This is to introduce. That is, 1 (a) is just to introduce the proposed taxes.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your guidance. I can see right ahead after this we shall have as part of the Bill - so if I do not get this one at this point deleted then, I will have – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No. What you can say, for instance, having accepted the other one not to be deleted but you can say, “I am proposing the deletion of b, c” as the case may be.

MR KASIGWA: Yes, Mr Chairman. That is why I said I would want 1 (a) in particular the local government hotel tax to be deleted and not to be part of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Then what you are saying is that you are interested in a) which is not in brackets.

MR KASIGWA: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Oh, he is proposing that we delete local government hotel tax to be charged on all hotels and lodge rooms occupants and to be collected and paid by hotel owners. I think that is what you want.

MR KASIGWA: yes, Sir. Should I go ahead and justify?

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We should look at the sector in its totality. Currently, the hotels are subjected to so many taxes and the business is not so profitable so in this case, I think that we shall be trying to squeeze the hotel owners out of business. For example, they are subjected to property tax, income tax and the other day we passed a law here and they are going to be subjected to the tourism levy.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the honourable member on the Floor that the tax is not charged on hotel owners. The hotel owners are going to collect the tax from their clients. All over the world, whenever you sleep in a hotel you pay the accommodation, VAT and municipal tax. I don’t know of any hotel in this world where people don’t pay municipal tax except in Uganda. This is not levied on the hotel owners rather it is charged on you who are sleeping in the hotel directly.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Minister, for that information. Mr Chairman, I want us to look at the realities on the ground and the dynamics in the hotel industry. It is for that reason that I am saying that they are so stretched and competition is so cutthroat that they shouldn’t increase any levies within the price settings.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what happens is that, when a hotel owner prepares the receipt, there is included therein the tourism levy and so on so that it is you the person who has come in the hotel that is required to pay and not the hotel owners. I think that is what he is saying.

MS KYATUHEIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to know from the minister whether there is going to be affirmative action for districts that do not have hotels. I have a fear that the gap between the rich districts and the poor ones is going to increase. For example, districts like Mukono, Bushenyi, Wakiso, Kampala and Mbarara may have quite a number of hotels, which are earning a lot of money while in districts like Kanungu, we hardly have hotels and this might create a big gap between the rich and the poor yet we have been trying to also get to that level. Is there a provision by the minister? 

Also, I have seen in the report of the committee that a sum of money will be given to the districts but this sum is the same and cuts across all the districts. Is there going to be different treatment for districts that are not able?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable, as you may appreciate, some places have got many hotels while others don’t have. Some districts have cows and others don’t have. Some districts are growing pineapples, others are not. What do you do?

MS KYATUHEIRE: Mr Chairman, I don’t think that we can deny the fact that some districts are well endowed in all that you are talking about. When you look at the equalization grant that is in local government, we have been crying for a long time for districts that are hard to reach and stay in to be considered but you find that districts that are already well off like Bushenyi and Mukono are the ones that are benefiting from this. We wouldn’t want to continue having this kind of treatment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable, this proposal is not selective but in reality you are saying that some districts will be irrelevant in as far as this tax is concerned. When you talk about equalisation, I think that should come somewhere else not when you are dealing with this.

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, I listened to hon. Otafiire’s information. I think that I have traveled and slept in so many hotels and I haven’t come across that particular tax. I think we have to be a little bit more innovative. We should look at the environment that we are operating in and the environment that these hoteliers are operating in. We should also look at the costs of running the hotels today. Much as we are saying that we are going to pass this tax on to the occupants, let us look at the realities of it. I am saying this because I have talked to hotel owners in Jinja and they have asked me to put their request before this Parliament to be considered. 

If you look at the Bill, they say that this tax will be specifically for cleanliness and garbage collection. Hotels already pay exorbitant fees for garbage collection in the municipalities. I live in a municipality myself and I am not against municipalities earning revenue but I am against us squeezing a sector and it is being excessively squeezed. They are paying operational permits, trading licenses and VAT so what is this that we are trying to do now! 

Today in Jinja, for a hotel owner to put his fees beyond Ugshs 100,000 is impossible. We should look at the practicalities of this. I would rather that the ministry becomes a lot more innovative other than squeezing the hotel owners because they are already pushed against the wall. I rest my case but I beg that the hotel sector be left aside and supported to develop. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: But is it clear to you that this proposed tax is not for the hotels to pay but for the customer?

MR KASIGWA: Yes, Mr Chairman. I spoke to the hoteliers in Jinja Municipality West and when you look at the stakeholders that were invited to appear before the committee, the Hotel Owners Association of Uganda was not included. The practicality of it, they are saying, is that this tax will eat into their small margins yet they are borrowing at 23 percent to develop these hotels. Mr Chairman, this is not practical.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Chairman, is the honourable member in order to keep on misleading the House? I have informed him that this is a tax we charge on people who have slept in hotels. The hotelier will give you his bill and on top of his bill, he will add Ugshs 1,000 per day only. This is the practice all over the world. Like you know you are a Christian and you pay taxes here as well as in Jinja but when you go to Church, they say give to God and you give willingly. Is he in order to go on misleading this house?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the case has been made. He was trying to make his case but – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, there is certainly a problem concerning the difficulties of collecting this money. You will remember sometime back that there used to be a tax known as commercial transaction levy, which was being collected by retail shop attendants and it didn’t work well. (Interjection) I am trying to help you, Mr Minister. This is going to be your money and at the end of the day, we will want you to get it. But I think we need to agree on modalities, which will not complicate it because, for example, commercial transactions levy failed. Let us not shake our heads; it failed! Let us borrow a leaf from it and see how we can improve this one so that it becomes enforceable. Commercial transaction levy, which was expected to be a tax levied on a consumer of goods and services in a shop, was difficult to collect.

THE CHAIRMAN: My understanding of this, hon. Member, though I am not supposed to persuade you, is that I go to a hotel, I am booked in and there are standard charges and the following day when I am checking out, they give me a bill including this particular tax, which is Shs 1,000 so that before I check out, I have to settle this and I go. In your books you will have to note that out of the money you have collected, there is Shs 1,000 which is owed to the local government. You may refuse to remit it, but that is different. However, it should be in your records because at clearing you will issue a receipt to the person who paid and checked out.

MS NAMAGGWA: Mr Chairman, in the morning I did not get the opportunity to talk about this Bill, but I wanted to raise a general observation that is related to what my sister from Kanungu has said. The Bill is very discriminatory. I am saying this because not all districts are at the same level. I can give you, an example. (Interjections) Yes, this matters a lot to me as far as Masaka is concerned because there very few households that have a Kibanja of –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, point of order. Not every district is equally distributed with taxpayers; we all know this. Does that mean that because there is a district called Kanungu, which has fewer people who pay graduated tax, therefore, we should not collect graduated tax from there? Is it in order to agree like this?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I do not know whether it is in order or not, but the point is that there are districts with landing sites because they have lakes and there are many districts without landing sites. So, because there are other districts without landing sites, you cannot say that you will not impose charges where there are landing sites.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. That is why, in my opinion, I would like to have this tax centralised so that districts are considered according to –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Member, there are rich and poor districts because of location. You, for insistence, cannot compare Wakiso to Kabula.

MS NAMAGGWA: If you do not consider my observation, then let me go to what was on the Floor. (Laughter) I was talking about Clause 1 (a). I would like to say that the way this clause is written is causing a problem. In fact, the drafting of this Bill is one of the sources of the problems. As you said, all of us go to hotels and pay our bills; these bills internationally have a tax called service tax. So, I do not see the difference between (a) and (b), not to consider this as a service tax, which could go as a percentage to ones payments of the bill at a hotel. Why is it very different from (b)? Why don’t we consider it as a service so that it is directly given to the customer?

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Member on the Floor that when you talk of service tax, you are talking about a tax, which is charged by the hotel for its services. It goes to the service staff of the hotel. So, if you say this is also a service tax then you confuse the two. This is a municipal levy while the other one is a service tax for the hotel staff. I thank you.

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, if you look at memorandum three of this Bill, you realise that the local government hotel tax will be used for garbage collection improvement and general cleanliness of the urban areas. Now, it is for that reason I am saying that hotels today are already paying these taxes: they are paying garbage fees; they are paying trading licenses; they are paying permits; they are paying so many taxes and the practability of collecting this money is a problem. So, I find an effort in futility. That is why I would rather say that the hon. Minister of Local Government becomes more innovative other than squeezing – (Interruption)

MR KALIBA: I think my colleague from Jinja Municipality is combining two issues: the one of hotels paying many taxes and that of collecting this tax. The issue of collecting tax, yes, I think at an appropriate time maybe someone will move an amendment whether to leave the collection of the tax to URA or the local governments. That is a different matter. However, I think that the minister has ably explained that I, Kaliba, when I go to Jinja for say, a workshop and I sleep in your hotel, for example, Hotel Triangle, I am just given a bill and I clear that. It is not actually Hotel Triangle that is going to pay that money; it is Kaliba going to pay that money. So, it is not going to be part of the taxes you are mentioning, Hon. Jinja Municipality.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us dispose of this amendment. There is an amendment that we delete Clause 1 (a). I now put the question. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendments to Clause 1?

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think let us be very specific. What is the difference between a hotel and a lodge? We are just taking them for grated because we are calling all of them hotels.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, on page 2 of the Bill there is something on rates of the local government hotel tax. You have categories there. You have five and four star hotels, three and two star hotels; hotels, lodges and guest houses. Read the Bill, honourable member.

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok. Any other proposes amendment? 

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I propose that we delete (b) “…used for garbage collection improvement and the general cleanliness of the urban areas.” My feeling is that garbage collection is part of the service that is going to be done by the revenue collected in some of these towns. 

Two, some of this hotel tax may not be enough to cater for such a service. Does that mean that you cannot use other revenue collected to clear the garbage? And three, the hotel tax might be so much. Does it mean that when you meet the budget for garbage collection then we will stop collecting the hotel tax? 

So, I feel that this is part of the service to be rendered by the authority which is collecting this tax, in which case we should not specify what the revenue collected is for because there will be a properly made budget for the revenue collected in that area. I move to beg that this be deleted because, to me, it is redundant.

MR WOPUWA: I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment? 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am moving to amend 1 (a) (b) - (Interjections) - no there is a small 1 (a) (b) on page 1. 

THE CHAIRMAN: It reads as follows –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Yes. I want to amend that provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: Read it. 

DR LYOMOKI: Yes. The one which reads, “Local service tax to be levied on all persons in gainful employment….” 

MEMBERS: What page?

DR LYOMOKI: First page.

THE CHAIRMAN: “Local service tax to be levied on all persons in gainful employment or who are practicing….”

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, Mr Chairman. I want to delete the phrase, “…in gainful employment or…” from that provision so that the provision reads, “Local service tax to be levied on all persons who are practicing any profession or on business persons and commercial farmers producing on large scale.” The reason is that, the persons in gainful employment are already subjected to paying Pay-as-You-Earn and, therefore, if we want to take advantage of the revenue coming from tax on gainful employment we can take advantage of the Local Governments Act which enjoins local governments to become agents. 

For instance, you can pass an administrative arrangement where the whole of Pay-as-You-Earn which is being taxed under the Income Tax Act goes to the service of local government, instead of again taxing the same people who are being taxed in lieu of their income through gainful employment. This is because this is the major contention of this Bill when we are talking of double taxation.

So, Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we delete that phrase and later on work out and pass some administrative arrangement where the tax being got from the revenue on gainful employment is given to local governments. I beg to move.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, I oppose that amendment because when we are talking about all persons in gainful employment, we are referring to people who earn a salary. But it is wrong to mix Pay as You Earn with other revenues because Pay-as-You-Earn and VAT form part of the national pool that goes to the Consolidated Fund that is used to run other services. So, this provision is specific and is targeting a particular group of people who earn a salary including myself. I oppose the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, another one?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Chairman, I need to be guided. In the general debate, it was observed that it was going to be a bit difficult to collect this tax. So, given the fact that we are now passing it, and given the fact that different hotels countrywide use different receipt books, and given the fact that it may be difficult for the local government to provide general or similar receipt books which are going to be monitored by the local government tax collectors, how is this tax going to be collected? Is there a provision that perhaps these hotels will be issued with stamps like the stamps which we put on letters such that each receipt has a coupon so that you can easily monitor the payment of this tax?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Banyenzaki, why don’t you give the benefit of doubt to these hotels that they are honest organisations and that they will be submitting their books? It is true that some may not but why do you think they cannot do things correctly? You see, you are saying that perhaps they falsify records. It can happen. But why do you imagine that is going to happen? 

MR BANYENZAKI: I am saying so, Mr Chairman, because the administration and collection of this -(Interjection)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, is the honourable member in order to give the impression that he has not read the Bill and yet on page 8 there is provision, enforcement and collection? Can the honourable member read these sections so that he is up to date with the debate: “Wherever the local government hotel tax is collected and any part of it remains unremitted, the respective local government at the end of the financial year shall notify the hotel liable, requiring it to pay the outstanding tax with a surcharge of 40 percent within two months after notification. The district or urban local council may sue a hotel for failure to collect the tax or failure to remit the tax collected.


THE CHAIRMAN: Let us try - they can come back so that we make other measures but I think it is better to always think positively rather than being negative. You cannot know that he is going to falsify the documents or he is not going to tender proper documents.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Chairman, what I am proposing is in good spirit. And I thought that hon. Kabwegyere was going to guide me but instead he did not guide me. [An. hon. Member: “You are not guidable”.] (Laughter) It is in a good spirit in the sense that what I am looking at is that if we propose say Shs 1,000 per room; it should be very easy to collect Shs 1,000 per room. 

For example if we let these local governments give guidelines on how this money is going to be collected; for example if you remember we used to have stamps, which we would put on letters when posting them. They are cheaper to print for example. If you have such a kind of stamp, it is very easy to know that this hotel earns so much. And for every receipt that you are issuing to a customer who has stayed in the hotel, you put there that stamp. So, it becomes very easy for local governments to come and say, “We issued you with so many receipts and you have bypassed these stamps.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, the position is that the Local Government Hotel Tax is being collected by the management of the hotels, lodges, who are remitting tax to the relevant local government. We are saying that this may not be the case. So, there could be a provision for enforcement. If you do not do as provided, there must be a sanction. I think there must be a part here imposing sanctions on a person who fails to carry out the obligations he is supposed to do. Why do you not leave it there?

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I seek your guidance because I am completely confused. I do not know whether it is by language or not. Because when you talk about hotels and lodges, there are lodges in national parks; you know it. In the national parks, we call them lodges –

THE CHAIRMAN: Does it make any difference because he has said “hotels or lodges”? 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Yes, but I am talking about lodges, like in Kyanamukaka trading centre (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, you can use Kyanamukaka as an example -(Laughter)- if it calls itself a hotel, they are supposed to collect taxes. If it is a lodge, it is supposed to collect taxes. It does not make any difference. I put the question that clause 4, as amended, stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to

Clause 2

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that in paragraph 1, on rates of Local Government Hotel Tax, after 1, 2, and 3, we should insert 4: “Less than 10,000 and the amount charged is 500 per room.” The justification is that we are looking at those small lodges –

THE CHAIRMAN: In Kyanamukaka.

MR WOPUWA: Like that one, which may not fit, so as to broaden the tax base. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I think it is clear. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment?

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, paragraph 2(ii) on page 3, at the beginning of the word “two” we should add the words, “Salaries of” the following are exempted, so that we are specific on where the exemption is.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment to clause 2?

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Chairman, during the debate there was concern for boda-boda cyclists. I beg to propose that they be added in (c) after the “jua kalis”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, before we proceed, I am sorry to take you back but I have noticed that we have some kind of an omission on our part. We have amended 1(b) by deleting (b) and I thought it would be important that we add 1(c): “The local service tax and local government hotel tax shall be spent on …” to avoid –

THE CHAIRMAN: We cannot go back to a clause we have finished. If you want, it will be re-committal. So, are there any more amendments to clause 2?

MR WOPUWA: Paragraph 3, at the beginning of the table, the amount of monthly income earned, we have introduced a new component saying, “Between Shs 100,000 and Shs 200,000 and the annual tax is Shs 5,000”, because we started at 200,000 to 300,000. If you took that you would exclude almost all the people who earn below Shs 200,000 and this constitutes the majority in local governments. So, we have said, Shs 100,000 and Shs 200,000 and Shs 5,000 per year. That is to widen the tax base without hurting those who are paying. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS KYATUHEIRE: Mr Chairman, I wanted us to improve on 2(e) because it is saying that “The local service tax shall be levied on the wealth and income of the following categories of people and the assessment shall be fair.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Which page is this?

MS KYATUHEIRE: That is page 2(e), Mr Chairman. It is talking about the categories of people to be taxed as: “commercial farmers namely large scale farmers producing crops covering five acres of land.” I want to note that you can have one acre of land and produce more than a person who has grown on five acres. For example if you look at chicken farming or if you look at fruit growing or mushroom growing, you can use just one acre and produce so much more than a person who has planted simsim for example on five acres of land. So I was suggesting that we could improve that 2(e) by maybe putting a minimum amount of money or –

THE CHAIRMAN: How will you know the money?

MS KYATUHEIRE: Or the amount of sacks that could be harvested, other than just saying - 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that is why - you have said that there is an exception that the one on one acre can produce more than the one on five acres but normally you would expect the one with five acres to be doing the same thing as the one having one acre and, therefore, producing more. The other one is an exception of one acre exceeding one who has five. 

MS KYATUHEIRE: Mr Chairman, it doesn’t precisely come out to explain that and that is why I want us to intervene so that people who are also producing on a small scale -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, what he is saying is that if you have less than five acres, you are not considered a commercial farmer. This is what it means that they start considering you a commercial farmer only if you have five acres. This is the text here. 

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I think the hon. Member for Kanungu has a point. Today people are now going for small, intensive and highly specialised agriculture. When you are on your way from Masaka to Kabale, there are two spots that will impress you. One is before you reach Mpigi on your right-hand side; you will see some green houses specialised in the production and export of flowers, and they may not even be on five acres. 

As you cross from Ntungamo entering Kabale on your left, you will find a comprehensive commercial farm again with complicated equipment undertaking commercial flower growing for export. And such a person earns much more than a person who has got 10 to 20 acres of simsim. I think it will be very presumptuous of us to close our eyes to these realities and ignore these people and we tax a poor cassava farmer in Terego when actually those who are earning large sums of income are left to go scot free. I think we need to –

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, hon. Wadri, what will be your formula because you must have a formula? You do not just imagine that this one is producing intensely; you must have a formula. 

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, it is at this point that I say that if the type of undertaking I wish to introduce is not taken, then we may bring it under clause 7 when we are talking about the various categories, because I feel these are the real people who earn large sums of money and they should be taxed. 

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, I want to agree with hon. Kyatuheire’s proposal that on 2(e), we amend it to say, “Producing concerning two acres or more….” Then we should add five exotic cattle, and five indigenous cattle so that it agrees with the future amendment that is going to come on paragraph 7.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you reduce from five to two? 

MR WOPUWA: Because the justification is really what hon. Wadri has said that if you have somebody with one acre of flowers, the net revenue from there is much more than that of somebody with 10 acres of Maize and therefore the amendment that is going to come in paragraph 7 will be in contradiction if 2(e) is left as it is. Therefore, I would like to thank hon. Jacqueline Kyatuheire for that proposal and I beg that we adopt it and make the necessary adjustments. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Suppose what I produce on one acre or two is for my own consumption? [Hon. Members: “No”.] No, I am trying to get it. You say commercial farmers namely, large scale farmers producing - but then you have come to one. Supposing I am doing things like a commercial farmer when actually I am doing it for my own consumption?

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank you for your guidance here that we should say namely, large scale and intensive farmers so that we capture all the other aspects. 

MS MUHANGA: That is okay.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I think the point brought in by the committee chairman is, it will not even only address the section that we are trying to amend but even on the front page 2(b) will equally be cured if we bring in that element of intensive farming. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But the question will also be, if I am not a commercial farmer, do you prevent me from being an intensive farmer? I am an intensive farmer for my own consumption and I want to maximise the use of my land! Unless you say commercial crops, flowers and others but here, you just said crops. Well, it is up to you; I can put the question to it. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Not yet. Mr Chairman, whether large scale or intensive farming, the categories of those that are going to be charged are really explicitly stated in the Bill and even in the amendments proposed by the chairperson of the committee. It is not every intensive farmer that will be charged but the specific items are enumerated. I think the fear that you are expressing does not arise. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to improve on the wording. Probably we should say, “Intensive farmers with enterprises of a monthly turn over of Shs 200,000” so that it coincides with what is on page 4 where we are taxing the salaries. We are starting from Shs 200,000.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, are you imagining that I must keep books? Am I obliged to keep books? 

MR ODIT: Mr Chairman, that suggestion is also misleading because there is not a single farmer who has a monthly turnover. You know we have annual crops and perennial crops. So, you cannot tax the farmer on that basis. 

Secondly, the best thing could be on the basis of their income. But even then, what I want to provide for is that one person can own one acre say of cotton. BT Cotton produces or yields 10 times more than conventional cotton. So, a farmer who is cultivating one acre of conventional cotton may earn Shs 1 million but a farmer who is planting BT Cotton may earn 10 times more - that is Shs 10 million - but each of them has one acre. So, I think the specification we have should be revisited so that they can be able to come with very fair categorisation of these farmers, which is very scientific and fair to all. 

Similarly, when you finally come to the table, you will see that even a two-acre farmer is going to be charged Shs 20,000 like a farmer who owns 100 acres. So, that is very unfair.

THE CHAIRMAN: So what is the formulation we should consider? Who brought this amendment? Okay, you are improving on it; right. 

MR WOPUWA: That is 2(e). First of all, the key words there are “commercial farmers.” So, we are saying namely: large scale and intensive farmers producing crops. So once you have the word “commercial”, the large scale and intensive is qualified it can be considered to be like food or it is already qualified. That means we change 5 to 2 so that –(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, the (e) now should read: “Commercial farmers namely, large scale and intensive farmers producing crops covering two acres or more and cattle keepers with more than five exotic or 20 indigenous heads of cattle,” that’s what 2 should read. 

MR CHAIRMAN: Okay. 

MR WOPUWA: Because 20 -(Laughter) 

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Mr Chairman the concern here is that the list of farmers is not exhaustive because there are certain enterprises, which are not provided for like people say, rearing bees is a lucrative industry, fish farmers like Prof. Kabwegyere who I do not how many millions he gets per month but he is a large scale fish farmer. We have the likes of the flower industry, it is not exhaustive. So I want to find out if we would want to tax these other enterprises excluding those other enterprises because there are people engaged in farming like goat farming, which is becoming a very commercial industry and so on. I do not know whether it is going to be provided for while it is not captured because this is not exhaustive -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: While honourable members were trying to raise more money for the local governments, I do not want it to appear like we are smuggling back Graduated Tax. So, I accept the amendment but the details of what these honourable members and the levies they are asking for shall be in the guidelines because everything we want cannot be in this law. It will be in the regulations. Because when you talk of intensive farming, there are people who grow mushrooms and somebody can make Shs 100 million out of mushrooms in an area of less than this House. Some of these will fall within the guidelines, we cannot have everything in the law because this is ever expanding and it is elastic. It is ever expanding, we are looking and tapping sources of information and this is a wealth tax. We are going after wealth, not people. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, since you have 7, which has the details, why do you not leave out 5, 20, and 50? Why don’t you leave that and then leave that to 7.   

HON. MEMBERS: Yes, it is okay. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Then you would propose to delete these numbers and leave it to 7.

MR WADRI: Before the committee chairman comes, I do agree with and I think I have given the minister and the chairman a very good guideline. But on the other side I think we as Parliament will be interested in knowing because he is talking of guidelines and many times guidelines are developed by technocrats and they do not come back to Parliament. Shall we have an opportunity as Parliament to look at those guidelines before so that they become facts? Because in many cases guidelines are usually designed by technocrats and they do not constitute part of the law. 

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: I would like to inform hon. Wadri that whenever guidelines are developed by the ministry, they are laid on the Table of Parliament for scrutiny and whenever there is anything that is not palatable, Parliament has always advised us and we have complied. And in this case we intend to comply with due respect.  

THE CHAIRMAN: what will the amendment to this be? Can you propose it? 

MR WOPUWA: I propose that in 2(e) where “five acres” appears, where “20 exotic cows” appears or “50” appears, those figures should be deleted so that we only have the rest. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, I propose to improve on that provision because Members had proposed other items and, therefore, I would think following your guidance, it would have been safer for us to just say, “commercial farmers,” and then you cannot again start naming goats, you cannot start naming poultry when you have not named in the main Bill because regulations cannot be outside what we have provided here. If we do not provide for poultry, there is no way you will provide for it in regulations. 

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, when we were discussing the re-formulation of these Bills, we really have had a lot of concentration, I even looked for hon. Lyomoki if he had an idea and he did not come up, is it even in order fro him to take us back when we have voted in place?
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, paragraph 4 page 5 on rates of local services in respect to self-employed professionals, we handled paragraph 3, where we opened up Shs 100,000 and Shs 200,000 when we went back to 2(e), we went back and it was proposed by hon. Kyatuheire but now we are moving to paragraph 4. 

Paragraph 4 talks about rates of Local Service Tax in respect of –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, we are making law and the law needs to be very clear. On page 3, in 2(e) where the committee chairperson has conceded and amended and says we should delete the figures for the purpose of clear records, can you come up with how these provision now reads? You formulate it because without it, it is vague. It is not even a sentence! And here we are making a law; a law should not be vague. It should be so straight.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I want to agree with hon. Lyomoki that it should just be “commercial farmers.” Then the rest will be provided in the details in 7, otherwise, if you remove figures and leave words, it does not make any sense. We just leave it at, “commercial farmers” then the details will come later on with the “intensive farmers”, the large scale ones will come later in 7. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, you had a problem with 3.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a problem with 2(2)(c) on page 4. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Members of the Uganda Prisons Service?  

MS NAMAGGWA: Local Service Tax 2(C), page 4. I beg your pardon (e) not (c). 

THE CHAIRMAN: (e) is members of the Prisons Service.

MS NAMAGGWA: (e), Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Unemployed persons; these are exempted.

MS NAMAGGWA: Yes, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: These are exempted because they are employed.

MS NAMAGGWA: Yes, please.

THE CHAIRMAN: Persons, or peasants namely people engaged in subsistence or occasional economic activities, petty food vendors, sole petty artisans and jua kalis who are not established and are not business entities and people living in poverty who are unable to earn a minimum income to access basic necessities of life. What is the problem?

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Sir. I think this is first of all too wordy, secondly it attracts corruption. Because if I looked at anybody, I think most people are able to meet their basic needs. If there is nobody who can meet one’s basic needs then that is a big problem. So, which category are we talking about as far as meeting the basic need is concerned? 

THE CHAIRMAN: What is your main problem?

MS NAMAGGWA: What is the minimum income? Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Member. There are many ways in which we measure poverty. One of them is to measure the proportion of the population, which spends less than US $1 a day. And in the Uganda of today, 31 percent of the Ugandans are below the poverty line. That is what we use to measure the abject poverty.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you for that information. Mr Chairman, this Bill has a drafting problem and is not talking about -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you help us and bring your amendment the way you want to read it so that we consider it?

MS NAMAGGWA: I will find a problem in doing that because I have a general problem as far as the Bill is concerned; it is not realistic. And because of that I have a problem in making an amendment. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we move on? Move on to your amendment.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Chairman, I would like to re-arrange these in consonance with what the chairman here proposed when he says “The salaries of the following are exempted,” I would like to re-arrange, “The unemployed persons and peasants” remove it and make it (3) then move “members of the diplomatic corps” and make it (e) then the current No. 3 becomes No. 4. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: It is an issue of re-arranging. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS BINTU: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification on 2(2). Whereas I know that there are some categories of officers who are exempted from paying certain taxes, and these categories have been pointed out as those people who would be exempted from paying the local service taxes. The clarification I am seeking from the minister: we are setting a precedent where we have started violating the principle of equal rights. 

Two, I am seeking clarification on how these people who I know that some have got big farms and they contribute greatly especially to the hotel taxes, I am seeking clarification on how these people will - 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the exemption is in respect of the salaries. When he has a farm, he is not exempted. It is only in respect of remuneration from the service they render as a prisons’ officer. 

MS BINTU: Mr Chairman, the point that I was raising, I know most of them earn even more than most of the civil servants in this country and now when we start exempting them, we are actually setting a precedence, which may cause us problems in future. That is why I was seeking clarification: why should we not set a minimum standard or say that whoever gets such a salary should be legible to pay Local Service Tax instead of exempting certain categories and leaving out those people who would qualify to be exempted? 

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, in this arrangement here, we were trying to follow the law as it is. In Income Tax, these categories of people do not pay. By the nature of their work, they are really always mobile like the UPDF. But that is what it is in Income Tax law so we do not want to create a law which contradicts with the Income Tax law. Yeah, it is conventional almost throughout; UPDF soldiers and the like do not pay this type of taxes.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I think this puts us in a very difficult situation. If we are to go by the explanation given by the committee chairperson, even judicial officers have their allowances which are not taxed and yet I do not see them here as a category of those exempted from this. What hon. Jalia Bintu has said is quite true. Army officers world over have actually the most lucrative conditions and terms of service. I can see the general here looking at me seriously but it is true. If you went through –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform Kassiano Wadri that the consideration for exempting the Armed Forces is that they do a job with a daily risk and it is –(Interjections)- yes, these are people who die so that you stay alive. Do Members of Parliament fight wars?

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, Uganda does not have a provision anywhere in its laws to conscript people into the army by force. They go there willingly as a distinguished profession. Is the honourable minister therefore in order to stand here and say that they go there and risk their lives as a point of exemption?

THE CHAIRMAN: I am not making any ruling because we are wasting a lot of time. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I was giving information regarding taxing. In other developed countries, there is what we call death tax and this means that even if an individual passed away and somebody is inheriting his property, Government taxes that person to ensure that when this person was leaving and making that money, he could have used services of the people around that place. So eventually you may find that this tax is meant to benefit the people who were there and contributed to this. 

So, when we say that we subject soldiers to paying taxes, as long as people are making money and maybe even the smugglers - these are guarding the people who are making this money. When you say that they should also be subjected to tax, that would be demanding too much from them. And we should also match with international standards.

THE SPEAKER: How many times are we going to raise this matter? We considered this matter when the minister put in the boda-boda; now we are going back to the same thing. When are we going to move? 

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, when you could not make a ruling, I was a little disturbed; we rely on you both as a chairman of this session and as a learned lawyer. Every occupation has got its occupational hazards. We have lost doctors in the course of their duty while trying to save lives from Ebola. We have senior civil servants who are diligently serving this country in various capacities and they pay taxes. Honestly, what we are asking is that if the cry is really genuine that local governments in order to carry out and deliver service are hindered by lack of funds, let us revisit these categories of people whom we are exempting because the Army has been a professionalised. What does it mean to be professionalised?

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: These were considered in the general debate and we have now come to consider the clauses. You should have raised this matter in the general report. Is he in order to start a general debate at this stage of the proceedings? 

THE CHAIRMAN: The genesis of this matter was that during the general debate - I am the one who actually raised it - I asked about a General having a big farm and cattle and they clarified that this was intended only for the salaries they earn. And then somebody else said we should include the boda-boda. That is why this amendment came in and it was accepted. We voted on it and we accepted it. It is in respect of the salaries the officers’ get? But then we are going back; when are we going to finish this?

MR MATHIAS B. NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I think hon. Jalia Bintu had a point, we are setting a precedent. We are the very people who set up the Equal Opportunities Act. We are now saying that able bodied people that earn like the rest of us and have occupational hazards like all the others – we are saying that they are not going to pay. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The Equal Opportunity Act meant what; that people should not be exempted by the Constitution?

MR MATHIAS B. NSUBUGA: That we are all equal before the law.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Equal Opportunity Act is to help the disadvantaged people – but there are exemptions in the Constitution any way. In the Constitution, some people do not pay tax.

MR M. NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I think before we approve this, we need to have the salary structure of these people going to be exempted otherwise we cannot accept this.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: If we are equal in the eyes of the law, do you know that soldier go to General Court Martial and you do not? Did you bare that in mind? Is there a law in the civil law which talks about cowardice in action; are you subjected to the firing-squad if you run away from the battle?

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman and honourable members. I think there are some issue that won’t be handled under this Bill, and if Members had read the report, on page 7, bullet 3, there is a reference and a precedent already set which we may not necessarily go over. 

The chairman of the Local Government Committee has alluded to it that under the tax exemptions, Uganda Police, Uganda Prisons and the Members of the Uganda Armed Forces are exempted from paying certain territorial taxes that may be imposed on their salaried for any period of time as determined by the Minister of Finance. Humanisation of the legislation is the reason why this category of people’s salaries has been exempted from the Local Service Tax. 

However, their wealth and other sources of income are not exempted. So these people will pay tax except for their salaries. I want to beg the indulgence of this House- my husband is a major in the UPDF and that is no secret. But I want to beg for the indulgence of this House –

THE CHAIRMAN: But the question is, are we revisiting a provision which we had earlier considered and passed? -[Hon Members: “No”]- We can have a re-commital but we cannot have it before we finish the process.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, on 2(d): local defence forces - is there a law establishing these local defence forces, prescribing their manner of recruitment, deployment and salaries? The experience I have in my district is completely different, different in the sense that we do not seem to have a clear guideline on how these people are recruited, deployed, and paid. Is there such a law?

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, I want to help my colleague there. When we were passing the UPDF Act, the local defence forces were treated as part of the reserve forces and it was done here. So, there is a law.

Now, Mr Chairman, following the renumbering of the paragraphs, paragraph 3 became 4. Now, we are looking at paragraph 5, which was initially 4. We propose that we add another bracket down there – there is that gap of Shs 1 million, where people pay Shs 100,000; amount of monthly income earned. We propose that we add there Shs 500,0000 to Shs 900,000 and the rate of Local Service Tax would be Shs 50,000. 

MR BANYENZAKI: The spirit under which we are exempting UPDF, Uganda Prisons Service –

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I said we cannot do it. You recommit. We cannot keep on back-tracking. So, I put the question on the proposal by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, in new paragraph 6, we propose that in the amount of monthly income earned, we put there Shs 100,000 to Shs 200,000 so that the rate of Local Service Tax per year is Shs 5,000. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that we substitute the existing table with a new table as shown below: the heading will be, “Rate of Local Service Tax in respect of commercial farmers”. Then, the Local Service Tax on commercial farmers producing on a large scale - Pardon me; it should read: “The Local Service Tax on commercial farmers -” There, let us delete, “Producing on a large scale -” and have it read, “Shall be levied as follows: the Local Service tax on commercial farmers shall be levied as follows -” we replace that table which is part of the amendment. I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any contribution on that or I put the question?

MR BARYOMUNSI: MR Chairman, earlier on, we had made an amendment on the commercial farmers. I think this is the time where we should introduce the intensive farmers: those categories of poultry, bee keeping and fishing farming; we had promised to bring it in at this stage. 

MR ODIT: Mr Chairman at this stage, I think it is a very difficult exercise to propose some draft because the table has mixed up seasonal crops, plantation crops, short term, annual, cereals and so forth. So, I think they need to first of all, categorise the type of enterprises which will attract taxes, because if I see banana - this is -(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman in view of the amendments we had on clause 2 (2) (e) earlier on, I propose that these details in this table be deleted totally so that it will be part of the regulations by the minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: Because the minister will bring the regulations before us any way. Is that okay?

MR ODIT: I think that will make sense in that probably the minister will have had time to consult the professional people to provide sufficient information to guide in identifying the areas that will attract the taxes.

THE CHAIRMAN: So the amendment is to delete. Can I put the question? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The clause is deleted and then if it is deleted we cannot have any amendments.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that we put a transitional provision immediately after the last paragraph to read as follows: “Notwithstanding the provision of this Act, Government should continue to contribute the amount of Shs 45 billion for continuous period of years to compensate for the vacuum created by the abolished GT.”

The justification is to cater for the vacuum created by the abolition of GT and also to protect the local governments from the Ministry of Finance, as it was last time.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, our tax collections are improving year in year out. I just wanted to slightly amend to say, “to contribute the amount of at least Shs 45 billion” so that in case we raise more, Government should not be tied to the exact figure. It could be raised higher. So, we add “at least 45 billion.”

MR WOPUWA: I concede

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, following the deletion of 7, I would like to move an amendment for a new 7, to the effect that the rates of the local service tax in respect of commercial farmers shall be determined by the minister in the regulations -(Interjections)- with the approval of Parliament. (Interjections) because –(Interjections)- honourable members, Chairperson, you have accepted that you are going to have this in the regulations, but there is no reference in this Bill that they will be determined in the regulations, that is what I am trying to bring in. You can assist me on the framing.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what she is saying is that having deleted what had been there in the hope that the Minister will do this in the regulations, let us be categoric in that this will be done by the regulations that will be laid by the Minister before Parliament.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I have got reservations. This year, we were here trying to undo a statutory instrument which was issued by the Minister of Internal Affairs in an attempt to operationalise the Police Act. 

Many times the ministers having developed such guidelines with their technocrats bring these documents and they are laid on the Table of Parliament and they do not attract debate and they are enforced. Is it going to be so specific this time before it is tabled, that we shall be given an opportunity to debate it and to discuss it before it is implemented?

THE CHAIRMAN: For approval.

MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA: We have proposed that we shall draft the regulations and put these tables and bring them before Parliament and we shall seek the consent of Parliament. I therefore promise. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Point taken, General.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title stands the Title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.13
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the Whole House reports there to.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
 
4.13
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2007” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.14
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2007

4.13
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move –(Interruption)


DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, before the hon. Minister comes in I wanted to move for a recomittal.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, let him do so before I put the question. Hon. Minister, you move your motion.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitle, “The Local Government Amendment Bill, 2007” be read for the third time and pass. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR RECOMMITAL

4.16
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very, much, Mr Speaker. I just want to request that we recommit clause 2 (2) of the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: The motion is that we recommit clause 2 (2) of the Bill. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2007

4.18
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Chairman and I want to thank members for accepting to have clause 2 (2) recommitted. We did have an extensive discussion on the categories to be exempted from paying the Local Service Tax and I was convinced with the justifications for the categories outlined. However, the purpose of my request for a recommital is to expand the bracket and include teachers and medical workers to be among the categories to be exempted from the Local Service Tax. Thank you. (Applause)

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I thank the rationale of this Bill is to facilitate the local governments to operate. I also believe that much of the source of this revenue, to a greater extent, will be derived from the salary earners. Much as the element of hotels and commercial farmers is embedded in it, there are many districts, which do not have these facilities yet many of these districts also derive their taxes from salary earners. 

So, without any reservations, much as I sympathize with the poor conditions of teachers, they constitute the bulky of the salary earners in this country. The moment we strike them off this list, I can assure you, the essence of this Bill will have collapsed – [Hon. Members: “Let it collapse.”] It will have collapsed because education as a service and as a ministry is the largest employer in this country. In every village that you go to you will find a teacher. So, if we strike their names from this list, we will have a very big problem in achieving the purpose, aims and objectives of this Bill. Unless we are saying that during the coming budgeting process, we are going to have special attention to increase salaries so that the threshold can be raised. Otherwise, striking them out is what I am afraid will fail the implementation of this Bill? I beg to move.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, we are now acting like doctors. A patient comes, he is sick and when you administer the injection it is painful, but at the end of it the patient recovers. If you look at pages 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 of the report, you realise that this category of workers; the teachers, form the bulk of the workers in local governments. We are trying to enlarge the tax base so that local governments are able to perform. 

Currently, Mr Chairman, in the many local governments that we have visited local council IIIs are not conducting business because they cannot even to buy stationery. It is therefore, becoming a problem to attract good quality councilors in the local government councils because of the non-payments and facilitation there. In view of this, I want to strongly beg that we include the teachers as they are. This is because we are talking about somebody who earns Shs 100,000 per month and he is going to pay only Shs 5000 in a year; it is like Shs 200 per month. Let us be bold; let us be courageous and support this position for the benefit of our country.

THE CHAIRMAN: There was a proposal to recommit clause 2 (2) and you have heard Dr Baryomunsi proposing the exemptions. I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

DR LYOMOKI: We have an additional amendment –

THE CHAIRMAN: You never asked for a recommital.

DR LYOMOKI: It was on the same clause, Mr Chairman.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.22
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. (Rtd.) Otafiire): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed.)

(The House resumed, The Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.23
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2007” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.24
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is to adopt the report of the Committee of the Whole House on Committal. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2007

4.25
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2007” be read for a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2007” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED 
“THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT NO. 3) ACT, 2007”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, but I want to remind you about the procedure, which is clear in our Rules. When we go to the committee stage, we go into details on all the clauses; we amend; we add this and the other. Now, if somebody thinks that we overlooked a certain provision(s), when the owner of the motion moves that the Bill to be read the third time and do pass, before I put the question, anybody who is interested in re-committal should come in at that point. And when we recommit, we only consider that provision for which a re-committal was sought. We do not open the entire Bill for other considerations. So, this time we only went in because of what hon. Baryomunsi wanted to say and having said it, you do not use that opportunity to bring in other things. That is not part of our Rules. I hope it is appreciated. 

4.25
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr John Arumadri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have stood up as the Shadow Minister for Local Government. I could not participate actively during the debate but it is my duty to sound this caution to Government. Now that we have got a law in place, Government must be mindful of the difficulties and the pitfalls in the administration of this tax. Let it not be lost on Government that the Graduated Tax which was abolished was abolished mainly due to the fact that it was not properly administered. 

I also want to caution Government that you can trust Ugandans. Many of them will try to escape from their riches in order to be included in the poverty bracket. Shakespeare said that even the devil will quote the Bible for his own purpose. I have a very interesting example. The late Vice President, H.E. Dr Samson Kisekka said that he was also an orphan. (Laughter) The importance of that statement was that those amenities which will be available for orphans should also be extended to him. 

He went further to say that he was also a displaced person; that he was displaced from Temangalo to Kololo. (Laughter) The importance of this was also to say that he was entitled to the relief aid which was going to the IDP camps. I say this because this law, which we have made is supposed to energise the running of local governments and Government now must be very worried of people who will want to join the poverty bracket in which case we would have made this law in vain. Mr Speaker, I thought I should sound this so that we will be careful of what is a head of us. I thank you.

4.29
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would also like sound a warning to all of us. The purpose of this instrument, which we have made is to provide for Local governments to raise incomes so that they can run their affairs at that level. And here again, we noticed significantly that some of the areas, which are mentioned as the ones from where we are supposed to collect this money are noticeably absent in many local governments especially in rural areas like Obongi. 

When you talk of hotels, you may not find one and when you talk of the categories of people who are supposed to be exempted here, they are the majority in a place like Moyo and Obongi. Actually, those who are said to be employed there, apart from the teachers, the medical workers, the Police officers, the UPDF in terms of the LDUs, yet these ones are the ones we have exempted. Alright. The point here is this law is not going to cure the problem of shortage of funds for running of local governments. We should therefore find a way of covering the gaps that may arise. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, we have just concluded the debate on the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill. Perhaps some members have not been here since morning. We have been debating the report and we have gone through the amendments and now clearly, Members are trying to open debate to discuss and to warn. Are they procedurally correct to attempt to open debate on a Bill we have just concluded?

THE SPEAKER: The next item I expected after dealing with the Bill was the Audit Bill but it seems you have done a lot of work and so we cannot consider this Audit Bill. We shall consider this Audit Bill tomorrow as agreed. Between 10.00 a.m. and 12.00 we shall have finished. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 4.31 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 18 April 2008 at 10.00 .a.m.)


