Thursday, 15 April 2004

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I want to inform you that there has been a change of venue for a national workshop on GMOs, from where it was supposed to be, to the International Conference Center. It is to take place on 20th April   starting at 9.00 a.m. Please, take note.

2.58
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, I want to move under rule 17(3) of our Rules of Procedure that we vary the Order Paper so that item No.5 on the Order Paper comes to item No.3 and then item No.3 goes to item No.4 and item No.4 goes to item No.5. 

Mr Speaker, item No.5 is a motion seeking leave of this House to introduce a Private Members’ Bill in respect of Graduated Tax. Sir, this is a matter, which has been before this House or within the office of the Clerk for a very long time, and yet it is only a preliminary move to introduce the Bill. It is a matter, which will not take this House a long time. It is a matter on which a number of us have had opportunity to make a lot of consultations. It is a matter upon which we have had an outside seminar and so, it is a matter which will not take this House a long time to dispose of and yet, Sir, if we do not handle it expeditiously, we run into the problem of going into the budget circle which starts next week. Therefore, chances are that it will spill over to the next Session. I beg that we vary the Order Paper so that we give this matter about 30 minutes or so and dispose of it. I move, Sir. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have heard the motion; and apparently it is supported. Otherwise if it were not supported, I would not entertain it. Should I put the question to it? Is there any objection being raised? It seems there is no objection. Therefore, I am varying the Order Paper. But first let me put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now the Order Paper is varied. We have item 5 now as item No.3.  

3.02
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, I have a problem. I am sorry to interfere with what the Clerk was doing. There is a big problem in Kaliro. As we speak now, the riot Police has been mobilized in Kaliro Town. When the residents were sleeping they woke up with the riot Police, fully armed with tear gas, in their midst. The crime they have committed was to complain to the RDC that the Town Clerk who was posted in Kaliro Town Council has swindled the first amount of money, which was sent to run the Town Council.  

Mr Speaker, I am worried that since the people have been ferried from other areas into Kaliro Town Council, there could be death. I think this is a matter, which is very important and to which I must draw your attention so that the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Local Government immediately take action. The people have been complaining for the last, I think almost a year now - about the Town Clerk who is actually treating citizens as though they were dogs and this is hurting us a lot. We have been patient, but if things become worse, do not blame me because I have reported it to you personally in front of the august House of this country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope now the ministers concerned have noted that there is a serious problem in Kaliro. So the ministers concerned take note and then take the necessary action, please.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE 
A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

3.04
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Mr Speaker, the House is overwhelmingly in favour of me moving this motion now, and I am more than ready because this motion has been pending for the last six years. (Applause) However, with statesmanship and matters of democracy, there have been consultations going on. We have been consulting at a reasonably high level and my stakeholders are convinced that this motion must be moved today. 

We have had intercessions from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, His Excellency the Vice-President, and the Attorney-General, and I want to beg the indulgence of my stakeholders that they listen to these people for their view on seeking their indulgence that this motion and your commitment, Sir, that this motion could wait for the ongoing consultations and be moved on Tuesday. Precisely, that is why I think they should be given a chance to be heard also and if the House overwhelmingly says, “We move now,” I would like to move with the House. I am at your disposal, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard from the mover himself. He is engaged in consultations with other stakeholders so that they reach a consensus before the motion is brought. That is the owner of the motion. He has told you that he is making consultations with other stakeholders whom he wants to also make their position known to you before you proceed. I think he is being fair. 

I remember hon. Okulo Epak has said six years ago - yes, I know this motion was brought here some time back, but because he was fair in that he was providing a solution in case the motion is removed, it could cause a problem. Because he was being fair, in doing so he found himself with a constitutional problem. Now he does not want this constitutional problem to arise; that is why he is making consultations. I had given him the opportunity to come and move it but before he moved, he has told you what is going on. It is fair for him so that he does not face problems, that we also hear the other side and then we proceed. Well, that is his request. He is the mover and I think he should not be opposed because he wants his motion to sell.  

3.07
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have very high regard for hon. Dr Okulo Epak and I want to confirm that I did ask him to give us more time to consult because matters relating to Graduated Tax, to money, are very critical. There may also be constitutional implications of this matter, especially with regard to Article 93. Therefore we have to ensure that all the intricate constitutional, political and financial aspects of this matter are fully considered, and then we move together. I thank you.

3.08
THE ATTORNEY-GNERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to confirm that I was one of three ministers who were detailed by Cabinet to go and meet the mover of the motion, the hon. Dr Okulo Epak and you. Indeed this is a matter, which has been on the drawing board for quite some time and it needs to be disposed of. However, considering the nature of the motion, there is need to do a bit more consultation, especially with some of the stakeholders including the donor community, which works very closely with Government, and the fact that the hon. Dr Okulo Epak was disposed –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, a motion was raised to change the Order Paper. You gave us an opportunity to object to the changing of the Order Paper. The mover of the motion was aware and the people he is consulting were aware too.  

A few seconds ago, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister stood to argue against the motion. Once again the Attorney-General, in the same vein, is literally arguing against the motion before you have given the House the opportunity to debate it. Is it in order, therefore, for the two leading members of the frontbench to start debating a motion, which you have requested that it be postponed to next Tuesday? Are they in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No, there is nothing out of order. What happened is that this motion is in the name of Dr Okulo Epak, and I called upon him to move his motion. But before he did, he gave us a background, and he wanted the other people he has been consulting with to tell you their problem so that we know how to proceed. Let us hear them. It is not about the motion; we have not started talking about the motion. He is talking about moving it today or another day. That is what he is on –(Interjection)- there is no information to give. Let us proceed.

MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I was going to say that, yes, we had a very cordial exchange with hon. Dr Okulo Epak, and in fact reached a position where we think it was desirable to differ the debate from today for purposes of concluding this consultation and then we would be able, as it were, to move together. As Attorney-General I –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order following a statement, which has been made by the Attorney-General, which I think undermines the sovereignty of this country, Uganda. This is with reference to Article 1 of the Constitution. The Attorney-General has stated that the matter should be delayed so that he and others consult the donors. In accordance with Article 1, which I want to read, that statement is faulty.

Article 1 reads; “All power belongs to the people, who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution.” Is it in order for the Attorney-General to have made a statement, which encroaches on the sovereignty of the people that should decide the matter he is talking about?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what you should appreciate is that officially this is a motion by hon. Dr Okulo Epak; it is not by any other member. Any other member can second it but the motion belongs to him. The Attorney-General who was on the Floor was just telling the Members of Parliament - we are representing the people you are talking of - so he was addressing representatives of the people. So, he was in order.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, bearing in mind that the mover of the motion has said to this House that he has postponed his motion to go and consult other stakeholders; I would have thought that it is better that we remove it and then go to other business rather than people debating it while we are sitting and we are the people who supported the whole thing.

THE SPEAKER: No; I think what the mover was trying to do is to say that although he was privy to consultations going on, he wanted the House also to hear from the people he was consulting so that you are actually clear. So, should we move to say this is that, we should be clear about the kind of consultations that were done. That is what I think the Attorney-General is trying to do. Please, bear with us, let us hear him then dispose of this matter in one way or the other.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, my colleague hon. Ben Wacha moved a motion to alter the Order Paper and it was voted on. We altered the Order Paper. Hon. Okulo Epak says it has been on and the stakeholders have been consulted for the last six years. What more do you want? Hon. Epak, if you want to move, move; if you want to withdrawal, withdraw it; but you have the overwhelming support of this House.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we cleared hon. Ben Wacha’s motion. Hon. Ben Wacha’s motion was carried and therefore we moved item 5 to item 3. Now in item 3, it does not mean that the mover cannot say, “Well, for the time being I used this and the other.” This is what we are trying to do. We are getting the background so that we know what to do. But we have not started dealing with the motion itself and we are no longer dealing with hon. Ben Wacha’s motion because that was carried and we have effected it. Let us listen and see how we proceed. Yes, Attorney-General.

MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was really responding to what the mover of the motion said, namely that those of us who are involved in consultation should be given an opportunity to be heard in order to appreciate his position. That is all I am really saying, and to confirm this, indeed we consulted; we took a certain position but because of his other stakeholders he was consulting, that is why he is making it clear here also that he did make those steps and we are just confirming. He took those steps and we are confirming what he has said -(Mr Alintuma Nsambu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: You want guidance, do we move now because none of you has said what we have to do.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: I am just seeking clarification from Mr Okulo Epak. Is it that the government headed by His Excellency, a man of the people, the President of Uganda who also knows that always the population is with him; is it that his Government has problems in removing Graduated Tax? Is that why this motion cannot just be moved like that, or is it that the people of Uganda will not be happy if Graduated Tax is removed? That is the clarification I am seeking, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us clear hon. Nsambu; he sought clarification from the mover.

MR WACHA: I thought you wanted to speak to those people you gave permission to talk to on the issues that they have raised because hon. Okulo Epak said, “These honourable members had a position to present to the House.” Some of us who disagree with that position should also be given a chance to answer them in that context before -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You will be given a chance, but each one of us is entitled to make his position heard. You will be given a chance. 

DR OKULO EPAK: I want to thank hon. Nsambu very much for his commitment to support this motion. This is a people’s motion and I think everybody is interested in this motion from the bottom to the top. The only thing that really has disappointed me is that this issue has been here for six years. At this time. we are having this hectic arrangement, which has created for me a bit of problem. I am a person who likes to negotiate and get understanding but I do not even want to stand here and tell you the difficulties I have faced. But I still want to give the people with whom we have been consulting the benefit of expressing their views to my supporters, what they have used. Their ultimate reaction will give me the way forward then I can move the motion and we move forward, but I must give them the benefit of explaining so that my supporters know something has been going on behind their back.  

Hon. Nsambu, you are a strong supporter of this motion and I think you should not have fear that anything is underway to torpedo it. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, it seems that the House has been waiting to give hon. Okulo Epak leave to introduce his Bill. We have been anxiously waiting and they want him to get on with it but at the back of my mind it appears to be that hon. Okulo Epak, with the discussions he is having with other stakeholders, it may not be necessary to move this motion. But I was wondering whether in view of the demand for the motion to be moved, after all leave can be given, whether or not he succeeds in making the need for a Bill to be made. 

For instance, if the government decided, as a result of the various things that we have heard, that Graduated Tax is abolished; is it not possible for hon. Okulo Epak later to withdraw his motion so that he does not proceed with it? Then at least people who want the motion to be moved will be satisfied and the motion is moved. And if there is no need for it in future, he can withdraw it and we can proceed. This is a procedural matter, which I thought I would bring up.

THE SPEAKER: Precisely. Honourable members, the procedure is going to be like this. Assuming the motion is moved today or another day, it will be to grant leave to the mover to start preparing the necessary instrument that would cause the abolition of Graduated Tax. It is not what is going to be done today or the next day that will remove the Graduated Tax. He is saying that there will be sufficient time after leave has been - it is only leave so that he can start drafting this and the other, but there will be time to continue with the negotiations. That is precisely what it is. 

But apparently he has not moved it because as far as I see he saying - this is my interpretation - he is making progress because he may succeed today but then he gets hurdles after he has been granted leave. So, he is trying to make consultations so that those hurdles that may prevent him from even introducing the instrument are removed. That is what is behind his move, I think.

I must say that before I came in, they consulted me over this matter and I said either you move today, if not today, I was saying I would reserve Tuesday to give whoever is making consultations to finalize them so that on Tuesday this matter is finally dealt with. This is what I had suggested. This is what I told hon. Okulo Epak in the presence of hon. Ben Wacha and in the presence of the Attorney-General. I said, “Well, it is up to you.” Earlier the mover had given you the background. He is trying to make sure that eventually when he gets the leave his attempts are not aborted. 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, this being a peasants’ motion, it touches on the peasants of this country. It is a vital motion, which this House should allow hon. Okulo Epak to move. This motion seeking leave should be granted. Once it is granted, we could wait until Tuesday so that hon. Okulo Epak consults with the Executive. But I would beg this House that while this motion is seeking leave, this House grants Hon. Okulo Epak to move it. Meanwhile he can go on discussing with the relevant parties –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But what you are saying will be a contribution to his motion. Let him move the motion if he wants, then you can make that contribution.  

DR OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr Speaker. By the way I do not want to lose the confidence of the people who have overwhelmingly supported this motion –(Applause)– I am, therefore, seeking your permission to move the motion for the introduction of a Private Member’s Bill moved under rule 97(1) of our Rules of Procedure.  

Whereas Article 191(1) of the Constitution empowers local governments to levy, charge and appropriate fees and taxes in accordance with any law enacted by Parliament by virtue of Article 152(1) of the Constitution; 

And whereas Articles 191(2) lists Personal Graduated Tax among the fees and taxes to be levied, charged, collected and appropriated under Article 152(1) of the Constitution; 

And whereas section 81(1) of the Local Government’s Act, 1997 permits local governments to levy, charge and collect amongst others fees and taxes and Personal Graduated Tax;

And whereas part II of the Fifth Schedule of the Local Governments Act, 1997 establishes the powers, procedures and penalties to levy, charge and collect Personal Graduated Tax; 

And whereas a research undertaken by the United Nations Center for Human Settlements (Habitat) in East Africa and the research service of Parliament indicates that there are several inequities and cruelties associated with the administration of Personal Graduated Tax; 

And whereas other viable and less demeaning options exist for raising revenue for local governments, no or little attempt has been undertaken to utilize them; 

And whereas Parliament is aware that it is the responsibility of the Executive to institute measures to ameliorate the consequences on the revenues of local governments resulting from the abolition of Personal Graduated Tax;

Now this motion is moved, therefore, that this House accepts the introduction of a bill for an Act entitled “The Local Governments (Amendments) Act, 2003” attached hereto, and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading. I beg to move.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not standing to oppose what he is moving, but I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General on what will be the impact if such a move is taken and we pronounce ourselves on Article 93 of the Constitution? I want to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: He is just seeking leave; leave, which he may or may not use. The instrument that will affect Article 93 will come depending on the type of the law he will bring. When the law is produced, it will be subjected to scrutiny, including testing it and measuring it with Article 93. Should it be found to be conflicting with Article 93, then definitely it will fail. But since we do not see the Bill now, we are only seeking permission to allow him go to his office, assisted by the Parliamentary Counsel, to draw it. He must make sure that whatever he produces as a result of permission granted does not conflict with express provision of the law, and we shall test it.  
 
MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification. This Article 93 talks not only about a Bill but also a motion. With your permission the Article reads; “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government- 

(a) Proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following:
 
(i) The imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction.” 

So, it talks of both a Bill and a motion. So, I do not know how we can get over this by confining ourselves just to a Bill. What about this motion?  

THE SPEAKER: I think I am able to answer that. This motion is simply to go on record that hon. Okulo Epak has this day been granted leave to attempt to move a Private Member’s Bill, which we do not know how it looks like. And this motion does not abolish the payment of Graduated Tax. It does not affect any financial arrangement currently obtaining. It is the motion that would – if the motion was saying as of today we are abolishing Graduated Tax - that motion would be incompetent. Therefore, let us wait to see the format of the instrument he will present, and then it is that format we shall scrutinise and see whether the policy behind is in conflict with Article 93. Could you now justify your motion?

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, before I justify my motion, I would like with a lot of apology to expunge the name of hon. Kakooza James, Member of Parliament for Kabula County, who was enlisted among the supporters but who has approached me to say that he has never expressed any support for the abolition of Personal Graduated Tax. By whatever accident his name flew onto this page, I regret. (Laughter). 

But I am quite sure I have an inexhaustible potential list to replace this singular person.  

The origin and the contribution of Personal Graduated Tax to local revenue: what is called Personal Graduated Tax today was originally called poll tax, in the colonial time. Poll tax was a flat rate paid by every male citizen of the age 18 years and above. It became a Graduated Tax based on income brackets, after independence, and was levied on every adult male and female citizen though it was and still is rare for women to pay. 

When it became Graduated Tax based on income, it became a form of income tax but using very crude methods of assessment.  

The British colonial administration introduced poll tax in all its colonies in order to include the natives into payment of direct tax; in order to introduce them to the money economy; and above all to force them to work for money instead of the forced labour and to perform public works, which was then practiced. The fact that it forced people to work and that it was compulsory to pay it, caused a lot of resentment. This resentment persisted even after independence and for the additional reasons that the assessment and method of collection are seen as being unfair because of its colonial legacy.  

Many former British colonies abolished it after independence but paradoxically the British Prime Minister, Mrs Margaret Thatcher, introduced a poll tax in Britain in the 1990s. It caused such large-scale rebellion in the country, including from her Cabinet. After some exercise in collecting it, its cost of collection and administration was found to be colossal. By the time it was abolished it had amounted to pounds 4,000 million. It was not only abolished after a short period but it was also the main cause of her downfall as well. 

I have attached an annex of extracts from the paper entitled, The Flagship Sets Sail by Hugo Young in 1991 on this tax and property tax as well. It provides very good information, and makes for good reading too.  

A study based on recent data and other studies commissioned by other interests indicate that although Personal Graduated Tax is the most important and highest contributor to revenue of local authorities, its popularity, importance and overall contribution in terms of all sources of revenue to local authorities is actually declining.  

In the period 1996/97 to 2000/01, it contributed about 55 percent and 76 percent, or an average of 65 percent, to the local revenue of district councils; while it contributed 3 percent to 18 percent, or an average of 90 percent, to their total revenue. In the same period, for urban councils it contributed an average of 32 percent of their local revenue and 26 percent of their total revenue. 

There are extreme cases like in Kitgum District where it was a mere 6.4 percent and in Moroto Municipality where it was only 11.7 percent. This data shows that the local governments depend on a higher percentage of over 70 percent on other sources of financing their recurrent and development expenditure.  

It is estimated on the average that the tax generated is Shs 50 to 60 billion annually and this is about 3.8 to 4.5 percent of the total collection of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), of Shs 1,329 billion, for instance, in the year 2002.  

The study revealed that the administration of the tax is fraught with many problems. It is difficult to enumerate, assess and collect. It has a very high social nuisance value. As such people hate and evade it. The enforcement and collection are handled brutally. The collection cost can be as high as 30 percent to 50 percent of the amount collected. There were instances in Sembabule where chiefs spent four times the amount they collected. 

Corruption and lack of accountability in the assessment, collection and utilization process is high and inevitable. On the average, only 61 percent of the target is met. The taxes have on many occasions led to riots in some districts such as Kamuli and Iganga.  

The study entitled, “The Evaluation of Graduated Tax in Uganda” has analysed many studies and workshops on Personal Graduated Tax and many problems associated with it are enumerated as well as corroborated by each study. But none of the studies recommend that the tax should be abolished and significantly, or because of it, none of them suggested alternative sources of revenue to local governments to replace Personal Graduated Tax.  

The reasons and comments on their applications are as follows:  

a) Their failure to recognize the fact that since the central government has all along provided grants to local governments. It pre-supposes that local authorities are not and will never be able to raise sufficient revenue from local sources to finance their budgets. This is a fact, which other former colonial countries recognized and weighed against the overwhelming problems of administering Personal Graduated Tax, and took a bold decision to abolish it altogether.  

b) The fear that local governments would lose a major source of revenue. The truth is that the tax is progressively accounting for a small and decreasing proportion of the total revenue of local governments. In addition, or because of it, local governments have not been innovative in expanding their local revenue base.  

c) Inaptitude by the researchers to study and recommend alternative sources of revenue to replace Graduated Tax. It is pointless for them to merely conclude that unless viable alternatives are found, the tax should be retained. This is unrealistic and idle because other countries with similar experiences took steps to abolish the tax.  

Another honourable member wants her name removed, hon. Akwero Odwong Jane, Member of Parliament, Kitgum. Your name is accordingly removed.

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Mr Speaker, my name was erroneously left out. It was supposed to be included amongst the seconders. (Laughter)

DR OKULO EPAK: Oh! Please, excuse me, I am very sorry. I withdraw that statement and welcome hon. Akwero Odwong for joining the supporters of the motion. I am very sorry.  

d) The negative social aspects of the tax are relegated in preference to the revenue considerations and yet it is these social factors, which negate the administration and people’s willingness to pay the tax. Failure to accept that recommendations by previous studies on improving the administration of the tax failed and new ones are likely to face the same fate.  

Overall problems associated with the tax

Besides the problems identified by the studies, the following arguments should be noted:

1. It is the only strange colonial legacy still haunting our society. The Constituent Assembly took a bold step to reverse the nationalization of land in 1900, and returned it to the people. We can also save the people from the vagaries of Personal Graduated Tax.

2. The tax being ideally an income tax is not different from Pay As You Earn (PAYE), and as such it constitutes levying of the same tax twice. This is contrary to any tax policy.

3. The tax is levied across the board, including the poorest of the poor, and as such it is counter-productive to the government’s poverty eradication strategy. Reports on participatory assessment of poverty eradication have all along pointed out this serious omission. As a matter of fact, in a good situation, people would rather get welfare benefit handouts than get deprived of the little resource they can earn through their sweat.

4. It is highly vulnerable to political manipulation and agitation and recent experiences in the presidential, parliamentary and local elections bear testimony to this fact. Since that time, up to today, the payment of this tax has become even more problematic. And I cannot anticipate a time when it is not going to arise again in the next elections. So, why should you make it a perennial election problem?  

5. It is regressive and inequitable. In the rural areas people do get discouraged from increasing their wealth and productivity in order to avoid paying higher tax. They actually hide their property. Persons of widely ranging incomes are grouped in bands in which they pay the same amount. This is un-realistic.  

6. It has on many occasions resulted in riots and death in some districts.  

7. It is hard for the public to appreciate and for the local authorities to demonstrate its impact. 

8. Even the local leaders and authorities do not like it because it makes them unpopular and compromises them, but they feel they have to have it for the so-called lack of a better alternative and because it is assumed it is the highest source of local revenue for local governments.  

9. The method of collection is time-consuming, coercive, offensive and sometimes de-humanising. Indeed, it has on many occasions resulted into deaths.  

10. It is basically a revenue operation, which has blinded local authorities from exploring and getting better sources of revenue and widening their tax base. It has created a dependency syndrome. 

Mr Speaker, I move this motion after a lot of consultations with persons in responsible positions, but in particular, after holding a national workshop in which people participated from districts. Therefore, this is a motion, which has been handled most transparently. Even the motion was circulated very early, and I had even attached the justifications. It has been handled very transparently in the interests of the peasants. I beg to move.

3.53
MR MICHAEL OGOLA (West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Okulo Epak for the motion that he has just moved on this very important topic, which is of great interest to every constituency represented here. I believe it is also in the interests of those who have no constituencies. But what I want to request is that there are some people who had indicated interests as seconders to this motion. May I get the assurance of the hon. Okulo Epak that their names will be reflected appropriately even though you have already moved this motion? I am making this request because there are very many people in this House and Mr Speaker, may I know whether he can give us this assurance? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There is no reason to do so since the motion has already been copied to members. The question of adding another name does not arise. If you are supporting it, stand here and give your support. Have you finished your contribution?

MR OGOLA AKISOFERI: Well, yes, but I could go on if you wish, your honour.

3.51
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, I will be brief in seconding this motion. Hon. Okulo Epak said this is a primitive method of collecting taxes. I could not disagree. In East Africa it is only Uganda, which is still collecting Graduated Tax. A lot of other Commonwealth countries no longer have this tax on their legislation. That is number one.

Number two; Sir, you should go to the villages during the time when these taxes are being collected. It is not only dehumanising; it is humiliating. People are tied like chicken, to ropes. People are beaten. People find themselves having to hide away from their houses. I mean, what sort of tax is this? Taxation should be imposed and collected with happiness, with the knowledge that it is going to help but not with the knowledge that it is going to dehumanise, with the knowledge that it is going to be a method of intimidating, or a method of humiliating the taxpayer. 

Number three; hon. Okulo Epak indicated the amount of money, which is collected annually on these taxes. I think we should come out openly and say that the amount of money, which is being collected, is not worth the amount of effort, which is put by the tax collectors into collecting this tax. There is no district in Uganda, which can say that it supplements its tax base with Graduated Tax, there is no Government. If anything, a lot of the taxes end up being swallowed up because even the central government knows that this tax is no longer of importance in its arithmetic.

Mr Speaker, I would want this House to accept that we introduce this Bill to this House and then the details of this taxation should come out to Ugandans. Thank you.

3.53
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all I would like to thank the mover of this motion not so much for the popularity it might fetch but for its historical significance in the evolution of our de-colonization. He has hinted on the history, but I would also need to re-emphasise that one, because if you have read what I have written, I have really put it down that the way the British or the colonialists wanted to make sure that everybody loses his freedom was the introduction of this poll tax.

The reason was that it was pretty difficult to coerce the Africans into doing things, which are beneficial to colonialism. One of the things, for example, was the building of the railway. It was pretty difficult to get Africans to build the railway because they were being disturbed to go and work. So they could lay the railway under the gun during the day and during the night they would go and remove the railway lines.  

In the growing of cotton and coffee, which was mainly introduced in Uganda, you know these crops are not eaten by anyone but they were of a good economic interest to the colonialists. So, they could not have any other method to coerce the people to be able to grow these things for the colonial state. And it was the ingenuity of these people that every adult male of 18 years and above was forced to pay poll tax. And the only way to earn poll tax was either you went and sought employment with the colonial master or you grew certain acreage of coffee so that you would sell it and then you go and pay for your freedom.  

This is also when they introduced the prisons. Prisons were not part of an African way of punishing one who had done wrong but they introduced that he who fails to pay that tax either by going directly to offer his labour to the colonial master or to grow cotton or coffee of a certain size, which must be sold specifically to pay poll tax, was to be imprisoned. That indeed struck at the hearts of the people and in the struggle for their independence they made the head of the home to be the nyampara and his wife and the family as the labour force. So, this tactic worked so well in a place like Busoga, which was famous for growing of cotton. The threat of taking the household husband to the prison if he did not pay tax was so effective that by 3.00 o’clock the wife was the one who used to wake up the husband, “Let us go and grow cotton so that you are able to gain our freedom, otherwise if you go away where are we going to live?”  

This thing worked so well that by 1939 the growth of cotton in Uganda, the proceeds from it were able to pay for the costs of the railway line from Mombasa to Kampala, including a bridge across the Nile. By 1940, there was a balance of 40 million pounds, which was actually a surplus as a result of the labour because of this method of inducing the population and threatening them that if they do not do so they would be imprisoned.  

So, the continuation or the modification of it at independence still has that historical linkage that up to now descendants who have never been part of that but by genetic inheritance look at Graduated Tax as something very pernicious. So, I think this is good.  

As this is a motion just to get leave to present a Bill, when you get at the time of drawing up the Bill, all matters will be considered. The realities will then again have to be faced with the emotional and historical adjustment of what we want. Because, for example, now it is due to that historical stigma that prevents the people from collecting tax but it is not that they are poor; that I do not contend. If you really take samples even in your villages, you find that a person who is a drunkard will spend quite a large amount of money on drink, including a slice of pork, and that is big money. But because of that historical significance, the thing is repugnant, but not that the people are not able to pay. 

The reality we are likely to face and which I would like to warn my colleague against is that definitely, because this tax is diminishing, it is not that there is no taxable base. It is not because the people are not able to pay. If some are poor, there are others who can pay. And then we have also got examples of people who have been able to collect this money and have got advantages out of it. For example in Kampala, because money is collected from the source of income, you find that money is actually substantial. In other districts they have been able to collect from local revenue, and been able to put up good structures. So, you cannot say that it is poverty that has made the tax unpopular. It is the historical content that has made the tax unpopular.  

Thirdly, the reality of the situation we are likely to face is that whenever we abolish a source of revenue, we must consider how we are going to replace it, because we are going to run a state. Somebody was bringing here a question that, “Why should we consult the donors?” All members of this House are aware, sovereign as we are, that 48 percent of our budget is subsidised. If those who subsidise us either in form of grants or otherwise, collect taxes from their own taxpayers and we are encouraging our own citizens not to pay tax, it will be a difficult job -(Interruption)

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister is saying that we are encouraging our people not to pay tax, whereas there are many types of taxes. There is corporation tax, there are consumer taxes, excise taxes, sales taxes, Pay As You Earn - there are so many. Is he in order to come here and mislead the House and tell lies that by abolishing poll tax people are not going to pay tax, when people are paying taxes indirectly? There is direct tax and indirect tax. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think let us reserve those issues for when we are debating the substance of this. This is just asking for leave to present the Bill.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, for giving me the opportunity to give this information. I went to Kyenjojo District one time for a fundraising function and the chairperson of the district told me that the taxpayers in that district have contributed tremendously towards the building of Kyenjojo District block. 

I also went to Wakiso, Sir, and we are about to commission the district headquarters for the district. The disciplined districts have managed to raise money through Graduated Tax and they have utilised this money profitably. So, when you mentioned Kampala, I thought that I should give you this information.

MR WACHA: Is it in order for the honourable minister to discriminate districts by calling some disciplined and others undisciplined?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will have an opportunity to deal with the merits of the Bill when the Bill is brought here. This should not take us a lot of time. Let us consider the merits of allowing him an opportunity to work on the Bill, and then we shall go into the details when the Bill eventually comes here.

MR KIRUNDA: Thank you very much for that information. I want to conclude by calling upon all members to move together, it is not a question of support or no support. If we are here we should be able, first of all, to take care of the interests of those we represent –(Interjection)- my constituency is of course the presidency and you know that he was elected with a majority of about 70 percent. 

So, when we are approaching this question, we should make sure that we do not actually impoverish the centre and then demands come from the districts to subsidise when we have not given alternatives. Because as I said, it is my contention that it is the history of this Graduated Tax which has actually continued to the present. But brilliant as we are, we can easily be able to find other ways to make sure that the path is increased and we are able to make sure that the peasants are actually saved from this problem. Thank you very much.

4.08
MR MICHEAL MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: For your information, I intend to give as many people a chance to speak as possible. I am not going to close this suddenly, but make your contributions brief because there will be a general contribution when the Bill comes.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I will be very brief. I stand to support the motion that hon. Okulo Epak be granted leave by Parliament to go and explore ways and means of building up a very serious Bill to be debated here. As you are aware, the cause that hon. Okulo Epak is pursuing is indeed a peasants’ cause. You very well know that the peasants are the employers of the President, and are also the employers of Members of Parliament. 

Those of us who represent these peasants know very well - because we have got no other constituencies we represent but the peasants - the outcry, the suffering that the peasants face while this tax is actually collected. And as one contributor ably debated, Mr Speaker, Graduated Tax remains one of those colonial vestiges that the contemporary politician or policy maker must move to resolve and finally abolish. So, this being a peasants’ cause, this being a move that is going to improve and even emollient the suffering of the peasants, I do stand to support that hon. Okulo Epak be given leave.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, Graduated Tax appears to be gender insensitive. As you are aware, this tax is supposed to be collected from both males and females. But unfortunately, it is the males who are harassed more than the females. I have never –(Interruption)

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, for giving way.  Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that in Arua the Graduated Tax you are saying that it is gender insensitive has been shifted to the women to pay for the husbands. (Laughter). Yes, I stand to be challenged by any Member of Parliament from Arua. The women of Arua have been paying Graduated Tax for their husbands. During the time of collection, because of much harassment, the men normally go to sleep in the ceilings, so it is their wives to pay the Graduated Tax so that their husbands are not arrested. I thank you very much.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, a new dimension has come into this debate. I would like to be clarified by hon. Angupale on why Arua women have high propensity to pay Graduated Tax for their men. What do they get in return? (Laughter)

MRS ANGUPALE: Mr Speaker, for purposes of clearing the Hansard record, the payment of taxes by women is done throughout this country. It is not only in Arua. And to give you more information, I, Angupale, I also pay taxes. It is not only the men who pay it for the services of this country.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think hon. Angupale rose to augment my argument. In most constituencies and in most regions, it is male citizens who are basically harassed, hurled out of homes and even most times imprisoned for failure to pay Graduated Tax. It is unfortunate that for Arua it is vice-versa and if it is so, I think this is the more reason that we  –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we shall really go into details when this comes back. This is just to give leave; we do not know whether it will be utilised or not, it is just a limited debate, honestly.

MR MABIKKE: Mr speaker, by way of winding up, I think the point has been made. To me Graduated Tax is gender insensitive and it is high time that the males are also given affirmative action after so many years of pampering ladies in Uganda. 

I would like to summarise by also making a point that Graduated Tax appears to be a double tax and for my part, I want to say that I have been finding it very difficult to pay PAYE and at the same time return to Makindye Division where I pay Graduated Tax. So, it is very clear that Graduated Tax appears to be a double tax, and by all standards this becomes an unfair tax to which very serious considerations must be done to revise and if anything, abolish it. I wish to move that we support hon. Okulo Epak, grant him leave to work on this very important Bill for our people. Thank you very much.

4.14
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank very much hon. Okulo Epak for having resiliently and consistently made his research to come up with such a motion today. In Kabale we had a high forum consultation meeting of all Members of Parliament, all political leaders and the elders in Kabale District, and I was told by the District Council Chairman about how this kind of Graduated Tax has been giving them headache. And in his words he said: “Please, go and tell Parliament to abolish this tax.”  

Mr Speaker, I fully support hon. Okulo Epak’s motion that he be given leave to come up with a Bill. In his motion he said even people die. Last week a young man died in Kabale town while he was running away from the tax collectors. In my constituency, the peasants of Rubanda who have all the power have told me, “Use the power we vested in you and speak for us on this Graduated Tax because” –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it question of administration of tax or collection of tax?

MR BANYENZAKI: Both, Mr Speaker. So, to support this motion further, the administration of this Graduated Tax itself still is repressive and the people feel that they cannot hold this anymore. They cannot stand it anymore. Even when there is the Graduated Tax statute moved by the minister, the districts are finding it very difficult to administer this tax in the sense that it was categorised –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member. In your consultations with the peasants of Rubanda who hold the power in this country, have you hinted the idea to them of holding a referendum on the tax, how will they run that referendum?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, in the invent that this Parliament cannot decide on this, then maybe the peasants will request to have a referendum on Graduated Tax. So, to be brief and you requested us not to take much time on this, it is really my humble request to this House that we give overwhelming support to the motion on the Floor as we had given it before so that it carries the day. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Phillip Byaruhanga): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and colleagues. With due respect to the mover of this motion, hon. Dr Okulo Epak, and with due respect to members of this august House who have made very modest contributions to the motion so far, I would like to say the following, as the one guiding the sector currently.

One; we had, in a spirit of moving together with our colleague who is bringing forward this motion, hon. Dr Okulo Epak, requested for some consultation to clear ourselves over this matter. Unfortunately, this august House in its wisdom did not seem to appreciate the urgency of our request. And I would not want to stand here as Minister in the Ministry of Local Government and commit myself to a situation, which subsequently I cannot explain to this same august House.  

The purpose of this consultation between now and Tuesday was to give us an opportunity to look at both sides of the equation because the Ministry of Local Government, the local authorities, the municipalities, are also running their governments in accordance with the Local Governments Act and in accordance with the Constitution, and are currently carrying out budgets within this financial year with certain commitments. 

Mr Speaker, with due respect, this is why I want to refer again to the initial request we had made. It would be unfair on my part, imprudent and dishonest to say that with conviction I would allow this motion to proceed, because I do not have the facts at hand that would help this House to make a correct judgment of the situation. It is on that basis that on behalf of the ministry and on behalf of the entire Government, I would want to say that I would reluctantly not proceed to support my colleague and this House to grant this leave. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.23
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank, hon. Dr Okulo Epak for bringing out these issues on Graduated Tax. But I have my reservations on whether we should proceed or not, because first of all, I do not have a copy of –(Interruption)- I do not. If it is in my pigeonhole, I do not have it here.  

When we look at the administration of this tax that has been criticised so much, I want to compare it to other expenses that the people usually have or should have to make, for example, payment of school fees. If all the peasants were forced to pay school fees, I am sure they would run away from paying school fees, the way they run away from paying Graduated Tax. And even for us Members of Parliament here - it is a question of attitude and commitment to supporting Government programmes. If we were to pay, for example, Pay As You Earn as cash from our pockets but not as deductions from source, I do not think Members of Parliament would pay. It is easier to administer this because it is subtracted from source. So, in order to understand the Graduated Tax, we need to understand the collection from those who do not pay tax.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, since the minister in charge of the sector has conceded to giving leave –(Interjection)- the impression I got was that he reluctantly –(Interjection)- opposed? I thought he said, “I support.” Sorry, Sir.

MS ERIYO: I am sorry that it has been interrupted. But my other reservation is on important decisions that this Parliament is yet to make, especially on the issue of decentralisation versus federal. If we adopt the federal system of governance, what kind of tax are we going to adopt, what alternatives do we have? I, therefore, think it is not yet the right time for us to go ahead with this motion. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, the fact of federal has come in?

4.27
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I will be very brief. First of all, I want to thank you for guiding the House because there were fears that hon. Okulo Epak was going to move the very instrument here, which was not the case. So, you assisted members to realise that this is not the real motion yet.

I want to thank, hon. Okulo Epak, for this long outstanding matter, which came all the way from around 1997 in the Sixth Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think for purposes of record, let us correct these six years or so. There was an attempt by hon. Okulo Epak, which was not to move a private members Bill. It was a motion, which was aimed at abolition. And because it was aimed at abolition substantively and was trying to provide solutions, that is why it aborted. This motion is different because this is to seek leave to bring a Bill. Because Graduated Tax is imposed because of the law, you cannot remove it by a motion because that will be tantamount to amending without using proper procedure. That is why it aborted. But he was a fair man in that he brought in a solution to plug the gaps that will be created by the Graduated Tax. I think this should be clear.
 
CAPT. GUMA: Thank you, for your guidance, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to request the government - because really our ministers seem to be very uneasy. I am seeing some degree of uneasiness, like the one I saw when we were discussing the Northern Uganda humanitarian disaster. Do not be uneasy because the majority of you, save a few, are Members of Parliament. You represent constituencies and for sure you know the issues that hon. Okulo Epak has expounded in his paper.  

Secondly, we request Government in its consultative meetings and especially lawyers like our Attorney-General, to interpret these laws favourably and correctly to the peasants of this country so that our people can really get something. Because we are not saying paying taxes is bad, but we are looking at a particular type of tax and we think it no longer has a lot of relevance in our present circumstances.

Mr Speaker, broadly any tax has got three major tenets. One of them is that the tax must be re-distributive of income tax; that the tax must have an income redistribution aspect. Secondly - I can see hon. Nasasira nodding his head. What I am talking I know for sure –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: I wanted to inform hon. Guma that when you are nodding your head, you could either be saying yes or no. So, when he states nodding somebody’s head, he must also go further to know how he read my nodding. But I was actually nodding about a rule in our Rules of Procedure but not about your debate.

CAPT. GUMA: Really, one of the reasons for any tax to be levied by government is that it is intended to redistribute income from poor to rich or vice versa. 

Secondly, it can be for revenue generation to enable government get money for spending. 

Or it can be to stimulate economic development. These are the three broad tenets of any tax.  

But Graduated Tax does not fulfill any of these. This is just a tax. Hon. Okulo Epak has given his historical context; it is just a tax that hangs around. So, we really expect that honourable colleagues, government ministers, when you are consulting with the mover of the motion, please support an effort.

I have heard hon. Phillip Byaruhanga talking about the 2004/05 budget estimates, which will be read before Parliament in June this year. I can assure you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that a small manipulation like an additional Shs 100 or Shs 200 over a bottle of beer, will result in the Shs 60 billion for the entire country that we get from the Graduated Tax. (Applause). And that will not affect the consumption of the beer. So, it is the question of the planners pressing the right button and so on. So, hon. Phillip Byaruhanga, please, rest. This thing is not intended to undermine the effort of government to raise taxes. We want our taxation experts to assist our peasants and look at a more modern way of raising revenue for government spending. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Try to be brief, because we have another debate when the instrument is presented.

4.34
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to request the honourable members to start creating what I should call trust in each other because at the end of the day, we want to achieve something that is going to be beneficial to the society. And we can only do so if we trust each other. 

Mr Speaker, at the beginning of this debate we have been briefed that negotiations and consultations are taking place and you rightly put it that even you had reserved if possible, Tuesday for these people to complete their negotiations. What I am driving at is that creating tension for who should win might not result in what we want. I have seen, as a person who has been in this House for some time, people seeking leave and it is granted to go and bring a private members Bill and at the end of it nothing is achieved. But we want to see something and in order to have it, let all the groups be given time.  

Some people, when we talked of next week, perceived it as if it is in 2006. When we were coming to this Parliament we looked at five years as if it is too much but we are just remaining with two. At the end of bringing this Amendment Act, which is going to amend 2003 –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Point of order.

THE SPEAKER: You see, when we raise points of order unnecessarily we eat in our time. Let us really deal with the merits of this matter. I will give you time if you want, to make a contribution.

MR MWANDHA: I think there is a procedural problem with the honourable member’s contribution because he is debating matters, which are settled, that is, we are not going to consider - because the mover of the motion requested for Tuesday and it was debated and the House decided to go ahead with the motion. Therefore, for the honourable member to continue talking about trusting each other and listening to each other – I think he is being irrelevant by going to matters, which we have settled.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, even if we grant leave today, it will be the beginning of a journey, a journey to take us to Nairobi. As we move to Nairobi, I think he was saying we should be moving as friends, together. So, his contribution would be relevant even when the process itself starts. Let us hear him and then hear other people.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Mwandha thank you very much for your observation. But what I am leading to, as the Speaker has rightly put it, is creating that trust from the word go. I gave an example that we should not be excited over seeking leave. We can even reach 2006 without seeing this Act here but at the end of it what should we have contributed to the nation? That is why I am saying that if there was room of consultation we should, from the beginning, much as the motion has been tabled, create it, accept it so that these two brothers, the front bench and the mover, hon. Okulo Epak, can at the end of the day in consultation with the donor community, come up with something that we are going to brace with in a month and we pass it. That is my only request to the members. We are not here to show who is strong, we want a win-win situation at the end of the game.

I want lastly to tell you that without creating that trust, I can assure you that can be the end of the Bill. Please, let us build that trust and allow these people as the parent minister has said, before we proceed with putting the question to say, “Please, let us first leave it and give them ample time” and we come with a viable situation. I thank you.

4.39
MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto County East, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion and you can already see I am extremely excited. I can reveal this is the happiest moment for Bukoto County East of Masaka and I believe for the whole country. Of all the things this Parliament has ever done for this country, whether or not this motion one day becomes accepted, the truth is -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But in dealing with this matter, let us avoid giving the impression to the people we represent that they have no obligation to pay tax. If that is the message you are carrying, it is a wrong impression because tax must be paid.

MR ALINTUMA: Mr Speaker, I hope that message also tells our local authorities that the taxpayers’ money should never be played around with, and that the money should be used appropriately. Thank you.

Mr Speaker, I have three or four points for supporting the motion. The first point is to do with donors -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not concentrate on the motion for leave because we shall deal with the donors when the consultations are done, when we are dealing with the substance of the removal?

MR ALINTUMA: Mr Speaker, since I came to this House, I have heard about donors about a hundred times. So, if I mention it, I do not think I have really committed a crime.   

I just wanted to reveal that the question of whether or not the donors will find us so stupid that we support this motion should not arise for the basic reason that at all costs, no donor will accept anything done in developing countries so long as it intends or it purely undermines the human rights of the recipient nations. And Uganda, with its Graduated Tax, is earmarked by all countries as one country where people’s rights are abused. For that matter we can tell any donor nation that, “Look, because of your demands for the sake of the human rights in this country, we have to do away with Graduated Tax.”  

Mr Speaker, the other point is to do with the personalisation of Graduated Tax. Some of us are lucky, almost a 100 percent of the people here, in the eyes of the people who sent us to Parliament we are very wealthy people. I cannot imagine myself going to jail because I cannot manage to pay Graduated Tax. That will never happen and I do not think it will even happen to my son, but that is another area of our income. The truth is, by the time a person goes to jail, they do not have that money to pay. For that matter, I would feel happy as Nsambu if someone told me that instead of buying a beer at Shs 1,500 in the interests of the people I represent or the people whose finances I am above, I will be paying Shs 1,700. So, we have the alternatives.

Mr Speaker, ever since this Government or the President of Uganda came to power, I hold the belief that the smartest President on this continent is our President. He is the smartest, and I am sure with that smartness he cannot fail to find a solution to save the population, which is always with him each time he is seeking re-election. They are always with him and I know if this is going to undermine their rights, he will always find a solution. That is how we are even able to have the local council system. We never knew about LC system, he initiated it, it works, it helps and it does wonders on this continent.  

Therefore, I am concluding by thanking Dr Okulo Epak, I am thanking all the Members and of course you, Mr Speaker, for the wonderful thing you have done in allowing this motion to be tabled. Thank you.

4.45
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support that, hon. Dr Okulo Epak be given leave over this private members’ Bill. It is long overdue. Nevertheless, it has come. I fully support it with the people of Kasilo, and Teso as a whole.  

Mr Speaker, those who have studied economics even at elementary level know that there are canons or principles of taxation, of which one is cost effectiveness. Is this Graduated Tax cost effective? Fairness and equity are some of those. When you look at these canons of taxation, Graduated Tax does not qualify. It is on that basis as an economist that I do not totally support Graduated Tax.  

The only thing that we would be looking at now are the alternative ways of raising revenue, but not of retaining Graduated Tax. I hope in this time that we are going to have before a full debate comes up we should be able to come up with the alternative ways of raising revenue for this country because it is necessary for the development of this country. It is also my prayer that in the consultations that are going to take place - my appeal is to the frontbench - let us be looking at the alternative ways of raising revenue.  

As far back as 1962, there was a famous revolt in Bukedi over this Graduated Tax. It cost the lives of people. The hon. Dr Okulo Epak has given incidences here of where some people have died. Just a month ago I was reading in Monitor that this has caused divorce in families. In Masindi the wife deceived the husband who had not paid tax that the tax collectors had come and he took off, in the end she brought in another man. When the husband came back he found another man in the house; he only discovered that she was lying. (Laughter). So, you can see how far this tax has gone. There is a social problem as regards this Graduated Tax. Having said that, Mr Speaker, I must say I fully support the abolition of Graduated Tax. Thank you.

4.48
MR ALEX OKOT (Moroto County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and actually I would like to refer to the message, which the Minister of Local Government gave this august House. A colleague of mine asked me whether the minister reluctantly supported or he reluctantly did not support, and I insisted that he reluctantly did not support and that in English, you accept reluctantly what you do not want. So, that means he supports the motion but he cannot say it now.

The motion is not seeking to get rid of tax but to get rid of inhuman ways of collecting tax. I think all of us do agree that we do not want a way of collecting tax, which is inhuman. All of us want a broad-based tax that is able to support this Government so that sooner or later, we even get rid of the donor community who are supporting our budget. But we cannot insist on having any kind of tax, which humiliates Ugandans. It is time we began thinking that of priority are the Ugandans, not the money. If we have to be poor at least let us be humane. We cannot get rich at the expense of being inhuman to our own citizens.  

Mr Speaker, one time as I was jogging, I was surrounded by a vehicle and people from KCC who asked me for Graduated Tax. I was jogging but they thought I was running away from them because they were coming to collect tax. This gives an impression of how people are suffering everywhere in the country because of Graduated Tax.

I am requesting the honourable members to stand strongly behind this motion and also to stand strongly behind Government in future, to find better ways of collecting more taxes from Ugandans but in a very human way. I thank you.

4.50
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Mr Speaker, having studied the mood of the House, this has overwhelming support. Even the frontbench members are beaten, and since there will be time to contribute substantially on the motion, I beg that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I am going to put the question to the motion. We are going to vote by show of hands.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. In the middle of the first vote a lot of other colleagues entered the House. I think it is only fair that we re-vote.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the ex-officio Members of Parliament do not vote and I have seen they have not voted. It seems that you are disputing the vote. Should we repeat this? 

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE SPEAKER: So, we shall vote on the motion.

(Voting by show of hands was carried out.)

THE SPEAKER: This is what I have: Abstention 5, against 39, for 49 -(Applause)- and the total is 93. Therefore, we had a number competent to carry out the voting. So, the motion is carried. (Applause). 

THE SPEAKER: In view of what has happened, you really want to relax and I think we should end today’s business here. We have a problem with the Budget Committee because it has a timeframe within which to process the budget then we send our comments to His Excellency the President. And because of this, the Chairman of the Budget Committee has approached me to say that you will need the whole week, morning and afternoon for the respective committees to look at the budget and make their reports so that the report is received by the Budget Committee so that you are in time to make the formal Budget Committee report, which we shall send to the President. Because of this, we shall not have plenary meetings next week. Therefore, you are expected to sit from morning to afternoon so that you can complete that work by maybe next week –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, but in your communication from the Chair you informed the House that on Tuesday we were going to have a workshop on genetically modified organisms at the International Conference Centre, and this has been a workshop highly demanded by this House. I would, therefore, like to know whether this announcement will affect that workshop in particular because it is going to be half day from 9.00 O’clock to 1.00 O’clock on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: In view of that we can adjust that programme. We will all go for that meeting on Tuesday but then in the afternoon committees can resume their work so that we are in time to submit. According to the Budget Act, there is a date by which I have to submit our comments on the budget to the President. I think that is clear and this brings us –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to inform members that those who were invited for the NPA Workshop on the 15th, it has been rescheduled. The reporting date is tomorrow evening because of the workshop that is organised by Bank of Uganda on Apex Loans at the International Conference Centre tomorrow. So, members are informed that reporting is tomorrow and it continues up to the 17th.  

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee will also be meeting with effect from Tuesday with regard to the announcement you have just made. But the members are expected to report to the committee room earlier than 10.00 O’clock because there is some other urgent business to be handled prior to 10.00 O’clock, which is the reporting time.  

THE SPEAKER: With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until 27 April 2004.

(The House rose at 5.02 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 April 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)


