Friday, 18 April 2008 

Parliament met at 10.25 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. As you remember, we agreed that today we would sit in the morning to consider the Audit Bill, which received the second reading the other day. I did ask you this and you agreed because earlier, we had agreed that Plenary will not be held next week to enable committees to sit and consider the Budget because the process has started, and that is why you are sitting today. I, therefore, thank those who have been able to come and I hope others will join us.  

The Prime Minister obviously has sent me a message that he may not be able to be with us because he has gone to Karamoja to settle a problem. The Chief Whip, Government side is also in Bunyoro because I think His Excellency the President has an engagement there. Despite this, I think we shall be able to continue with the work and finish it.  

Because we also have the Education Bill, which has been hanging on for some time, I had also intended - if we finished earlier - to allow the minister to move a motion for the second reading and the chairman to present the report. We will not discuss it; you will go with the report and during the week you will study it and when you come back, we can start the debate. This will depend on how we proceed with this matter.  

Since this is the Committee Stage, I must say that when the Bill was read for the second time, I raised an issue of a proposal, which has been made in the Bill that the Auditor-General should serve on contract terms. I realised that it had a problem with a provision of the Constitution and I have to consult the Attorney-General to get an opinion on that. I want to know what he thinks of the Auditor-General serving on contract terms when the principle is to preserve his independence.

I have today received long, written advice from the Attorney-General to the effect that he is agreeing with me that we cannot introduce a contract aspect with the Auditor-General and that has never been the intention. So when you deal with that provision introducing a contract, forget about it. The letter is here if you want to look through it.

10.29
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank you for the communication. Actually, the worry was on that element, which had been introduced that was going to complicate the whole process. But looking at the importance of the Office of the Auditor-General and this Bill which is before us, I think that our number right now is not very reasonable. I, therefore, plead with you that we should probably ring the bell for the second time so that at least we have a good number, which can be able to deliberate on this vital issue. Even if we go beyond lunch time, at least we should have our done constitutional duty to deliberate on this subject. Thank you very much, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Leader of Government Business. 

10.30
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the point being made by my brother but as I came in, I saw quite a few MPs out here and the principle we adopted was that for debate, Parliament can go on. It is only when it comes to decisions that then the point becomes critical. So, I think we can go on with the debate and –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Since we are going to the committee, yes, we can go to the committee; but I think for fairness, let me suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes. I think that will be enough, so that you can communicate; send messages so that members can come. After 15 minutes when we come back, I will definitely go to the committee. Then when we count to make a decision as Parliament -(Mr Mbabazi rose_) Did you have any other point? Otherwise, I am inclined to give ourselves 15 minutes for honourable members to come. We shall definitely proceed today, but let us give ourselves 15 minutes for more Members to come. The House suspended.

(The House was suspended at 10.32 a.m.)

(On resumption at 11.05 a.m., the Speaker presiding_) 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE AUDIT BILL, 2007

Clause 1

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, in clause 1, I want to delete, “on the date to be appointed by the minister by statutory instrument” and replace it with “within three months after publication”. The justification is, to clearly define an immediate time the Act should commence so as to allow the financial requirements of the Bill be part of the next Budget. I beg to move.  

THE CHAIRMAN: The justification is not clear; what did you say?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, the justification is clearly defined; an immediate time the Act should commence so as to allow the financial requirements of the Bill to be part of the next budget.

THE CHAIRMAN: And, therefore? Dates of commencement are - do you want to pass it immediately and then it becomes a law?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Within three months after the publication of this. In other words, assuming the minister was to take longer than this and we want this autonomy to take immediate effect, he will be compelled by the three months time that he is proposing.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 2 talks about interpretation. I propose that we stand it over because we could go ahead and get more items that need interpretation. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?
 
Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, in clause 4, sub-section 3(a), I am proposing to add “full” immediately before the word “membership”. This is to justify that the Auditor-General is a qualified member of the institute with complete rights and reliabilities to attain full membership. I beg to move.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I accept the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: When they say membership for at least 15 years, doesn’t it mean that one must have been a member for at least 15 years? Are there half members?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the institute consists of full members and associates so if you leave it open, even an associate will become a member. In addition to that, under clause 2 -

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us dispose of this first. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, under clause 4 sub-clause 2(a), to be specific, it should state, “a qualified, professional accountant” because anybody can call himself an accountant. If you were to read our directory, people are calling themselves accountants. So, to specify that this should be a fully qualified accountant means that we have eliminated those who call themselves accountants.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes but then in the interpretation don’t they deal with this and refer to the Accountants’ Act? What does it say? Because when you look at the interpretation, which of course we have suspended for the time being they say, “A qualified accountant means an accountant as defined the in Accountants’ Act”. I don’t know what the Accountants’ Act provides for.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you go by the definition in the Accountants’ Act, even people who were practising accounts before qualifying in 1964 qualify as accountants. That is the reason why even at a later stage, we may do away with -

THE CHAIRMAN: So you want it to be tight? I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment to 4?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, 3(b) should also have “full” immediately before the word “membership”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, on clause 5 I propose that sub-section (1) be deleted. The justification is that Article 163, sub-section (11) of the Constitution provides for tenure by age, which is provided for in this Bill under clause 5(2).

(Question put and agreed to).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, having deleted that, we need some guidance. I know you said the Attorney-General had something. The Article says, “… may retire at 60 and leave office at 70”. It is not talking about the lower age of that person. If we stated a lower age limit, would this be in conflict with the Constitution?

THE CHAIRMAN: The intention of the Constitution is to give options to the appointee, that is, the Auditor-General to decide if at 60 he wants to retire. He can and the Constitution allows him to. The only upper limit is that he does not go beyond 70. As for the lower age, of course it will depend on the qualifications, which you have set that the appointee should have. He could be 35 or 45; as long as he meets the qualifications then there is no problem.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what is the problem with having a fixed term to the contract?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the letter of the Attorney-General to me is quite detailed. It is a long one and I didn’t think that I should read it but the conclusion was - okay, if you want to -

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a copy of that letter and I think it is only fair that Parliament benefits from the opinion of the Attorney-General. I will read it as it is not too long. It says, “Article 163 clause 11 enacts for the Auditor General the principle of tenure by age. The Auditor General may retire voluntarily after reaching the age of 60 and shall vacate office on reaching the age of 70. Clause 5 of the Audit Bill attempts to fuse the principle of tenure by age as well as tenure by contract. 

In my analysis, the Constitution did not provide for this fusion. The Constitution envisaged tenure by age only and he draws a comparison with Article 144, which talks about the tenure of office of judicial officers. It would be unacceptable to suggest that for instance a judge could be given a five-year renewable contract or contract of 10 years, non-renewable. 

He says, “I have taken the opportunity to look at the report of the Commission of Inquiry, Constitutional review 2003 and the Government White Paper on the report of the Commission of Inquiry Constitutional Review 2004 in as far as they might throw some light on the matter. My conclusion from studying them is that the intention of both the review commission and government was that the Auditor-General should hold office and be removed from office in the same manner as a judicial officer under the Constitution. In view of the fore going analysis, I find clause 5(1) of the Audit Bill, 2007 to be unconstitutional. It introduces tenure by contract for the Auditor-General, which in my view violates Article 163(11) of the Constitution.”

That is the opinion of the Attorney-General.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, acting Attorney-General.  

THE CHAIRMAN: He is Leader of Government Business. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, under the same Article, clause 17 says “Parliament shall make laws to regulate and facilitate the performance of the functions of the Auditor-General.” It says to regulate performance. To make somebody perform – well, I am not doubting the learned men but I think we need to think further; what is the conflict between this and the upper one because the Auditor-General is a person who is – well you have said he is a judicial officer. Judicial officer is between me and maybe somebody who has gone to court. But the Auditor-General audits the enormous resources of this country. I am not meaning the recurrent - if he or she made a mistake by only a pen, anything could happen to this country. So, we need to understand; what does sub-clause 17 mean? Can’t it mean that he will perform better if we give him a contract?

THE CHAIRMAN: There are many people who are similar to the Auditor-General; even the Chief Justice can make a mistake with his pen. What do you do? But still he is protected. Making regulations - this is what we are doing by making this law. Exactly this is what we are trying to do. But it is a question of tenure that is an issue in this clause 5. Anyway, that is the Constitution. We can move or change the Constitution but so long as the provisions are there, let us please oblige.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, the Constitution also provides for the removal of the Auditor-General in clause 10. So, there is no conflict. And I am speaking as the Leader of Government Business and someone who has been Attorney-General; not the acting one. Thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking maybe a clarification because when we look at the President; when he reaches the age of 75, maybe he is not supposed to go beyond 75 years. But somewhere in Article 105, there is tenure and a period of five renewable terms. I just want to be assisted: is it in the same line as that?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, the situation is not comparable and the two cases are distinguishable in the sense that a president is elected every five years; his holding office will depend on the results of the election. But the appointment of the Auditor-General is made once and it is controlled by the ages between 60 and 70. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, having said this, we would request the Executive to look at the Constitutional amendment as quickly as possible - if that is true. But in the meantime, maybe as we go ahead, we should put real safety controls in the law to deal with the issue of the performance of the Office of the Auditor-General.

THE CHAIRMAN: You have said the Executive should look into this but you as a Member, should you feel that there is any provision of the Constitution you want to change be it on this and the other, you can come and apply to move a Bill to amend the Constitution. And I want to alert all Members that there are many issues we talk about concerning the country that require changing the Constitution. Members of parliament are free to bring motions to apply to move a Private Members’ Bill to amend the Constitution. If you allow, we process the Bill.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: But what we fear are the financial implications involved in moving these Motions. That one is tying us.

THE CHAIRMAN: There will be no financial implications in amending a Constitution. Okay, we shall discuss that. I now put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr chairman, in clause 17 I want to add sub-section (8), which is an import of the constitutional requirement, Section 163(12), which says: “The Auditor-General shall vacate office if he or she is under a sentence of death or a sentence of imprisonment exceeding nine months without the option of a fine imposed by a competent court.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is lifted out of the Constitution. I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, in clause 11(1) we are saying that the Secretary to the Treasury will appoint the accounting officer. I find sub-clause (2) a bit redundant. Why should we then request the Auditor-General to recommend the Secretary to the Treasury the accounting officer of his or her institution? Don’t you think if we left it out to the Secretary to the Treasury to appoint an accounting officer, that would suffice?

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you are saying Secretary to the Treasury could informally consult but this is a different thing rather than putting it here. So, you want a deletion?

MR BAHATI: That is what I am proposing, Mr Chairman.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: I think hon. Bahati has not completed 2, it says in 1: “Except that that person designated shall not perform any auditing functions after his/her designation”. So you have to complete that. No. 2 is completing exactly what No. 1 is supposed to do.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I read it and completed the clause but in my opinion this means that before the Secretary to the Treasury appoints the accounting officer of the Office of the Auditor-General, the Auditor-General’s Office has got to recommend to the Secretary to the Treasury a person to be appointed. That is my interpretation and I find it a bit unnecessary. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You are saying that because the recommendation comes from the Auditor-General, it may somehow influence the performance of the accounting officer?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, here are two distinct issues. He is recommending somebody to be the accounting officer. But in No. 2 he is saying that that accounting officer should not do the functions of auditing. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But it is combining the two. Do you want to – this is a question of recommendation; will that be acceptable?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Bahati has a point but when you go to clause 2 it says that the AG is supposed to be the accounting officer, but he is designing his function to somebody within his office. If that is what you want to amend then the persons that can be appointed as accounting officers should not be employed under the AG’s office. Maybe the Secretary to the Treasury may appoint and send somebody there, for instance as in the Police, Prisons and so on. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The compromise as indicated is that in No.2 we can delete, “The Auditor-General shall recommend to the Secretary to the Treasury a person …” we can stop there and say, “The Auditor-General shall recommend to the Secretary to the Treasury a person to be designated accounting officer under sub-section …” so that we remove the part that gives the AG the role of advising.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am attempting a formulation. If we delete what you have read which is, “The Auditor-General shall recommend to the Secretary to the Treasury a person to be designated accounting officer under sub-section 1 except that …” delete all that, then you will reformulate that clause to read as follows: “The person designated as accounting officer under sub-section 1 of this section shall not perform any auditing functions after his/her designation”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reasoning here is that currently the Auditor-General’s Office is appointing staff from among their own to do the functions of auditing; that is what we are trying to eliminate. And the Secretary to the Treasury is free to appoint anybody from outside – maybe someone who comes in as staff to work. So, the law should not assume that the person going to be appointed is coming from within.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is harmless; I think we can take it. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I propose that clause 12 be stood over because we are saying that the Auditor-General shall designate a member of staff of the Auditor-General’s Office to be secretary to the board. Supposing it is not the case? So, until we see what the board shall comprise of – supposing we delete “the board” and yet we have already put it in the law, what will happen? So I propose that we stand it over and deal with it after we have dealt with the board.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Clause 13: I put the question that clause 13 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, I propose that in clause 14(1)(b) we add between: “Other audits such as gender and environment audits” between “other audits” and “in respect of”. I propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 14, I also propose we add on (1), after (c), let us put (d), (e) and (f). And it will be: 

d)	Audit all government investments. 

e) 	Carry out procurement audits.

f) 	Audit treasury memorandum.”

The justification is, to provide for the auditing of all government investments, procurement audits and audit of the Treasury Memorandum.

THE CHAIRMAN: But when you say, “All government investments”, what do you have in mind? Supposing government makes an investment with my company?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, here we are considering that government may not have majority shareholding in a company. But as long as it has an investment; even if it is 10 or 5 percent, it is an investment by government and those funds must be audited by the Auditor-General. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But are you going to force me? You have to take that into account. Supposing I have 90 percent of the shares, will you say to me, “Bring your book?”

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, we are not talking about auditing the accounts, we are talking about auditing the funds that government has invested in that venture. Auditing funds is quite different from auditing the accounts of a company.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, if that is the case. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, in clause 17(2), I would like to delete “may” and substitute it with “shall”. The justification is to make it a mandatory rather than a discretionary requirement for the Auditor-General to give copies of the reports to the named officers. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, in clause 18(3) I also would wish to substitute “may” with “shall”. That is also to make it a mandatory requirement of the Auditor-General to give copies of the report to the listed officers. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, in clause 19 I would like to have a new head note reading, “Audit of all public funds in private organisations and bodies.” The justification is to reflect the intention of the provision, which is not “audit accounts of the private organisations and bodies” but rather “audit of public monies in such organisations or bodies.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, in clause 25, I would like to delete “office of” and make it “powers of” the Auditor-General. This is to bring the provision in line with the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, clause 26, I also wish to delete “the office of” so that it is in resonance with clause 25.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, in clause 29(2)(c), I would like to add, “a member of that commission authorised by the chairperson in writing”. The justification is to provide for the delegation by the chairman. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: So are you putting all – how do you form it?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, it was supposed to be “the Chairperson of the Local Government Finance Committee.” So I am saying, “the Chairperson of the Local Government Finance Committee or a person ….” 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, after clause 29(3) I propose to add –

THE CHAIRMAN: No, let us first dispose of this one.

MR OMACH: I have no problem with that. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)-

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Did you have an objection?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the audit board - we are making the Auditor-General to audit on behalf of Parliament. We are making the audit board to come in and I think even the suggestion being made about Auditor-General and his independence; this audit board looks redundant given the issue that the Auditor-General will report to Parliament and Parliament will take responsibility of his duties and functions. I was of the view that the audit board is not necessary.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I want to support the idea of hon. Nandala but I also want to invite Members to think about the current best practices of corporate governance, which require that there should be a board that is separate from the chief executive officer of an institution so that the chief executive officer is monitored and guided. But we also know that this institution we are talking about is a unique one, unique in the sense that its independence should not be diluted; and we have a long established fact that audit opinions are best formed by individuals not institutions as happens in the legal practice where the judgements are best formed by individuals not necessarily institutions. 

So, I would rather suggest that if we are to combine the two that we have best practices of corporate governance, we suggest that the Auditor-General chairs that board and the other members of the board are there to help him take decisions of the institution. And if the Auditor-General does not chair the board, the way it is done by the central bank the world over like here, the chairperson of the board of the central bank is at the same time the governor of the central bank and its independence has been there for some time and not diluted. So, if we are not going to allow the Auditor-General to chair the board, then we would rather not have the board and strengthen Parliament mechanisms to monitor the office of the Auditor-General.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As we move on, we will come across a new insertion called the Public Accounts Commission. If we leave this board intact, it means we are adding onto red tape and bureaucracy and the best government does not operate with a lot of red tape. I support my colleagues who said that the board should be removed so that the commission, which will be housed in Parliament, takes over the functions that are supposed to be performed by it. Instead of the board, at the level of the Auditor-General, we could have a management board, which is administrative and we do not have to insert it in law. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, when you got to clause 31, you will realise that it clearly defines the proposed functions of the board. For example, (b) is to review and make recommendations to Parliament on the strategic plan of the Office of the Auditor-General including any expenditure plans proposed by the Auditor-General;

(c) 	To consider the annual budget estimates for the Office of the Auditor-General and recommend their submission to Parliament for consideration;

(d) 	Approve the organizational structure of the Office of the Auditor-General;

(e) 	Approve staff regulations for the Office of the Auditor-General;

(f) 	Approve functional regulation of the Office of the Auditor-General; and 

(g) 	To perform any other functions incidental to these functions.

I think these are quite strong issues that support the institution of the audit board. So, I would like to propose that we do approve that there be an audit board.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the Auditor-General audits public accounts. These public accounts are under the responsibility of Parliament where the Auditor-General report. If the Auditor-General is supposed to report to Parliament and we put somebody who stifles his/her effort, I think that is not right. The only thing we can do is that to be able to look at the performance of the Auditor-General, it is Parliament that should be responsible because the recommendation you are talking about - I want to agree with brother Wadri who was saying that there will be management. That will be the one to prepare its budget, performance and any other thing that they will want and submit to Parliament. So, it will be Parliament to review and make a decision. I do not think there is any need for a board; we are creating a layer to hamper the efforts of the Auditor-General. If there is any place to appeal for anybody in the office of the Auditor-General, it will be Parliament.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, I ask the indulgence of the House to maintain this clause. What we are talking about here is an advisory board, which is supposed to give independent advice to the operations of the Auditor-General. Let us note that the Auditor-General is going to recruit a calibre of staff from the different fields to work with him. There should be a board to monitor some of the activities and in areas where they are aggrieved, where he can.

However, when we get to clause 29, there is paragraph 5, which talks about the chairman of the board, which hon. Bahati has brought and which we have not reached. When we get to it we will dispose of it, but I beg that we maintain the clause on the board.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am just seeking clarification form the chairperson of the committee. When you read the Constitution, Article 163(6) says: “Subject to clause 7 of the Article, in performing his/her functions the Auditor-General shall not be under the direction or control of any person or authority.” 

Much as the functions of the board are outlined, part (g) says: “… to perform any other functions incidental to the functions prescribed in the above paragraphs.” I think the fear is for one to look at the board trying to control the work of the Auditor-General. Could you tell us the kind of difficulties that the Auditor-General is facing right now that you think will be cured by creating this board? That is not clear to us and we do not want to appear like we are creating a board, which is going to direct and control the Office of the Auditor-General, where probably that office will be seen as being compromised by this board. So, could you clarify to us the current gaps that are going to be cured by the creation of this board?

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you trying to say that the Auditor-General can have internal structures within his/her office to help the office to carry out its functions or you are saying these are mandatory structures that come from outside? Are there structures within? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, the proposition in the Bill is clear. The board is not an administrative setup within the Office of the Auditor-General; it’s a board. Its functions, as my colleague has said, are clearly defined in clause 31. I think the point that sounded reasonable was raised by hon. Bahati about the possibility of this board impinging on the powers or decisions by the Auditor-General. I think if we can harmonise the two, maybe as he was proposing, I really do not see a problem. I am saying this because the functions of the Auditor-General are clear. And when you look at the functions of the audit board, there is absolutely no possibility that they will be in conflict at all. 

The fear raised by hon. Baryomunsi can be answered technically. When you look at the functions as prescribed in clause 31, paragraph (g), says, “To perform any other functions incidental to the functions prescribed above.” This limits all those other functions within the ambits of what is defined in clause 31; it cannot go beyond that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe as you said, hon. Leader of Government Business, before we look at clause 29 and maybe clause 30, we should go through this function. You are setting this audit to do what? Stipulate the functions. Perhaps we have to examine the functions and see what has been obtaining as of now before we start this. I think it is necessary for you to explain that to us.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, in order to have clarity we should look at the functions. We can also look back at the functions of the Auditor-General, which we have already passed, and then see if there is any possibility of conflict. 

On the idea of conflict, which hon. Bahati raised, as I said, we can sort out the independence in decision so that we maintain the independence of the Auditor-General to decide in accordance, of course, with the provisions of the Constitution. But that does not conflict with the possibility of having a board because he has independence of decision making in the functions that have been given to him, but these are different.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, we go for instance to recommend to Parliament an auditor to audit the account of Office of the Auditor-General. The question is, is this necessary here?  That is a function of Parliament; Parliament knows how to handle it, and it has been handling it.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: We intended to propose deletion of that one in order to maintain - of course this as a constitutional issue and we did not want to go into it because Parliament has full authority to appoint the auditors. Therefore, we think (a) is not necessary and we are proposing that it be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, “…to review and make recommendations to Parliament on the strategic plan of the Office of the Auditor-General, including any expenditure plan proposed by the Auditor-General.” What happens currently? How do we deal with this now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if we read through, the board is usurping the powers of Parliament, because Parliament is the one which appoints the Auditor-General to audit on its behalf. When they have given him powers to audit, then he can appoint the other auditors to do the work. Likewise, when he is coming to Parliament to go and deal with a function, he will come to Parliament and say, “To be able to perform, I will need these resources and that is the budget.” And it is we to say, “We have given you the authority. Now what are your resources?” He says, “This”. We then look at them and see whether they are in line.  He will come back and say, “But in order to do this, I need this structure”. Again it is we, Parliament, to do it.  

So, Mr Chairman, the true story here is that a board is quite redundant because these people can have their management board or management committee to sit down to review everything, then after that they come to Parliament and we will do the needful because the Auditor-General belongs to us.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, I am afraid we are attempting to create two centres of power –

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think what we have done is that we have agreed that before we go there we have to go through these functions and see whether it is necessary depending on the functions we list here. And the reaction of hon. Nandala-Mafabi was that these two are being handled by Parliament. They submit and Parliament considers and makes its consideration. Then (c) reads: “to consider annual Budget estimates of the Office of the Auditor-General and recommend their submission to Parliament for consideration”. What has been the present position, honourable minister?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, at the moment the staff of the Office of the Auditor-General make these budget estimates which are then submitted to Parliament. But to ensure that this is effectively done, the Auditor-General needs a board that should support it. Just like under (b), the strategic plan of the office of the Auditor-General is not done by Parliament; it is done by the office of the Auditor-General. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Now on this one, what impact will it make on Parliament when it is considering these estimates? “To consider the annual budget estimates of Office and the Auditor-General recommend their submission…” will the recommendation of this board have a greater impact on the views of the Parliament on these estimates?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, to even help further, if it is true that the Budget estimate is according to what the structure is always, by the time you come to look at the estimates what are the structures?  You must pay people salaries; you must maintain those offices; you must facilitate them.  So, in effect when you are approving the Budget, I think you first approve the structure and deal with the estimates.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: First of all, two heads are better than one. Even in Sironko, two heads are better than one. So, what is the problem? The problem, as I said, that I heard about, was the threat to the independence which we all cherish.  It simply says, let there be a board consisting of those people to help in this process.  It is, as far as I am concerned, I do not see that it is a problem. It now comes to Parliament and as you know in Parliament the way we act that is alright. But what is the problem of having something that has been processed? It will be better than if it was not.  

THE CHAIRMAN: But why don’t you allow the office to sort of set up management structures within the office to help him on these various items? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, the hon. Mbabazi is asking what the problem is.  I think the problem is that the board does not add a lot of value to the work of the Auditor-General’s office the way we are seeing it here. That is the problem.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, a little while a go I was saying that the danger is that we are trying to create two centres of power. We have the Parliamentary Commission and we have a board.  We are sandwiching their Auditor-General between perhaps a rock and a hard place and this is not good for the Auditor-General. He should have a clear path of report, not to the board and not to the commission at the same time.  I see these two being mutually exclusive. If we have a board, then we should not have a commission. But we rather have the latter.

THE CHAIRMAN: In Parliament here, when we prepare a budget, we have a number of internal structures that process that. There is a Parliamentary Commission; there is Legal and Committee on Parliamentary Affairs. These are the ones taking care of our strategic plan and our proposal for the Budget. These are internal management structures. Why don’t you just give that to the office and then they will help them, send them to Parliament and then we process?  

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Supplementary to what has been said; if you look at (d), (e) and (f), for example (d) talks of approving the organisational structure: That is a one-time activity; it is carried out once in the lifetime of the board. If you look at (e), to approve the staff regulations, and to approve financial regulations, do those require a fulltime board?  Those ones do not. 

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, I want to apply to use a principle that applies to every organisation. If you take any given organisation, there is a primary function of that organisation. In this case, the office of the Auditor-General has the primary function of auditing books and the board will not interfere with that responsibility. Then, within that organisation there is a second responsibility of administration and the board will be useful in helping that office of the Auditor-General to administer in terms of staff, in terms of recruitment, in terms of budget and so forth. So, if you apply that principle, I think it becomes clear that we need the board. 

MS KYATUHAIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think we all appreciate that the cancer of corruption has eaten us too much as a country. Here we are as Members of Parliament, given opportunity to give the keys to the Auditor-General to be able to help us in this area. Having a board, therefore, is going to undermine the work the Auditor-General is supposed to do. Remember that these members of the board are appointed. When they come in, let us say they are five - I did not look at the number - assuming the Auditor-General has a problem of an officer who has caused a very big loss to the country; these members are likely to connive to fail him. And remember also, that most of these boards when they are appointed are not usually technical. Therefore, it does not apply that we are going to help the Auditor-General to be able to do his work. I want to submit, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I am suggesting that we give time to various people to think of a solution while we move to other - 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, Mr Chairman. Thank you very much. I would wish to seek the indulgence of my colleagues in Parliament that you give us time to go and think it over. We have heard your good points and we need to see how we can harmonise our position with the position that we are hearing now. Let us move to the others then come back to this one later. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is very good for the Leader of Government Business to accept that they will stand over this and we move on. However, we must go keeping in mind that the Constitution has already provided for the employment of staff. So, we are not willing as Parliament, I think, to allow our powers to be taken away by the Leader of Government Business. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Stood over.

Clause 33

THE CHAIRMAN: Now we go to clause 33. I put the question that clause 33 stand part of the Bill- Yes funds of office of the Auditor-General- These are funds of the Auditor-General; it has nothing to do with the board. 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, since we have stood over part 4 and we are going to part 5 which talks about the finances and expenses of the Office of the Auditor-General, I was bringing in part 5 to be “The establishment of the Public Accounts Commission” which should come before part V. I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Public Accounts Commission? 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok. That is part V? The current part V will become part VI? Okay. Alright!

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, the Public Accounts Commission becomes section 33, which is the establishment of the Public Accounts Commission. Sub-clause (1): “There shall be a commission which shall be referred to as the Public Accounts Commission”. Clause 32(2) reads, 

“The Public Accounts Commission shall be composed of:
a)	The leader of Government Business in Parliament or a person appointed in writing by the Leader of Government Business; 
b)	The Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament; 
c)	The Chairperson of the Parliamentary Committee on Finance; 
d)	The Chairperson of the Budget Committee and; 
e)	Any other three Members of Parliament who shall be appointed by the Speaker.”

I beg to move on 33 (1) and (2).

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do you call it a commission?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman and hon. Members, since the Auditor-General has been given independence, we are trying to make a home in Parliament where all his correspondences and reports are channelled; where his Budget to be tabled to Parliament is received, synthesised and brought to Parliament. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are creating a structure for Parliament? 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: A commission within Parliament.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yeah, as you see, the home of this commission will be in Parliament and, therefore, you are creating a structure for Parliament - yes! Currently, with parliamentary structures as they are, there is a structure in Parliament, which is with the Auditor-General. The Auditor-General’s things come here and they are handled. This is according to the rules of Parliament. So, to use this law to create for Parliament structures has a problem. 

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I do agree with you that the establishment of the Public Accounts Commission as a structure of Parliament. There is a lot of constitutional implications to us, in practise and in essence, and the idea of establishing this body is okay. Probably, can we try to see how we can improve and strengthen the existing Public Accounts Committee to play this role by way of taking into account its membership, which will now therefore include the Leader of Government Business -

MR CHAIRMAN: What we can really do is to find out whether Parliament has not been able to handle affairs of the Auditor-General within the current structures. I, therefore, ask Parliament, to maybe create another committee. Because what we would create is not a commission but a committee to handle this one. Therefore, I think it is not proper for this Bill to create this for Parliament. 

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the very reason why the committee is trying to bring this is to do with helping the Auditor-General’s office on matters of the Budget. They feel – I have sat with a number of them several times and they seem to have the idea that whenever they are given to Ministry of Finance so that they appropriate for them and do all these kind of things, they feel somehow Ministry of Finance is giving them a problem, and they want to associate with Parliament fully. 

For that matter, I am trying to seek guidance from you whether we cannot accommodate them, not necessarily under the committee but under the Parliamentary Commission, such that their budget and everything else is catered for through the Parliamentary Commission as it appears that they are basically officers under this sector of Government.

THE CHAIRMAN: If there is a justified need exhibited, Parliament can always review its rules and create maybe another committee to handle matters of the Auditor-General if the current arrangement is not good enough. Therefore, it cannot come by this law but appeal to Parliament to review. Actually we are going to review a number of things because - for instance recently, we received the report of experts sent here by the Commonwealth Secretary-General and maybe if there are indications to us why don’t you create say, another committee for human rights, the IGG, that can be done. But unlike this one, I think it is out of order.

MR WADRI: Now that we have had this good guidance from you and this Bill before us is trying to make amendments to our Rules of Procedure, which create these committees of Parliament vis-à-vis the Bill which is before us, which we are considering now, how do we, Mr Chairman, synchronise the two? Because the other one is going to take quite some time and this Bill is before us. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Parliament is now being alerted that there is an urge to have another committee to deal with the Auditor-General. And therefore, Parliament can always sit, and having been part and parcel of this debate, Parliament can come up and say that “it is necessary to have this committee” and we can set it up. And they have indicated to us the people they think would serve on this committee, and we have them, we can add others. I think that can be handled by Parliament without including it in the Bill.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, I concede.

Clause 33

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 33, these are funds.

MR BAHATI: I just wanted to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance about clause 33(d): money from raising loans. I know this is a function of Ministry of Finance. Are we mandating the Auditor-General to borrow –

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, under 33(d), I propose that it be deleted. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay; I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 33 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 34 -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek your indulgence. I want to seek advice from the Chairman of the committee. Here in the report, you are saying “34 becomes 39”; what do you mean here?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Well, this was consequential. Now that we have conceded, it becomes deleted consequentially. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 34 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 35 -

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 35, I want to add “between accounts of any public body or international organisation, which does not receive money from the consolidated account.” Justification: It qualifies the application of provision for having the public and international, whereby you find the Auditor-General can levy fees on public bodies and international organisations for purposes of executing his duties.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I think that addition is not necessary. If we have “anybody or organisation”, it is implied that any organisation be it local or international, as long as it qualifies to be audited by the Auditor-General, it will be audited. So, I do not think adding the word “international” adds a lot of weight to the way it is stated.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, we deliberated on this at length with the committee and we accept the proposal by the committee.

MR CHAIRMAN: Does it do any harm?
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, in part 2 we want to delete “retained by the officer of the Auditor-General for defying the expenses of the office and any surplus shall and replace it with,” we want to delete that one. We want all funds to be received and deposited on the Consolidated Fund account. 
      
  (Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, we propose that clause 37 to be deleted. The justification, hon. Members, is borrowing by the national audit office will compromise its independency and the committee has recommended that borrowing powers be based under the Ministry of Finance. I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, deleted.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 42, I propose we delete “only by recommendation of the board”. The justification the Parliament appoints the auditor and it has been the case. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, agreed to.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a member of this committee and he signed and I am seeing him move an amendment instead of defending their committee. But he has been moving some amendments; so is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to participate when he is a member of this committee? (Laughter)

MR TINDAMANYIRE: On clause 42(6) we want to substitute “permanent secretary of the Ministry of Finance,” with Secretary to the Treasury.” The justification is that we want to accommodate a situation where by the permanent secretary is not necessarily the Secretary to the Treasury. I propose to move.
 
     (Question put and agreed to.)

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on sub-section 7 also the committee feels we should delete “he or she may,” and add “determined by Parliament,” at the end of the clause. I propose to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, supposing I want some guidance from you since my brother hon. Kubeketerya moved a point of order on me? The guidance I want, if my chairman is ready and has delayed to stand up and we want to make an amendment which is here, shouldn’t I get up to rather provoke my chair because I sit very far or what?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what we can maybe amend the sitting arrangement for the time being to allow you to cross to this side for convenience. Yes, you can come. (Laughter)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, the two committees handled the Bill together, so if the hon. Member could cross over to this side, there is no problem because we have enough yellows -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It would be ideal that the chairman crosses. (Laughter)

Clause 43
                             
MR TINDAMANYIRE: Clause 43(3), we want to substitute “250” with “1,000” and in the same clause, “three years,” with “12 years.” 

The justification, we want to create a harsher penalty for the offenders. I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman on clause 47, I propose and the committee proposes to delete “office” and replace it with the word “offence”. I propose to move on. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause what?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have stood over clause 46 because it talks about the board. So, I think we draw the matter to the board; we cannot delete it now. 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, although we have stood over it, I wanted to remove the word “office” and put the word “offence.” It was a typographical error. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, can we dispose of this substitution of a word and then come to our point.

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Chairman, there is something that I would like to be clarified on, clause 47(1) talks of the board, which I think we have agreed to stand over.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, we have agreed to stand it over. Now let us go to clause 48.

Clause 48

THE CHIARMAN: But then there is also statutory instrument. What do we do with that? Should we stand it over again?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, under 48(1), that is okay because the Minister of Finance is supposed to amend this statutory instrument about currency points; but clause 2 is talking of the board, which we have stood over. I think until we sort it out, may be we could now delete it and we substitute it later.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us stand it over. 

Clause 48, stood over.

Clause 49

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 49 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 50 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 51 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 52 stand part of the Bill. 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, in clause 52, it is actually repealing especially in (b) section 39 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, but in the same Act there is clause 39(2), which the committee feels should be retained. Otherwise with this one, clause 52 repeals everything. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay; I put the question that clause 52, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, my chairman has forgotten to include the protection of the Auditor-General from court proceedings. I suggest that you get up and we insert that clause to avoid any doubt.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it a new provision?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is a new clause.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question -

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, we are inserting a new clause, which gives protection to the Auditor-General from court proceedings.

THE CHAIRMAN: Read it.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Sub-clause (1) of that clause should be: “All reports of the Auditor-General published for the benefit of Parliament shall be treated as Parliamentary reports and shall enjoy all privileges accorded to Parliamentary reports. 

(b) To avoid doubt, no civil suit or criminal proceedings shall be instituted against the Auditor-General on the basis of any reports best published by him or her for the benefit of Parliament.” 

Here we are trying to insulate the Auditor-General but we are also trying to say - because he is a body corporate - that he can go into contract with a company. For example, he can say “Nandala-Mafabi and Company, go and audit Buddo Secondary School”, and when he fails to meet his obligation, he is sued. But here, we are insulating the reports that the Auditor-General makes or his opinion that he makes on any audited accounts to Parliament which are consumed by Parliament. Or assuming he audits USAID accounts which is an international body and he makes an opinion and USAID says that opinion is not to commensurate with what I gave you, he is liable to being sued because he is a corporate body liable to being sued. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want a clarification and I am sorry in case I am taking you back, but in the report of the committee on page 4, the Chairman is introducing a new clause where the Auditor-General is mandated to audit the treasury memoranda of Parliament. I do not know whether we have handled that.

THE CHAIRMAN: We did.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I think that completes the clauses and we have the schedule. What I suggest to minimise the delay, is that if we pass these schedules and they are mentioned in the board and eventually we happen not to retain the board, there should be consequential amendments that wherever this is referred to when it is not there, then it is – rather than waiting to resolve this one because I think they may need some ten minutes for you people to consult and they agree on the position. Don’t you think we should proceed with the schedules?

The First Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: Have we agreed on what to do? Because I am proposing that if we finish the schedule, we may give you some 10 minutes. We may have to suspend for 10 minutes. Okay, I put the question that the first Schedule stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The First Schedule, agreed to.

Second Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the second schedule stands schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled the Audit Bill, 2007, and has stood over some clauses [Hon. Members: “Mention them.”] Clause 2, clause 31 –(Interjection)- from clause 29 to 32. We have also stood over the third schedule; and we have made a number of amendments. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, since there were some clauses that were stood over, I think that it is necessary for some people to make some consultations and come back with an agreed position. Because of this, I am suspending the proceedings for 15 minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended at 12.38 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 1.21 p.m., the Speaker presiding.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE AUDIT BILL, 2007

Clause 29

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 29 the committee proposes that we retain the audit board and make some changes on the functions of the audit board. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which changes?

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, this is -(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The Opposition Chief Whip keeps offering me names. I am rising on a point of procedure. I thought we had taken a decision that the primary thing to consider under this part was functions because once we remove all the functions then automatically all the others go. Therefore, wouldn’t it be better to start with the functions because that is where the contention was? Once we have sorted it out, the others will fit in.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, we can consider informally because if we formally consider the functions; now that consultations have gone on, I think let us decide. One may ask: what will the functions be? If we start with the functions and we pronounce ourselves on them and then we don’t provide the whole, there will be a problem. However, if we deal with this informally and see that some functions are going to be - what do you think about doing this informally without necessitating us to pronounce ourselves? 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, we have agreed that for the better performance of any organisation and in modern management, an advisory role by a board is of essence. You could consider a situation in this case where the Auditor-General will hire professional people got from the civil service and employed by this office. Tomorrow, a certain Auditor-General in office may forget to take care of training of the staff. That board will come up and advice the Auditor-General that, “Please, there is an element that puts emphasis on training your staff”. 

So we are saying that generally the advisory role of the Auditor-General is done by the board, provided the board does not conflict with the constitutional rights of the Auditor -General. I beg to move.

MR WADRI: That is the exact area on which I wanted some clarification. We are here saying we want to have the Office of the Auditor-General with full autonomy. Don’t you think that creating this body, which is going to be responsible for advisory services given to the Auditor-General’s Chambers, will water down his independence? And who is going to appoint this board? What is going to be the functional relationship between this board and the Auditor-General’s Chambers? I am more concerned about the independence.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, let us separate two issues: operational issues and advisory role. When it comes to the operations of the Auditor-General, he has his total independence as by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. When it comes to the advisory role, the board has its duty and prerogative to do that. However, the Auditor-General might not take the advice given by the board. I want to give, an example, recently of the case in Tanzania where the Governor of the Bank of Tanzania was involved in a fraud and it was the board that unearthed what happened. Assuming that there was no board and someone insisted and said, “Let us piece this and get out this one”, how would the Bank of Tanzania have been able to lift the lid and know what was happening?

MR WADRI: My fear is that we are going to create many power centres and more so when you say that the Auditor-General will not be duty bound to take the advice given by this board, and that means that the board is redundant. Why should we have it? The Auditor-General is not duty bound and if he is not duty bound, why have that structure in place? It is redundant!

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Chairman, the argument of hon. Wadri that if we have the Office of the Auditor-General and then have the board playing advisory role and some other duties that will be prescribed by the law, we shall be undermining the Office of the Auditor-General in case of its independence, I want to tackle a case like in recruitment of staff where the Auditor-General is not a sole body. He is not alone; he is mandated to do it with the Public Service Commission. But this does not necessarily erode his independence. If we have this board to perform specific functions especially in the staff regulation and some other functions, it does not necessarily erode his independence. As long as we are having a board that is not going to erode his independence in performing his duty of auditing but in terms of administration and the workers who are going to be employed within the Auditor-General’s Office, you need that board to take care of this staff.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, hon. Banyenzaki. Earlier on, we debated on this Floor and agreed that actually in essence, the Auditor-General is an office of Parliament and we also agreed that we shall build mechanisms to strengthen the parliamentary institution of framework on how we are going to deal with the Auditor-General. In fact, there are institutions like the IGG which do not have a board and it has thousands of employees and we are not doubting his independence.

Given that now this board has become a bit debatable and drawing a line between the auditing function and the advisory role becomes very difficult because the auditing function is not a stand alone function; it works within the environment of the institution. You have got to recruit them, develop them and all these affect the auditing function. If you recruit wrong people, eventually they effect a wrong function. I want to suggest that given the fact that the Parliament is going to have an institutional mechanism on how to deal with strengthening the Office of the Auditor-General and also that the Constitution mandates the Auditor-General to work with the Public Service Commission, I suggest that this House deletes the board and then leaves the institution as independent as possible. (Applause) We are in a country where sometimes some people take corruption as business and they will do anything they can to protect their business. We do not want to create a situation where the Auditor-General is going to be compromised in that way. I implore Members that we delete the issue of the board because it has become debatable from the word “go”. How about if it starts working? 

MR WADRI: I think hon. Bahati who also doubles as the treasurer-general of NRM has summed it up well. I can see from both sides that people are contented that we delete the position of the board from this and then we move forward. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The point being made is that after consultation, what we came up with was that in order to avoid the possibility of undermining the independence of the Auditor-General in performing his/her functions, this board should be advisory; meaning that he/she would take or not take their advice -(Interjections)- I will answer the question. I am surprised that anyone would ask that question. How can you say it is useless to have advice if you are the one who decides? What is the role of intelligence, for example? (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, even the mood of the House can be read and it is boldly written on the wall. Once hon. Amama Mbabazi begins a debate, he will never give up as a freedom fighter. Procedurally, would it be right, now that we have exhaustively heard from both sides, that you put this matter to vote and we move to the next stage? I know hon. Amama Mbabazi will talk until the cows come home; he will never stop talking. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Do I take it that hon. Bahati is moving a motion that we delete this? 

MR BAHATI: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me allow some limited debate.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Wadri must –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, you suspended the House for these two parties to go and consult.

THE CHAIRMAN: It has not worked; what do I do? I have to continue with work. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I was saying that the purpose of advice is so that the decision maker makes a decision well informed. What is the problem with that? I really cannot understand it, even from hon. Odit, that there is a problem of a decision maker being advised –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is that there is a proposal to delete while hon. Amama Mbabazi is saying that we do not delete because we can say the function of the board is to advise on the following. I put the question to the motion 

HON. MEMBERS: Put the question; he is alone.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I am not alone definitely. I am with hon. Mafabi. (Laughter) The point is that clause 31 can be amended so that the board only provides advisory services and then we add a sub-clause specifically saying that, “In discharging its functions, the board shall not interfere in the constitutional powers of the Auditor-General.” What is the problem with the Auditor-General receiving advice? How can anyone say he should not? 

MR BAHATI: The information I want to give the hon. Minister of Security is that actually, if we delete the board, we are not saying that the Auditor-General will not seek advice from anyone. We have also provided that in case he wants some technical advice, he can hire consultants. I think to burden the Office of the Auditor-General with a structure that we do not have much confidence in is a waste of resources.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I just want to provide further information because hon. Mbabazi was asking, what is the problem with the advice? The problem is having a politically appointed structure advising the Auditor-General and given the mandate of the Auditor-General, we have fear that that advice can in one way or the other compromise the independence of the Auditor-General. And like hon. Bahati said, he can still get advice from Parliament, consultants and else where. And why should we be a special case by creating this body over the Auditor-General’s Office?

THE CHAIRMAN: I am putting the question on the amendment by hon. Bahati.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: And I think because of that, 29 will not stand 31, 32, 47, 48 and the schedule which talks about – 38 and 12. Is it clear? Those are assumed to have been deleted? And 2 is amended accordingly. I put the question that 2 stands part of the Bill – yes, we delete the deference to the board; so it is an amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in 2 we have dealt with the board. And the issue of a qualified accountant has been properly defined. So there is no need for the Accountant’s Act. So this one should also be deleted, “A qualified accountant means an accountant as defined in the Accountant’s Act.” So, we are deleting this because the person who qualifies to be the AG is clearly defined.

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question that Schedule 2 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendments?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, I wanted to move that the short title becomes, “National Audit Act”, and that wherever the Office of the AG appears, it becomes the “National Audit Office”. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, under 2 we propose that the definition of “private organisations” or “body” be defined under interpretation. For instance they say, “private organisation or body”. That should be defined.

THE CHAIRMAN: You want to insert it? How do you want to define them?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before the minister continues, we have defined “public organisations.” That means that private organisations are the opposite of this definition. So, there is no need for another definition.

MR CHAIRMAN: Okay; any other amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: A public organisation is defined in the PFA. So, we can say, “As defined in the Public Finance and Accountability Act.” In the Public Finance and Accountability Act, a state enterprise is defined as where government controls more than 50 percent of shareholding. 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on Clause 38, since we have removed the board, we should substitute it with, “In a manner determined by the board in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you are substituting the deleted board with that provision? Okay, I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: On the point raised by my brother, hon. Nandala, on the definition of a public organisation, it appears that the one which is being proposed here is not consistent with the one which is in the Public Finance Act. So I thought he was proposing that we either define this in terms of the PFA or we make cross reference to the PFA. There it says, “Where government controls more than 50 percent”, but here it seems to be open.

The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: Any changes to the title?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the committee has proposed that the short title be, “The National Audit Act,” and we have no problem with this. 

MR CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMACH: However, their consequent amendment that the Office of the AG should be replaced by the National Audit Office is not acceptable because this would be contradicting the Constitution because the Office of the AG is constitutional. So, I propose we leave it as it is.

MR CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the title.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Title agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the National Audit Act, 2007 and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL AUDIT BILL, 2007

1.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONIMC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the National Audit Act, 2007 be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL AUDIT ACT, 2007”

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is passed, congratulations! (Applause) Hon. Members, we are coming close to 2.00 p.m. but as you see, on the Order Paper there is The Education Bill, 2007. I do not expect a debate on this, but just for a few minutes the minister to move for a second reading and the chairman presents the report then we adjourn. You will go and study the report; after next week then we can come for a debate. It will take a short time. Thank you.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE EDUCATION BILL, 2007

1.54
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion that the Education Bill, 2007 be read for the second time. The object of the Bill is to amend, consolidate -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Education to proceed without anybody seconding the Bill?

MR OMACH: I seconded the motion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But we never saw you. (Laughter)

MR OMACH: I put up my hand.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You put up the hand? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Not yet. (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I seconded, except in style.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Proceed, hon. Minister.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. The Bill had been seconded. The object of the Bill is to amend, consolidate and streamline the existing law relating to the development and regulation of the education and training; to repeal the education Act, Cap 127 and to provide for other related matters.

There are specific objectives which I think I should go through:
1.	To give full effect to the education policy, functions and services by government.

2.	To give full effect to the decentralisation of education and services.
 
3.	To give full effect to the UPE policy of government.

4.	To give full effect to the universal post primary education policy.

5.	To promote partnership with various stakeholders in providing education services.
 
We deleted no. 6 because we passed a Bill relating to the training.

7.	To promote quality control of education and training in this country. I beg to move.

1.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr James Kubeketerya): Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Social Services on the Education Bill, 2007.

Introduction

The Education Bill, 2007 was tabled in Parliament on 8 May 2007 and the committee considered the Bill in accordance with Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Methodology

The committee discussed the Bill with the Minister of Education and Sports. Other stakeholders who made submissions on the Bill include: Education Service Commission, Save the Children Uganda, National Council of Higher Education, Uganda Joint Christian Council and Uganda Muslim Education Association, Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council.

The object of the Bill

The object of this Bill is to amend, consolidate and streamline the existing law relating to the development and regulation of education and training, and repeal the Education Act, 1970.

The specific objectives of the Bill

1.	To give full effect of the education policy, functions and services by the government.
2.	To give full effect of the decentralisation of education services.
3.	To give full effect to the universal primary education policy of government.
4.	To give full effect to the universal post primary education policy.
5.	To promote partnership with the various stakeholders in providing education services.
6.	To promote quality control of education and training.

The background

The Bill is premised to two principles namely; that education is a right to be enjoyed by every Ugandan enshrined in Article 30 of the Constitution. And secondly, the delivery of education services shall be a collaborative responsibility of the central government, local government and other partners. 

The other most important thing to note about this Bill is that it repeals the Education Act, 1970 which has been in force to date.  The Education Act, 1970 has been overtaken by various developments in the education sector and its implementation has become difficult. There has been marked development in primary education, post-primary education; education funding, and education inspectorate.  

Observations

a) Universal primary and post primary education. The Committee noted that government introduced the policies on universal primary and post primary education without the enabling law.  If this Bill is enacted into law it will enable government to implement the policies. 

	Mr Speaker, I would like to make a correction on the second paragraph where it goes that, “The committee supports proposals in the Bill that the universal primary” - please delete ‘post primary’ – “is made compulsory and punitive measures be taken against parents who refuse to enroll their children in school.” Similarly, education managers who charge extra tuition fees in universal primary and post primary institutions or schools be punished. 

b)	Management of private schools. The Bill provides for management of private schools. This will include registration, closure and inspection. The committee - and equally this Parliament - has all along been concerned about the mushrooming private schools. This law will regulate the operation of the private schools and enable government to put order in the sector.

c)	School foundation bodies. It is a fact that that Christian missionaries and Muslim communities founded the majority of schools. It is evident that these schools are owned by foundation bodies that have made enormous contribution to the education of the children in the country! The Bill recognises this fact. On the other hand, however, government grant-aided most of these schools and has been funding them.  The Bill proposes to introduce a charge on foundation bodies which want to pull out of government grant-aiding. The committee recommends that for as long as the foundation body maintains the school or institution for education purposes no charge should be made.  

Mr Speaker, on the title of the Bill, the committee has proposed a new title to read as, “The Education (Pre-primary and Post primary) Act, 2008.” The current title, “Education Bill” is misleading since the Bill does not address the entire education sector; it only addresses primary and secondary education.  

The other levels of education are being taken care of by their respective Acts or Bill. Cases in point are the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act and the Business Technical Vocational Education and Training Bill which was passed by this House on 10 April 2008. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that subject to the proposed amendments, the Bill be passed into law. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you chairman and the members of the committee for this very clear and brief report on the Bill. Honourable members, the process has started. The minister has moved the motion; the report of the committee has been presented. I do not expect you to start the debate now although the process has started.  

As agreed, when you finish the budget process of next week, we come back maybe on Tuesday - it will depend on the progress you make. But, tentatively on the Tuesday of the other week, then we shall start the debate on this Bill and other businesses that may be available. 

I want also to appeal to other committees having reports to indicate how far they have gone so that we can plan for utilisation of time between the other week and the time when the House will be prorogued, which may be around 15th May. But before that time, we can clear a number of these, if reports are ready.  

Hon. Members, with this I want to thank you for your acceptance to come on Friday and sitting beyond lunch time but completing an important Audit Bill and receiving the motion for second reading. I wish you an enjoyable weekend.  With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned for the committees to sit next week to consider the budget process. Thank you very much; you will be notified on the exact date when plenary will commence.

(The House rose at 2.04 p.m. and was adjourned sine die.)


