Wednesday, 20 April 2011

Parliament met at 2.48 pm in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I would like to say that I appreciate your patriotism, displayed by your coming to do parliamentary work today. Please continue doing so and please appeal to all the others who have not shown up to also practice the same patriotism. 

Secondly, I would like to inform you that we have a problem in the building relating to water and because of that, some of the facilities had to be closed. The only area where you can find water is the Eastern Wing of the Parliamentary Building. This was due to some kind of accident that occurred yesterday, which forced management to cut off water flow. I regret any inconveniences caused.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE RETIREMENT BENEFITS SECTOR LIBERALISATION BILL, 2011

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, go ahead.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, in compliance with the law, I also beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications of the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and subsequent reporting to us as soon as possible, and that should be before 12 May 2011.

The fact that this Bill has been read the first time means that the hurdle we had about the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill has been overpowered. I am saying this because that had been the condition, that the minister first brings the Bill relating to liberalisation. Now that it has been tabled, honourable members can now feel free to consider the other Bill that has been on hold for some time. 

Let me take this opportunity to welcome hon. Betty Nambooze.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

2.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that I have interacted with the hon. Minister of Education and Sports today. She requested that you permit her slightly more time to enable her complete the gathering of more information to help her make a fairly comprehensive statement on this matter. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE RETIREMENT BENEFITS AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, this Bill was read for the second time and the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development also already presented its report. However, because a motion had been raised by the Shadow Minister, hon. Francis Epetait, requesting that we first do the first reading of the Bill for the liberalization of the sector, we could not debate it. Now that I just did that a few moments ago, I request that debate on this Bill do start. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, as we left yesterday you told us to acquaint ourselves with the Insolvency Bill and that is what we are ready to debate this afternoon. In that regard, I do not know why we are changing to debate the Bill relating to retirement.

THE SPEAKER: You are right, hon. Nandala-Mafabi; that is the position we had yesterday, to deal with the Bill on insolvency because the condition that Parliament had set in regard to this Bill had not been met. However, now that the Minister who owns all the three Bills tabled the Bill relating to liberalisation – maybe the Minister can explain something on this. I believe he knows the circumstances under which this has come.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, as I said earlier, this Bill was earlier on presented to this House, a second reading was made and the Chairperson of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development already presented the committee’s position. However, as the House got to debate it, there was a motion that we first table the Bill relating to liberalisation for first reading, which we have just done a few minutes ago. In the circumstances, we only expect Parliament to debate that Bill and even get to the committee stage.

THE SPEAKER: What is the urgency of this Bill?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, first and foremost, this is one of the Bills that will enable this country to improve on its savings to GDP. Currently, Uganda has the lowest savings to the GDP in the region. We believe that with the liberalisation of the sector, more members will come on the ground –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, I am not talking about the urgency of that other Bill on liberalisation; I am talking about the authority Bill.

MR OMACH: Yes, this authority Bill will enable us to put in order the stakeholders who are now in the field. At the moment there is no single regulatory authority to regulate the industry. 

Secondly, our development partners would want us to ensure that this Bill is dealt with urgently. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to congratulate the Minister for bringing the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011. That is a very good step. We are not refusing the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill but if you look at the word, “authority”, that means they want to put in place an organisation so that people get jobs. They are looking at jobs -(Interruption)

MR OMACH: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a member of the finance committee and this is their committee report that is being debated. So, I do not see how he starts raising such issues when we are debating his own report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are on the Order Paper. I am sorry that hon. Fred Omach forgot this. I am not objecting to the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill. It is a good Bill. I congratulate you for bringing the liberalisation Bill; you should clap for yourself.

Having said that, we have the Insolvency Bill and all of us were aware yesterday that we were going to deal with it today. If you look at the Insolvency Bill, it is more important than the Retirement Benefits Bill. Why? There is a lot of insolvency which should be taking place here but because of no good law, we are having this problem. We should deal with this first and that one later. We can deal with that tomorrow. When we left yesterday, you had put us on notice that we would handle the Insolvency Bill. The whole night we have been reading about the Insolvency Bill and we are ready, but as far as the Retirement Benefits Bill is concern we can have it tomorrow.

3.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Mafabi for making those observations. The Insolvency Bill is a very important Bill particularly for the business community. However, it has been normal and standard practice that as government we determine the priorities concerning our business. 

Today the Minister of Finance has come up with a plea which they have discussed with you, that you consider prioritising and getting done with the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill. This understanding has been reached. Therefore, on behalf of government, I would like to request that we move expeditiously and handle the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill. Maybe we should even move to committee stage so that we can thereafter be in a position to attend to the pending business. I beg to request.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe it has a budget – why don’t you come out loud and clear. 

MR MIGEREKO: The Retirement Benefits Authority Bill has major input into our budgetary discussions. We shall only be in a position to realise our budget commitment if we can get done with it at this stage. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think some people want to take others for a ride. The Retirement Benefits Authority Bill is an organisation we are putting in place which will have a charge on our funds but –(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: It’s not about creating the authority and jobs; it is intended to regulate the pension sector where you have players that are not regulated. I find it much more important. At committee level, you are aware that we appreciated this fact. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a practical problem. When we adjourned yesterday we knew we were going to debate the Insolvency Bill and I carried my Bill to the House. When I entered Parliament, I was told we are handling a different Bill. The business of this House is decided by the members of this House and not by a few people who sit somewhere and change the agenda and then we come and find it in here. How do you expect me to follow what you are going to debate without my copy of the Bill? I think we should give notice to the Members of the business we are going to transact. I find it very difficult to debate the Bill that the honourable Minister is insisting on debating now. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is true that yesterday we said we would handle the Insolvency Bill but apparently there is something, which they are not telling you. They say the Insolvency Bill and this Bill are Bills which were tabled by the same ministry. However, I think the minister considers this one very urgent and that is why they have done that. Why don’t you give them the benefit of the doubt so that we pass it?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. By the time we adjourned yesterday, we were sure that it would be the Insolvency Bill rather than the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill that would be handled today. That was the final position. So, in terms of mental preparation and actually in terms of documents that we are carrying, we are carrying papers to do with the Insolvency Bill. We are not carrying the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill. That would effectively reduce us to spectators. I know most of my colleagues also did not carry that Bill unless there was another way in which the amended Order Paper was communicated to them this morning. 

So, we implore you; yes, the priorities of Ministry of Finance are different but let us proceed as we agreed yesterday otherwise we would be reduced to mere spectators in this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, who is the chairman of the committee handling the Insolvency Bill? Are you ready with the report?

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very much ready with the report.

THE SPEAKER: Is it a long report?

MR TASHOBYA: It is a short report.

THE SPEAKER: Ministry of Finance, what do we do? These are your Bills.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the Insolvency Bill belongs to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and not the Ministry of Finance. 

THE SPEAKER: They have a case in that yesterday we said we were going to deal with the Insolvency Bill. They say the material they came with is for the Insolvency Bill. Why don’t we go through it and finish and then maybe tomorrow - though tomorrow I had planned a different thing - we proceed? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I thought you were the head of this institution. Yesterday from your own mouth -

THE SPEAKER: You do not have to repeat what you have said a hundred times, hon. Mafabi. I am the one who said, you have said so. You do not have to repeat it. I am the one who said so and I have not changed but the owners of the Bill - the Government - say this is very important. I am trying to solve the problem then you come in. I have said if you people have the material for the Insolvency Bill, let us rush through it and then proceed. You do not have to repeat yourself.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we shall go by your guidance. Now that the chair of the committee is ready, we can receive the report and start the debate. My colleagues are heckling that the minister is not ready. Can you imagine these honourable ministers can dodge the House and have the courage to tell the nation that the minister is not there? Aren’t you even ashamed of dodging this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are wasting a lot of our time when work should be done. Would the minister in charge of the Insolvency Bill come forward and move the motion?

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, it will take us a bit of time to get the Minister of Justice and Attorney-General here because by the time we left Cabinet, he was aware we were going to deal with the Order Paper as it stands right now.

THE SPEAKER: In view of this scenario, while we are waiting for the minister in charge of Insolvency Bill, would the Minister of Education make the statement. Are you ready? 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.10
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I got notice that the hon. Members of Parliament wanted to hear some details about the hiking of fees at the public universities. I would like, in response, to make the following statement on that matter. I hope the papers are being circulated. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports and public universities have not discussed any issue on fees increment. Therefore, Government has no plan to hike fees in the public universities at least for the next academic year, that is, 2011-2012.

Two, I would like you to note that the disharmony at Makerere University on Friday, 15 April 2011 was a result of a remark made on the unit cost study by the university officials while appearing before the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament, and I want to underline that remark. The ministry issued a press statement on the same day to reassure the students, parents and guardians and the general public that the fees have not been increased or raised.

I would like further to request you to note that the strike at Kyambogo the day before yesterday, on 18 April 2011, was a case of communication breakdown between the university administration and the students. The university administration at admission issued letters of admission with fees figures for recess terms, which varied with what they were demanding from the students at the time of implementing the programme. When the students were issued with the admission letters, if I may clarify, they were notified that they would be paying Shs 100,000 for fieldwork -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Complete your statement.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: What I was clarifying is in paragraph 3. The students, on admission, were issued with admission letters where the fee for the practical exam was Shs 100,000. However, in the middle of the course, Council came up with an increase and students were objecting to that increase because according to the terms they had been given, they were supposed to pay Shs 100,000. So there was a breakdown in communication and we have looked at this issue and have put this back to where it belongs, that is, the students have to pay Shs 100,000 for their practical examination.

I would like to note in paragraph 4 that the Ministry of Education and Sports, in consultation with the Council of Kyambogo University, directed that the fees figures on the admission letters to students should remain in force. No variation should be made by the university administration.

Finally, the ministry wishes to reiterate that public universities will not raise fees as portrayed in the media. I want to again call upon the students, parents, guardians and the general public to remain calm and continue with their duties and work. There is no fear of raising or hiking the school fees for the next academic year. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I want to take the opportunity also to make a statement on what was raised by my colleague and Minister of Education on the Opposition side about the students who were about to lose their admission posts at Makerere University, having stayed there for so long. I beg to be permitted to read that also. It has been circulated.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I know it was raised but don’t you think it is different from this one?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: It is.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, would you mind? You can make it.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much. Would the chamber attendant kindly make a copy for the Prime Minister?

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, during the sitting of Parliament on 31 March 2011, hon. Alice Alaso, Woman MP, Soroti and Shadow Minister of Education and Sports, raised concern about the above statement, that is, the imminent dismissal of 2000 Makerere Students. 

I have made quick investigations and consulted with selected university officials on the subject and I would like to make the following statement on that subject: 

Mr Speaker, universities in Uganda are governed by the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 as amended. As provided in the Act, university councils and senates use regulations and rules to guide students and staff regarding effective and efficient execution of their duties and the management of their coursework, programmes and vetted activities while at the university. 

The regulations include the period of candidature, which limits students to a specific period or number of years they should stay at the university to complete the course. Their rationale for specifying the period for courses is articulated in the attached annexes I and II, which I will invite the honourable members to read. However, allow me to quote the most important paragraphs in the annex. 

First, knowledge should be acquired as continuously as possible so as to ensure that university qualifications have value, recognition -(Interjection)- as I was saying, I quote from that annex which I attached to this statement. Knowledge should be acquired as continuously as possible so as to ensure that university qualifications have value, recognition and must have currency both locally and internationally at the time of graduation. 

Secondly, in postgraduate studies, the areas of research may go out of date very quickly and not meet the criteria for the degree and thus require a student to either do further works or start all over again.

Thirdly, best quality assurance practices and policy also dictate that a curriculum needs to be reviewed after three years of offer and overhauled after five years of being updated. This results into major changes of courses offered and the student who overstays on a programme, for say, over five years, will find difficulty in fitting into the programme. The review normally results into change of course content, credit units and mode of grading.   

Fourthly, a university needs to each year assess its capacity in terms of class numbers, space for lectures and supervision of students so as to admit new students. If a considerable number of students overstay, they would affect the capacity of that university for subsequent years.  

The regulations also indicate the process for a student to apply and secure permission to withdraw from the studies where they are unable to continue because of various reasons. I am again referring you to those various reasons like sickness and other constraints which are indicated in Annex I on page 2.

The senate reviews the regulations regularly to accommodate new trends in the development of the courses and according to the needs of the students. The existing regulations on the period of candidature at Makerere University were reviewed in 2002 and then 2008. A student is allowed to stay on a programme for an extra four years, that is, four academic years, above the specified period for their course’s candidature.  

Due notice is given to all affected students through notices and other mass media before they are terminated. Senate has granted a grace period of up to December 2011 for students who joined the university before 2004 and have not yet completed their studies to do so otherwise they will be discontinued. 

Mr Speaker and Members, I believe the above information gives an adequate background on the subject and I would like to invite you to read the attachments which are very detailed. Specific cases of students who may be negatively affected by such regulations should be singled out for attention by the relevant officials at the university. I beg to submit, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Yes, hon. Okello-Okello.

3.22
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the statement. I wonder whether the so called public universities should be called public universities because the majority of students there are on their own - they are paid for their parents; they are private students. The institution, which we call a public university, depends likely on the tuition paid by private students. So, really what makes this institution qualify to be called a public university? 

I think the Government should seriously consider doing two things. One: make the public universities public as they were in the past when I was a student, so that all students are maintained by the taxpayer of this country. This idea of getting a few children of the rich paid for by the taxpayer and then the poor parents are completely excluded from university education is very dangerous for this country.  

Mr Speaker, since the Sixth Parliament, those of us who come from the North and East have been making requests nearly every year that students from these two disadvantaged regions be supported by Government by being exempted from paying tuition, but nobody is listening to us. To me, it is a quiet policy to exclude the North and the East from university education so that we shall be manual labourers of the children of those who are rich and can afford university education. 

Mr Speaker, this is a very serious matter and I call upon Government, particularly the Leader of Government Business, to take this matter seriously and take it up with the authorities concerned. It is very dangerous to deliberately keep someone ignorant. An ignorant person is very dangerous; he can destroy everything. 

So, I am appealing to Government to review the policy on public universities. We either make it public for everybody or make it private for everybody because if everybody is paying, we shall not complain. Now, you find that the people who are on Government sponsorship - I can say this without fear - 75 percent of them are children of the rich. Where are we going? We all pay taxes here. In the Sixth Parliament we investigated this matter and found that one of the students was a son of a Member of Parliament with us. It is not fair to sponsor the rich and leave out the poor. We should make education accessible by everybody. 

This talk about increasing tuition is not unfounded; there can be no smoke without fire. There was something coming up but my advice is, please do not because if you do it, right now students from the East and North are applying for dead years. Even to apply for a dead year you have to pay a half of one semester’s tuition, which some cannot even afford. This country is for all of us and not for some few people. If we are to remain as one nation, definitely we demand equal and fair treatment for everybody. I thank you. 

3.27
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Education and Sports for the statement she has made and I would like to seek some clarification from her. 

The statement made regarding the increment of fees in public universities was made some time back and Makerere University had its strike on the 15th of April and Kyambogo University had theirs on 18th April. You mentioned that there was a communication gap; why didn’t you communicate immediately when the Makerere students went on strike? We could have avoided the strike at Kyambogo University.

On the issue of students who re-sit exams several times in the university, I have witnessed a case where a student is disqualified even after failing only one paper. He sat exams the first time and he got 42 percent; he sat for the second time and he got 46 percent; and he got 42 percent the third time for that particular paper. He got distinctions for the rest. Is it really fair to disqualify a person who has studied for three or four years because he has failed only one paper? Is there a way of improving that method? 

We spend money on our students to study and just because they have failed one paper, they are disqualified forever. I think there is something wrong with our method of examination. At times you cannot avoid the malice of some lecturers who may not give the right marks to the right person. I would like us to find a way of re-assessing our students because we spend a lot of money on them and at the end of the day, they go empty handed. It is not fair. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.30
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for the statement but when this issue came on the Floor, I remember I said that the big problem lies with the ministry not supervising these departments. In the case of appropriation of aid to these public universities, if the ministry keenly did its rightful job of supervising public universities, the issue of hiking school fees would not have come because there is a possibility that –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, now that the Minister has categorically said that there is no increase, is it still an issue or should we deal with another matter?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I said that I had raised the issue of appropriation of aid and certain public institutions or universities, which collect money at source are supposed to report to the Minister to see whether they are actually using the money correctly. Even when she says that the school fees are not being increased, it still is high in these public institutions. This is because the operational costs may be high because money is not being used appropriately. 

I remember this issue was raised in the House and this is an issue about the Budget Act. The Prime Minister undertook to put these departments in order and he gave them a directive that they should make sure that they supervise these agencies and departments and report to him. Maybe there should even be a mechanism. I have seen a trend where ministers come and make statements and Members of Parliament talk for a day and at the end of it, it is business as usual. There is no mechanism under which Parliament oversees or tracks the commitments that have been made by the ministers through the ministerial statements; for example, nothing has been done on that issue. 

Mr Speaker, I agree with hon. Okello-Okello that there is no smoke without fire. They must be planning to do it. Today I saw a CT scan of a student with a bullet lodged in the nose. The other day, a student was killed in Rubaare Secondary School, Rubanda East constituency and more students are dying and nothing has been said! I am even more surprised that the Minister is not even regretting the action that led to this kind of alarm of hiking school fees. It may be an issue of internal affairs but the Minister of Education also has responsibility for the affairs that are happening in these schools and public universities. So, I beg to move that the Leader of Government Business should put to order the ministries where they are using money at source and are not complying with the Budget Act. I request Parliament to institute a mechanism under which Parliament can track the commitments that are being made on the Floor of this House. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit and if my proposal is taken, maybe we need to reinforce the Committee on Government Assurances so that this committee periodically reports to Parliament or appraises Parliament on the commitments that have been made on the Floor of the House. I thank you. 

3.35
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to comment on the statement. I want to thank the Member – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should curtail the time; use not more than five minutes. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: I want to thank the Member who raised this matter on the Floor and the Minister for the response. The question of affordable education is very serious and there is no politics in it. I came to your office because I wanted to make a comment but a colleague also made it on the Floor. That is why I am very grateful. 

This agitation for increased tuition should not only be looked at in public universities; a university is the epitome level of education but look at the whole system. The ministry is denying it, and we are happy that that act is not true, but two years ago, fees were doubled and other fees called functional fees were introduced. 

Hon. Members, whether you are in the Opposition or Government, we pay school fees for our own children, for our constituents – Shs 1.6 million at the beginning of every year. Hon. Minister of Education, I would like to inform you that this agitation over increase in school fees has gone deep down to the rural schools called the USE school. I will tell you that the Ministry of Education contributes Shs 42,000 to a USE day child and even the student in boarding section also gets that subsidy, but you will find a local school like Kazo Secondary School where I studied, in hon. John Nasasira’s constituency, or perhaps Nkoma because it shares a school in my constituency. They are charging Shs 250,000 per term per child who is USE subsidised. A private school where there is no USE is charging the same amount of money to cater for all their expenses.

Schools like Ntare and others are charging close to one million shillings. What policy is used to define those ingredients that make up school charges? I urge the Ministry of Education to come up with a comprehensive statement on how schools are audited. Are boards of governors the alpha and omega of raising and reducing school fees? Why are we having imbalances in these schools when the teachers are the same?

We should look at the inevitable costs of children staying at school. There is no electricity in villages, so there are no utility bills. We approved a loan here to construct over 1,000 classrooms. It is a bigger problem than looking at the public universities. I am continuing to see a trend of high affinity among education planners and managers to increase school fees at the expense of quality planning.

The Education Standard Agency has failed in its supervisory role. We have been talking about huge numbers of children per class but this comes about because of the greed of the managers who are corrupt. While we have liberalised the sector, we should have a minimum standard bearing in mind that Articles 30 and 34 guarantee a right to education as a basic one.

The issue of school fees at all levels should be defined by an Act if it is lacking and it should be criminal for schools subsidised by USE to introduce charges that are more or less the same as those of private schools.

3.35
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman representative, Soroti): I want to thank the Minister and comment on both statements. While the Minister gives a satisfactory explanation by university managers, she should know that there are students who take long to complete their academic programmes largely because of research related issues emanating from the university. This matter has been a subject of discussion for so long in our committee. Makerere has had a problem with their external supervisors so you get a student who does not receive the feedback needed to graduate in time.

The issue of missing marks has been a big problem in our public universities. In 2007 while making a similar complaint for myself, I met a student who was admitted to Makerere in 1992 and up to 2007 this man’s dissertation could not be finished because of the external supervisor. I want the Minister to explore this area with the universities such that when students are to be punished for the delays, the university should have a mechanism of detecting when the problem is theirs. 

I think we should ask ourselves what percentage of the GDP we invest in our public universities because if we are not investing in them, they will resort to this avenue of squeezing students to make ends meet. The only way of stopping the fees hike is to inject public money into public universities thus making education affordable by many.

The university was having problems meeting their utility costs and they came and pleaded with the committee; we could not find the money and they were sent back. They ended up pushing the poor students to bear the cost.

It has now become “criminal” to be poor in Uganda. You are born poor, do not go to a nursery school, cannot pass well so you are not sponsored by the Government but your mother or father is always taxed to sponsor the children of the rich who go to the powerful schools in this country.

We need to call for an entire review of university funding. We need to stop criminalising the poor. There is no equity in public university education and until the Government of Uganda re-thinks, you will have the strikes because the poor will not sit down and be marginalised. Instead of coming here to assure us on what we know, put money there and stop taxing the poor to educate the children of the rich. 

3.45
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): While this statement has been in good faith, I would like to inform the Minister about an eminent strike that will come to push for reduction of fees in public universities. Many students have failed to have university education because of these current school fees. 

I have failed to define school fees because some schools demand for beds, dictionaries and bags of cement but these things do not remain in the school. Are these part of school fees? I understand that even in public and private universities parents are the ones who are building these schools. Now who therefore owns these schools and universities? At the end of the day, the Minister should tell us the difference between school fees in public universities and private universities.

At what level are we going to continue paying for these increased fees at private universities? And if this one is not going to be increased, for how long are you telling the people of Uganda that the school fees in public universities will not be increased? Have you any policy or plan so that we are left to plan for the next five years or so, so that school fees at public universities will not be increased? 

I support the decrease of school fees in public universities. I do not support increase of school fees in public universities because we are - I will use the word “punishing” the students in the public university. We had boom those days, where have we put this boom for these students? Where has the boom gone? What reasons can we give to these students that they do not deserve this so that they can now understand that we have these problems here and there? So, hon. Minister, I wonder how long this non-increase of school fees will take before people can plan another strike. I thank you.

3.49
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take the Floor to talk about education. I remember I once asked the Minister of Education in this House if she were happy when she reads out the results of the exams. I told her that I would not have been happy at all because education in this country is not for everybody. 

If the issue of education is not addressed now and I can see colleagues agreeing with me, we are headed for a crisis. You can now see what is happening in Nigeria between the North and South – it is because of the issue of education –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I was a member of the Central Scholarship Board for four years and I want to tell this House that I could see scholarships going to one side. This is a true story and serious issue and if not taken seriously, it is going to cause problems in this country. 

You will recall that people raised the issue of employment and people saw that jobs were going to one side and of course leaders came up and said, “Look, go to Makerere and Mulago. People have studied.” And it is true that they have studied. I interviewed students and I saw them with triple A’s and they were all getting scholarships. These are the children of the rich; these are the children who have gone to Kampala Parents’, Greenhill Academy and Lohana Academy. What about those poor children from Sironko? What about those children who have gone to those poor schools? If the issue of education is not addressed now, we are headed for trouble in this country because the jobs are going to one side; we are going to go to one side. 

For us in Mbale today, if a child gets 12 in four subjects, you are very happy because your child has passed in the first grade. But we know very well that here in Kampala if your child does not get a four and strong one for that matter, you will not go to Gayaza, Namagunga or Budo and yet these are the children who end up in Makerere and the Government pays for these children. What about the children of those poor ones who never get a chance? So, I am urging Government to take action now, otherwise, there will be a crisis in this country because jobs will be taken by one side. 

I happen also to sit on the Public Accounts Committee and when people come and introduce themselves – you know when they say, “Wamai” you will know that “Wamai” comes from Mbale. So, this is the problem which we must address and take seriously. Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member from Mukono; I will come to you later.

3.52
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Admission to public universities depends on grades. Students with the highest grades will get admitted to the public universities but we all know how good grades come about; most first world school students will be admitted to the public universities and children of the poor will always end up in the so-called private universities. 

I would propose that instead of the Government concentrating on a few lucky students who get admitted to public universities, the Government considers subsidising university education for all, including students in private universities, because at the end of the day, we do not have private citizens or those who belong to the Government; all these are Ugandans and they should benefit from the taxes paid by their parents.

Secondly, the Minister of Education should also check out with private universities to determine the ceiling or maximum they can charge students as fees. I have a student in one of the private universities and I failed to clear a balance of Shs 100,000. Yesterday this student was saying that I now have to pay Shs 300,000 as a result of failure to pay Shs 100, 000 -(Laughter)- because of a surcharge. They do surcharge on the balance – they have what they call deadlines and if you do not pay by a certain date, then you are surcharged. Imagine a parent who cannot raise money today to be demanded to pay more money tomorrow as surcharge! 

Another point is that even the quota system has been - people are trying to cheat with the quota system. You will find that someone with a student in Kampala will take that student to register in an upcountry school so that at the end of the day, that student will sit for his or her examination say deep in Mukono or Luweero and when the quota system comes for students of Mukono, this person who came from Kampala will benefit from the quota system of those students who were supposed to have come from Mukono.

Finally, when I apply for a dead year, for example, one of the reasons maybe that I do not have the money today but then I am required –(Interruption)

MR KAKOBA ONYANGO: I thank you. I want to thank the hon. Member for giving way. The information I wanted to give about the quota system is that they do not actually consider the school but where you come from. There is a procedure for a student to be registered at the LC 1 to the sub-county and they consider the area where you come from. So they do not consider the school but the area you come from. Even if you are from an upcountry area and you sit in Kampala, you can still go to your area in the village where you are and then they register you. 

MS NAMBOOZE: If that is the case, then it will even be more unfair -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you for giving way. I have been consulting with the Minister of Education here. The scholarships that we are talking about are now 4,000 in the entire country. If you count how many people qualify in secondary schools, certainly 4,000 is a small percentage and now increasingly, some of these people who are qualifying are going to private universities. Pretty soon, the number of children in private universities will be by far more than those who go to Government universities. So the argument that the honourable member is presenting - perhaps she should say that we should have free universal university education. That is when we will be fair to the poor and to the rich. I don’t know whether this economy can afford that.

MS NAMBOOZE: An economy which can support the buying of jets at Shs 1.7 trillion can definitely afford to educate its children. Mr Speaker, our children do not end up in private universities as a matter of choice. It is because the existing public universities cannot consume the students produced at A’ Level.

Finally, Mr Speaker, if you allow me because most of the time has been taken up by my colleagues - when someone applies for a dead year, that person should be exempted from paying money because at the end of the day, it is because I do not have money that I choose to step aside and take a dead year. Now if you charge me for having taken a dead year then the whole essence of taking a dead year does not apply. Thank you.

3.59
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Minister for the very important responses. On the question of terminating those who do not complete for one reason or the other, for us who were in Makerere University in 88/89, we saw an opportunity of our colleagues who had gone to the bush, among others, the late hon. Mayombo, the Mugiras, the Shaban Bantarizas, came and joined us because of that latitude. You can miss university for four years or five years and you come and join. So, I am very concerned if the university becomes - such members would never have completed university education and that is why I would urge the university to administratively handle case by case; is it school fees, is it sickness? Somebody can fall sick for six years and when he recovers, should you stop him from completing? So, I would like to urge that they reconsider that position.

On the unit cost of study, I have been a good relative of the social services committee in Parliament and in 2008, I actually was at pain to ask the university team which was in the committee if what Government gives as Government sponsorship is in tandem with the actual cost of a student. The answer they gave was to the contrary and actually the committee then requested that these studies should be done so that we actually know what Government should be paying. Beyond that, it takes us to the debate that Members have been saying that there are no private citizens. 

Prof. Kabwegyere has even gone further to say, “Can we afford free university education?” We need to review our education systems to look beyond the funding. If we entrusted our education system to the foundation bodies, then Government would be at liberty to provide bursary scholarships per enrolment. You can agree on what score you are going to use but whoever qualifies and is in a university, whether public or private, should be able to access through competitive meritocracy that bursary and that would make - because right now the conclusion of the Minister is that the fees will not be increased but that is sweeping too much under the carpet. 

The universities are grappling with the unit cost challenge. So when you tell them continue like that, basically you are saying the problems should continue in the university. You are forcing these administrators of the universities to operate under funded and yet we would be more open by saying, “Let us agree with the cost unit; let Government agree on how much it can sponsor through a bursary scholarship scheme for those ...” Of course I appreciate the quota system. The quota system is the most fair so far in this country because it gives the weak in those small districts of ours who would not compete with my children in Budo who always get triple A. [Ms Bako: “Information.”] The bell has already gone my neighbour.

So I really want to request that we review the sponsorship of education all together including what hon. Tumwebaze was raising that even at secondary school level, we should not only look at financing. When the schools are under foundation bodies and PPP management, there are values they impart to students. There is supervision and there is monitoring. That is why you will find private schools like Kisubi performing because there is some extra control beyond Ministry of Education from a foundation body. That is an area we should be putting more emphasis on.

I want to remind you that by just funding children in these secondary schools - Uganda is having a crisis of drugs in schools and because most of these schools have been left to be LC owned, we have left them to be owned by community, whatever is owned by everybody belongs to nobody -(Member timed out_)

4.05
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for this statement. It is the Movement Government that has made education a very important sector in the development of our country. The Movement Government introduced free primary education and with that, there are many of our brothers who are going to school. We introduced free secondary education; we opened up education for everybody. 

We used to have very few people going to the universities but right now as I talk, there are so many of our brothers and sisters who are joining universities. But allow me to say that we need to put a lot of thinking into our education. We need the Minister to really think about our education in this country. 

I want to interest our Minister to keep visiting these universities. There is a lot of rot in most of our universities. Right now, we send over Shs 160 billion to our universities but where is it going? Where is that Shs 160 billion going? We only sponsor 4,000 students in the university but we are spending Shs 160 billion. 

Last year I made the same statement here that we are spending Shs 25 million per student at the university but we can still spread this and include most of our brothers who are not enjoying these benefits. The Minister promised to come up with a statement on how we are going to utilise the Shs 160 billion that we are spending. We have waited but all in vain. Right now they are saying that they are going to increase tuition for our students; we cannot accept this! Hon. Minister, you need to sit down, do strategic thinking and come out with the right procedure. 

I want to appeal to the Minister also to study the lifestyle that our children lead in hostels. When I am going home, I pass by a hostel which has a bar. On the upper floors, there are student’s residences, and a bar and discotheque underground. Is that what we want for our children? Go and see what is happening in the hostels on that side of Makerere University; it is becoming a brothel! Children go there to sell their bodies, but the Minister is just looking at them; no control, no administration whatsoever. We are exposing our children to evil when the Minister is around just watching. We have to do something.

Last year I heard they were going to privatise the halls in the university. Is that the right thing to do? Hon. Minister, we were told you are not building any more halls in the university. People coming from the North and East come to this university but it is too expensive and they cannot afford the cost of accommodation. I appeal to you, hon. Minister, if you cannot manage our university, then liberalise it; because Government has failed to run it. I went there last time – actually people now hold classes under trees. Some study from the windows; they study even at midnight and at 2.00 in the night. What kind of education are we giving to our people? People can now even buy degrees –(Interjections)– yes, people now buy degrees. This is not the education we want for our people. 

May I therefore interest the Minister in three things: look at the accountability of the money that we give to the universities! Let us also do more strategic thinking in the universities that we have in the country. Three; let the Minister monitor and supervise all the public and private universities –(Member timed out_)

4.10
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am from the North and when we talk about universities and other institutions of higher learning like clinical officers’ training schools and other tertiary institutions, our youths are greatly affected. We have talked about permission to withdraw for a short time, but after applying for a dead year, some of these students get completely stuck and eventually drop out completely. 

The proposal about giving some time to study the education system in Uganda is very important. I personally approached the Minister one time and asked her, “Is there no way for us to create, say loans for education at the higher levels?” The answer was that the funding was not yet there. 

Our people from Acholi sub-region no longer have animals which used to be our source of income and we often get stuck. We have hundreds of students coming to us for help. Hon. Minister, I think we should consider giving out loans. 

On the State House Scholarship, this system is not helping our children. I think that scholarship programme needs to be withdrawn from State House and be put in a central location where there can be some sort of balance. Our youth in the North are not accessing those scholarships. My appeal is that if we cannot handle the public universities, then let us privatise them so that you give loans to our youths. Otherwise, we are failing in our work as leaders yet education is so important in our work; not only to a section but to all. 

The policy to support those who perform very well targets children of the ministers, MPs and highly placed people in the business community. But how about the 80 percent of the children in the villages; we should not leave them behind because if we do, they will be a source of problems to the country and we are not going to have it easy in the near future. 

So, honourable minister, it is very important to have some people do a bit of study in this area and come out with something comprehensive that includes all our youths. These quotas are very small; we have –(Member timed out­_)

4.14
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the private universities and particularly the policy that liberalised the education system because many MPs and ministers here are beneficiaries, otherwise, they would be having a problem with the Electoral Commission. There are so many leaders who have managed to get degrees through those institutions. 

Having said that, it is important that the Ministry of Education is clear on the policy of education. All of us here are just hiding our heads in the sand; we who studied in Makerere in the past years, our task was to pass. The moment you passed with two principles, Makerere would not ask you for the school you came from, the districts you came from and so forth; we would all receive equal treatment. 

The tax collection at that time was less than Shs 5 billion a year. Now we collect Shs 8,000 billion but what are we doing with it? It is important that we rethink the education system. We need a whole day to talk about this, not just few minutes where hon. Bitamazire brings a statement. This is a serious issue. Many people have sold their land and when they no longer have any more to sell, they return home empty handed because they cannot pay the fees. There must be a mechanism to deal with this.

Recently, I was in Gulu and I heard hon. Hilary Onek on Mega Radio; he moved around the whole of Northern Uganda saying, “I have managed to get two scholarships for people in Northern Uganda from State House”. He took that as a big thing. I do not know how many hon. Wabudeya got for Eastern Uganda. It is time for us people from Eastern and Northern Uganda – we have been marginalised for so long. The people of Eastern and Northern Uganda should arise and leave this country for others and go to our own site, otherwise we are in trouble. We are being given peanuts, and the rest is going to a few people in one region of the country.

Finally, I want to concur with my brother hon. Okot that we need a serious audit. The Vice-Chancellor of Makerere bought two cars at Shs 700 million –(Member timed out_)

4.17
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Uganda we run the 7-4-3-4 education system -(Interjections)- but the problem with this is that education is most expensive at the terminal end. Right from the beginning, quality is compromised until the terminal end. 

We might be romancing with words that Government is doing a lot. I can assure you, we are reaching the dead end. The fact that I am talking as a former university lecturer –(Interjections)- give me the opportunity to educate my friends about the real issues that are happening. For example –(Interjections)- the quota system – my honourable friend from Buliisa was saying that the quota system has given us an opportunity for equal distribution. 

I want to inform you now that if you looked at the Human Development Indices of this country; you will realise that the East and the North where head-count poverty is the highest – even these district quotas have not helped. Why? Sixty percent of the beneficiaries of district quotas are from Western Uganda. Why? That region has been partitioned into very many districts. Therefore, the quantitative effect of that division –(Interjections)- I am giving you facts. Cross check; the Minister is there -(Interjections)- you can find this with her ministry. You only need to read in order to understand these cases. This is a testimony. How many districts have you created? For example, Arua has five counties and those are the equivalent of 10 districts because in some of these regions, you only need 40km and you are in another district. These are the unfair things we are talking about.

Mr Speaker, to my hon. Minister’s attention; did you know that right now Makerere University is not admitting students for a PhD programme in economics? Why? Since 2004 when they started that programme, no student has graduated with a PhD in economics. So they are not admitting any more. What are you doing about it? There is a serious capacity problem. The students are not completing. That has denied other people an opportunity to register for such a course. What are you doing about it?

Secondly, when we are talking about tuition; it is true students in these public universities are being supported by the private students. If Government has not released money, it is the tuition from the private students that sustains the Government-aided students. The question is: if MPs’ and ministers’ children are going to Gayaza and are among the 4,000, what about the taxpayer down there who is fuelling our car? Are we thinking about that person or we have closed our eyes and are saying, “No, since they are there, we need to use this elimination strategy so that we, who are in positions of influence, our children will be educated and the peasants will forever continue to be peasants?” (Member timed out­._)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know how the system works. (Laughter) No, next time. I think we have extensively debated this. Do you have any remarks or – but again, I had advised that the committee in charge of education brings up an item, which can be given sufficient time like discussing the sponsorship at Makerere and what we can do about it and so forth. We have to end this debate. 

4.21
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleagues for the comments, the queries and responses to the statement.

I will pick out just a few - but I am very grateful that you are proposing that we discuss in detail some of the issues at the committee stage or during the committee meetings. When I stated in my statement that we are not increasing or hiking fees at public universities, I meant this coming academic year. I would like to request that on that paragraph, you add, “for the academic year 2011/2012.” 

I would like to remind Members that only two years back in 2009 Government came up with an increase of 40 percent. This was to match the inflation which also affects programmes and budgets at universities. Therefore, what I am stating here because what sparked off the unrest among the students of Makerere University was that for the coming year starting in September, there was going to be an increase in fees, which is not correct. 

My statement was responding to that. But whether or not in the next two, three or four years fees will be increased - that is not what is implied in this statement. But for the coming year 2011/2012 starting in September, there is no official Government increase in fees at public universities. I thought I should make that very clear.

What was referred to and it is in my statement - there was an official who made a comment but that comment was about a report made as a result of a survey which hon. Mukitale referred to. The report has not even been discussed and is not yet a White Paper. The report is somewhere. Probably that recommendation was made but it does not tantamount to a policy. That comment did not refer to any firm policy about raising school fees.

The next issue I want to get back to is the Northern region. I am very happy and probably, I will say what the Leader of Government Business may come and clarify further, we have got the PRDP programme, NUSAF and NUREP. In addition, we have the UPE programme and the USE programme. Starting next January, we are getting HSC sponsored by Government; not in any region of the country but throughout the country. I believe those schemes will help us address issues in the Northern region. 

If I may add, we are already working on a programme that is going to give affirmative action –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is: what is the component in the PRDP that goes to education? Is there any allocation under PRDP particularly for education? 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable minister that there is money for PRDP as you have rightly put it to this House but the local governments in Northern Uganda at the inception of the PRDP came together and came up with a paper on university education. It was well-documented; it was very participatory. This paper was submitted to the Government of Uganda so that it could be funded under the PRDP. Unfortunately, the Government of Uganda declined to fund that education paper which was proposed by the local governments of Northern Uganda. Now I am shocked to hear the Minister saying there was a possibility of funding. So, why did you refuse to fund it? Why and yet you have our views on university education?

MS AOL: Mine is a clarification on this Universal Secondary Education which is also going to extend to Advanced Level now. I think Layibi College charges about three hundred and maybe eighty something and then USE contributes Shs 42,000 per student. A lot of our children who, under all difficulties, manage to be admitted officially to those schools like Layibi College and Gulu High School but because they cannot raise the two hundred or maybe three hundred thousand shillings per term, they cannot join. So, I think hon. Minister, you need to clarify this USE and even the UPE and you need more studies on it. We need that clarification. Does it cover all the fees or it just covers less than a quarter of what -(Interjections)- is required per term? Thank you.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleagues for raising clarification questions. Hon. Okello-Okello is wondering whether PRDP includes anything on education.  I think I will have to come up with a paper to show how many classrooms, laboratories, desks, teachers’ houses and so on and so forth are listed in PRDP. (Applause) I will also come with figures on NUSAF.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, as I have said, the sector committee should come with an item to discuss this.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: So, actually that programme is not only looking at university education but it is rehabilitating education right from primary one so that we continue building the capacity and raising the standards from the beginning so that we can, in some years, see students qualify to go and join tertiary and university institutions.

My colleague hon. Alaso is talking about the blueprint which we have and which we are implementing in phases - (Interjections)- no, I have the blueprint and I know how we are handling it and probably in that workshop or seminar I will come with it and show you, phase by phase, how we are implementing that blue print. I am aware of that.

Then the issue of USE, I think was raised by two colleagues. USE is a day programme whereby Government is paying Shs 41,000 per student per term but then many young people probably are finding it difficult to walk to school and many of those schools are being gradually and locally being turned into boarding schools. So, the Shs 300,000 or the Shs 250,000 is not for fees. That money is to pay for the accommodation and upkeep of those students at those USE schools. These are local arrangements, which we are investigating and we want to find out exactly why education which Government is trying to make cheaper is being made expensive. 

And then I would like to clarify that some schools are not in the USE programme. Because of the nature of the facilities and level of development that they are at, we could not include them in the USE programme. These are schools like Namagunga, Kisubi and Sir Samuel Baker which was launched, rehabilitated and equipped the other day and so on. So, not all Ugandan schools are under the USE programme. USE schools are in their own category and those which are very expensive schools which had been developed long ago and which have got facilities which are very expensive are also running in their own category, are not under USE.

So, I am really making the point that with UPE, USE and the Government-sponsored HSC starting next February covering the entire country, I believe all children will have the same opportunity to continue and study and then as we improve our equipment and instructional materials, they will all qualify.

As I said, it is not possible to go over all the issues but let me talk about what hon. Okot Ogong has said that the minister should go round at night supervising what happens in the hostels and see exactly what happens. Well, it is a good idea but I would refer you to what is going on in the area of the economy of this country. There is liberalisation and privatisation and there are other macro policies on the economy. So, the fact that now individual, private investors are putting up hostels, I think should be a welcome trend so that many of the students who otherwise would not have found accommodation in a decent place can now -(Interjections)– yes, but what we are saying is that we set standards and that the deans in these universities are responsible for day to day or regular monitoring and supervision of these hostels. 

I would like to add that these days with the liberalised education system in the country, not all people at the universities are children. I think we have to realise the composition of students at universities. They are not all children. Some of them are big people like ourselves here and, therefore, if we put a system where the Minister, through his or her agents, goes at night and finds out who is in the hostel, I think we shall have a problem. (Laughter) But from what I know, the deans of students are doing a very good job of regularly monitoring and looking at the standards of these universities, a) for safety because safety is very important; b)for the hygiene and public welfare and c) these deans are counselling students who otherwise need counselling. 

Therefore, hon. Members I thought I would just respond to those very general and very important aspects but then I want to take the opportunity offered by the Speaker that probably we all need a seminar or a workshop to go over what we are saying about education at every sub-sector and then we come up with a way forward.  

I would like to remind this Parliament that the policies and programmes we are implementing now came out in the Government White Paper of 1992 - not long ago - but if there is need to revise and review some of these policies and programmes, I am sure Government will respond accordingly. Otherwise, I would like to thank you very much for your comments and constructive additions and the Ministry of Education surely is going to take up all these issues. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INSOLVENCY BILL, 2009

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Insolvency Bill, 2009” be read for the second time.

This Bill has gone through a chequered history; it is part of the package within the commercial justice reform system that stretches way back to 1996. Many of these commercial Bills have gone through this House and many are yet to come – this is one of them. Insolvency is a court procedure where a debtor is adjudged insolvent and is divested of his or her assets. Creditors may then make no further individual claims against the insolvent but must prove their debts collectively awaiting the administration of the insolvent’s estate from which they receive proportionate share of the insolvent’s assets, impartial satisfaction of the debts. An individual bankrupt may then be discharged from bankruptcy and thereby released from liability from all his or her debts. In the case of a company, it will be dissolved.

As Members may be aware, at present, the law on insolvency exists partly in the Bankruptcy Act which deals with insolvency of individuals and also the Companies Act which deals with insolvency and winding up of companies. The aim of the new Bill is, therefore, to combine the two ideas into one piece of legislation applicable to both individuals and companies. The law is, therefore, being consolidated into a single insolvency code for ease of reference, management, administration and policy control. The intention is that the Bill will repeal and replace the Bankruptcy Act, to omit the relevant provisions of the Companies Act and to repeal the Deeds of Arrangement Act, which deals with matters to be covered by the Bill. While the Bill maintains the difference between corporate insolvency and individual insolvency, the Bill seeks to maintain as much uniformity as possible.

The enactment of this Bill will promote investment and enhance Uganda’s rating in doing business and generally protect creditors as they go about their business in Uganda. I beg to move.

4.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Insolvency Bill, 2009. 

This Bill was read for the first time on 18 August 2009 and it was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee held a stakeholders’ workshop and discussed the Bill with representatives from the following institutions: 

(i) 	The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
(ii) 	The Judiciary –

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t these clear? Why don’t you just say, “The list of those is here”?

MR TASHOBYA: The object of the Bill is to provide for receivership, administration, liquidation, arrangement, bankruptcy and cross border insolvency. To amend and consolidate the law relating to receiverships, administration, liquidation, arrangements and bankruptcy and to provide for related purposes. 

Insolvency denotes a state in which an individual or a business is incapable of meeting its debts as and when they fall due. 

At present, the law relating to insolvency in Uganda is spread over a number of enactments. In the case of individual insolvency, the matter is regulated by the Bankruptcy Act. In the case of insolvency of a company, however, it is regulated by the Companies Act, that is, the provisions which deal with winding up and liquidation of a company. 

The object of the Bill is, therefore, to rationalise the law and combine the relevant provisions into one applicable to individuals as well as companies. 

Observations:

i)	The Bill is extremely important and timely in as far as it is intended to update the law on bankruptcy and company insolvency to respond to new challenges in this area and introduce some global-based practices.

ii)	The Bill is necessary because it seeks to combine all the relevant provisions in regard to bankruptcy and company insolvency, which are currently spread in the Companies Act, the Bankruptcy Act, and the Deeds of Arrangement Act into one law, the Insolvency Act. This will make it easier for all the different users to access and apply.
iii)	The requirement of insolvency practitioners to be affiliated to professional bodies with codes of conduct is a welcome move to protect debtors, creditors and the general public. The disqualification of certain persons from acting as insolvency practitioners, for example bankruptcy, persons below 22 years and persons of unsound mind is also helpful in the same regard. The committee hopes this will introduce an element of strict adherence to professional standards.

iv)	The provisions of the Bill in regard to cross border insolvency are very important especially that there is increased cross border commerce. The committee hopes that these provisions will help to protect especially creditors and the general public in situations of cross border insolvency. There is need, however, to negotiate reciprocal arrangements for cross border insolvency with other countries.

v)	The Bill does not provide for the mode of service of the demand notice. This may lead to litigation by parties claiming that they were not served with the demand notices. The mode of service should be provided for in the regulations to be made under the Act.

vi)	The exclusion of certain items from a bankrupt’s estate may deny creditors opportunity to access valuable property, which should be available to them for recovery of their monies. Such items include a matrimonial home of the bankrupt and tools and other items or equipment, which are necessary to the bankrupt for use personally by him or her in his or her employment, business or vocation. Such property should also be available to the creditors to recover their money. It may be necessary to prescribe a minimum value beyond which such property should comprise part of the bankrupt’s estate available to clear the creditors. 

The committee recommends that the Insolvency Bill, 2009 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the report was duly signed as required by the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and your committee members for the report.

4.47
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report, although I have a few things that I would like to ask the committee to help me understand.

First, yes, commercial laws are very important for business and I think the law on insolvency is important too. I also know that there are other laws relating to this area. For example, there is the bankruptcy law, the insolvency law and in the companies’ Act, where there is some section that deals with liquidation of companies. I have read through this Bill but if you say we are now discarding the bankruptcy law, does it mean the good clauses in that law are not going to be taken care of? For example, where do you want to put that section on acts of bankruptcy, which is very important, but is not catered for in this Bill?

Two, there is a section that talks about properties in the law of bankruptcy, to the effect that if the person declared bankrupt had mutual dealings with a creditor, the two can agree on sharing some of the assets so that they do not lose on the value. But this Bill is silent about that. This means you are making the person declared bankrupt to be at a big disadvantage. I am saying this because at the time someone is declared bankrupt, it means his or her property can be sold even at less than 10 percent, which is very dangerous; it makes him suffer more instead of helping that person save something.

Three, the Bill does not provide for a demand notice, but you also have not provided for it in the amendment. Where are we going to fix it? You know that this notice is very important. Otherwise, people will go to court and claim not to have got any demand notice.

And for matrimonial homes – I have worked in bankruptcy and liquidations business and I can assure you that even in the UK, those homes are never touched because when you touch such homes you are making the debtor a destitute. Otherwise, where would you expect them to take their families? That is why they leave them with those homes and one bank account which is regularly monitored for purposes of maintaining their families. So, I think the committee is making it worse because by the time somebody is declared bankrupt, there are already many reasons.

I also would like to suggest that we provide in this law – whenever someone goes to a bank to borrow money, the banks usually talks about forced sale value. They will value your house at, for example, Shs 1 billion, but they will say that forced sale value will be 50 percent, which is Shs 500 million. This means they will only give you a loan of Shs 200 million because they would love to give you money in amounts that will be easier for them to recover when you fail to pay back that loan. In such cases, if we do not introduce a provision in this law to safeguard the people who are becoming insolvent or bankrupt to help them have their assets fetch market value, the banks will continue doing anything to make their debtors remain perpetually bankrupt. 

I am saying this because at such a time when you pay off all your debts, you are supposed to be discharged from bankruptcy, and come back to life. Otherwise, when you remain bankrupt, you will be nothing forever and ever because you will not even be allowed to travel anywhere.

I would like to request the committee to help us do something so that when liquidation of a person’s property is done such a disposal should not be done at the will of the official receivers. Let me give you an example of a liquidation that took place in Uganda for Produce Marketing Board. Land for this board in places like Kololo and elsewhere was being sold for only Shs 500,000 because there was no real market value set. This made people give any value to property and because that was liquidation, nobody was bothered yet that was a public company. But bear in mind that that situation can also apply to an individual or a private company.

I am still hesitant about having the law on bankruptcy. I would like to suggest that we just have both the bankruptcy and insolvency laws and just add what we think is missing to have just one Bill. I am saying this because there are so many good ingredients in the law related to bankruptcy. If we remove all of them, we will weaken it.

THE SPEAKER: I thought he said he is going to consolidate it. Isn’t that what is happening?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If it were a consolidation, then they would have picked the –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but in consolidating, they make some amendments.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Maybe the committee would help us on that by showing us which clause takes care of bankruptcy. Could they show us a clause that takes care of a debtor to net off the liabilities from the trading or the assets they have in between each other? May I know why there is nothing talking about a demand notice? I need to be guided, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, you are quite right. This is a consolidating law but of course we need to know that in consolidating, we do updates to improve on the work.

Anyway, principally, the Bill is in ten parts, which deal with individual insolvency in the case of individuals, corporate insolvency, in the case of companies, and cross boarder insolvency to provide for situations where orders are made in Uganda in respect of property held outside Uganda and vice-versa. That is the scope of the Bill.

But also, a few days ago we passed a Bill that pulled out provisions that relate to public companies into another law – the issuance of prospectuses and so on – because now we have got detailed arrangements within Uganda including the Capital Markets Authority, which handle the issuance of shares and stocks. We just passed that law.

For purposes – we did not want to go into the details but the new innovations in the Bill, which amount to the improvements that have been made to the existing law after the consolidation is for example, the introduction of the appointment of a committee of inspection to supervise the powers of the trustees during bankruptcy proceedings, detailed powers of a trustee and circumstances under which he or she may be removed and who may apply for his or her removal. In clauses 33 to 37, a new order of preferential dates, unlike under the current law where the government debts take priority, the Bill makes secured transactions priority debts. 

There are provisions to regulate insolvency practitioners in clauses 203 to 205; provisions to regulate cross border insolvency in part 9; requirement for the issue of a statutory demand before any step is taken to institute insolvency proceedings and modes of setting aside a statutory demand. And so on and so forth. I have a couple of all of them, unless you want me to read through them. These are really innovations in this particular law. 

For instance, if hon. Nandala-Mafabi talks in terms of agreements, if you look at – your first submission was in respect of - must it always be in court? Can’t people agree? Under the current law, that is covered under the deeds of arrangement; so that part has been incorporated in here. And if you look at – you should be guided by the arrangement of clauses in the Bill. If you look at sections 125 to 135 – you have read it – you first proceed to court because even a debtor himself or herself can go to court but when you are there you seek an interim order and during the stay of that interim order, no attachments can be made. Nothing can actually be done to your property. That gives you leeway with your counterpart to agree on an arrangement. You can even come back to court and you say, “This is how we have agreed that we should proceed”. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Minister, what I am saying is where the creditor and debtor have some understanding, but what you are talking about is where a debtor runs to court. But in these circumstances, a creditor could be having some property or some business dealings with a debtor. Those assets can be used, in those circumstances, without going to court. It is there in this law. And when the liquidator is going, you take care of those under this law. 

What I am trying to plead with you – you recall one time we agreed that when we are amending the law we should bring what we are changing, the old law because if you had showed us that this clause 1 has been deleted; on clause 3, this is what we have done, we would understand. But when you pick this and crosscheck here, you will see it. Let me give you an example. 

Clause 2: “Acts of Bankruptcy. A debtor commits an act of bankruptcy in each of the following: if in Uganda or elsewhere he or she makes a conveyance or assignment of his or her property to a trustee for the benefit or his or her creditors generally.”

I can decide - when I know that I am about to become bankrupt - to transfer my assets somewhere. How do you deal with that in this law? Because you come and say, “You have been declared bankrupt”, but I have transferred land; I have transferred everything and I have nothing. So how do you handle it? Whenever there is an act of bankruptcy, you commit – if somebody sees that you are heavily indebted and you start to do things so that you beat the law, you should be declared bankrupt. That is why I said you should look at Acts on bankruptcy. If you read these two – it is very important and I do not think we should have eliminated it. 

5.02
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. My first concern is on observation No. 6 where the committee points out the need to bring in the matrimonial home. I want to add to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has stated. We are likely to have a situation where most people will be displaced. In most cases, when families get displaced, it is women and children who get displaced. 

I am not comfortable with this observation and I totally disagree with it. I do not support it to be included. In any case, if we are to include matrimonial property as part of those assets, which should be attached, then possibly when the creditor asks for liquidation of the matrimonial home, they should be in position to provide an alternative home for the family so that they can be settled somewhere else. But if that is not the case, then we do not attach the matrimonial home.

My second concern is an issue of clarification especially when this law is supposed to merge the related laws, which are scattered everywhere. I have been reading through the report and I have not seen anything concerning NPART and the custodian properties. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister: are the custodian properties and NPART going to form part of this law so that we can rest assured that whatever remained without being sold out to the public is going to help in handling the situation? Thank you very much.

5.04
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): This recommendation No. 6 is very unfortunate. A matrimonial home even belongs to the unborn. Now, if you want somebody to claim this as a way of recovering whatever monies from certain transactions, if you want this to be used for recovery, does it suggest that when a loan for example was being negotiated, the family members or whoever is a stakeholder in a matrimonial home was involved in processing such an intake of a loan? If not, please save us and leave the matrimonial home alone. (Applause)

Some of these matrimonial homes might be holding very important things to us, a graveyard for example. If my father got a loan without the consent of my mother and I have people who are buried there and they want to do away with our home, how much would you pay me for somebody coming to run down the graves of my forefathers? 

These are things that are pertinent. You would help me, and I would implore and appeal to this House that anything to do with a matrimonial home should never even be included when somebody is trying to claim what is due to him or her.

We are in times of very volatile business regimes. Times are hard. Businessmen out there are suffering. For example, a loan that you picked of Shs 200 million a year or so ago is half its value due to this inflation. And you know how much money we put in our homes. You want to have a beautiful home. And what is the interest of the moneylender, for example? They want something that will get them quick money. Look at how much rent you are earning, for example, in the towns and in Kampala. They would get interested in first attaching your marital home. Homes in Kampala are the most beautiful thing so somebody would go for that and that will leave you in an even more desperate situation. The question is: is there morality in including things to do with our homes most especially the matrimonial homes?

5.08
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to be educated by the committee about which clause in this Bill, if there is any, gives an option of an alternative method before we go for a sell out. The moment you are declared bankrupt, is there any other way of first settling out of court because of recent, we have seen connivance especially on land matters. Maybe it shall also come in this Bill. Somebody may want to murder you financially; malice aforethought. Somebody may connive with the creditors and the Judiciary in form of bribes and corruption and then whether they sell your assets on the market price and they find that they can realise what they owed you - after seeing that you are going to have a fall back position, they insist that you must go out of business either because of business rivalry, competition or politics. So educate me on whether there is an alternative method they can use to save this bankrupt person.

Lastly, we may want to save the matrimonial home but what about the assets they have mentioned - vocation, business, employment? What can be saved?

THE SPEAKER: But matrimonial homes belong not only to the businessman but to the wife and children. Why should you involve the wife who was not in this business to suffer since this matrimonial home does not belong to a husband alone because the husband works? It belongs to the wife and children also. Why should you involve them in a business probably where the man does not disclose what he gets from the business?

MR SEBUNYA: Much as you may want to save the matrimonial home, once put in the law then the person borrowing the money shall know that I shall not involve – maybe in the arrangement they are making they should consider for themselves - because when you are borrowing money, we should also consider the one who is borrowing the money. I want to be paid to the last dot and you take this money while knowing that I am going to recover and pay back. 

So once you save the matrimonial home, maybe it is the biggest asset where somebody should retrieve the money from. So somebody may do it deliberately, use my money, build a very huge home well knowing in future he shall use that home as a hotel. So much as you have saved them from bankruptcy the man shall have a fall back position well knowing that he is not going to stay in this home forever.

THE SPEAKER: When it is a hotel, it is not the matrimonial home.

MR SEBUNYA: Maybe we shall hear from the committee and how they have safeguarded this matrimonial home. These days there are people who build matrimonial homes with apartments attached and maybe the children stay in the apartments well knowing that in future, they shall be used as rentable houses. We need to be clear about that.

THE SPEAKER: But you very well know that when you are dealing with the mortgages, we had to say something about this. In most cases men take beers and go for parties and sell homes and that is why we wanted to protect the family.

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, we would like to know whether in future this bankrupt person shall be allowed to have a fall back position. After being declared bankrupt, the man is over and out but maybe in future, where in this Bill is it allowed for somebody to appeal to be de-bankrupted so that he can be allowed to do business after a while and after all is settled? I thank you.

5.13
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report. I just want to make a comment on observation NO. 6. First of all, we must be fair to both the creditor and the debtor. We shouldn’t be biased on one side. You came for my money knowing I want my money back. 

People have talked about this matrimonial home. This was thoroughly covered in the Mortgage Bill. The wife and the husband will have to agree so the wife agreed in this thing but we can be kind enough and say, “We leave this one out,” but how can you come around and say tools and equipment used in his employment? Who is going to decide and determine that these are things that fellow needs in his employment? (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to inform hon. Byandala that there are secured loans and unsecured credit. So the moment they come to attach the matrimonial home because of unsecured credit, that is where the problem is but if you secured your credit where the wife agreed on the matrimonial home that is different. I wanted to give you that information.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much. Having clarified on the matrimonial home, I would be ready to save it but I am against this equipment and tools for this fellow to use in his employment, business and vocation. What am I, the owner of the money or the creditor, going to do? You are taking away everything from me. Why did you come for my money? I think if I have left a roof for you, there is no point that this should also be included. Thank you very much.

5.16
DR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to welcome the object of this law of bringing together individual bankruptcy and the company insolvency laws into one law as a way of streamlining our laws for ease of operationalisation.

Secondly, I would like to make a comment on observation No. 3 in the report, which I also welcome. This looks at trying to disqualify certain categories of people from acting as insolvency practitioners, for example, bankrupts, the young ones and those of unsound mind. I think this is a very good attribute observed by the committee in this report in that if I am bankrupt and I am a practitioner, I would like others to also fall victim like myself and I am a bit biased as I do the practice. 

Thirdly, I would like to be clarified by the Minister and the chairperson, maybe in regard to observation four, that is, cross border insolvency because we are having increased border trade. From my little knowledge of law, cross border insolvency may refer to cases like in the East African region or the COMESA region but where it beats me is what happens if insolvency occurs since we have multi-national companies. Will this mean that in order to be able to operationalise this law under multi-national companies, it will be required for Uganda to either be a signatory to certain international treaties or conventions? That is where I need clarification. 

Lastly, regarding observation six, I am also sceptical when we are including matrimonial homes and so on and yet we know that in many cases especially in cases of us men, we tend to go into debt which may not benefit the family but for our personal gain; and in the end it will be the spouses and the children to suffer. I think we need to think this out. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.19
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the idea of bringing the different Acts together because at the moment we have so many statutes on our shelves and it is quite difficult to look for some of these laws. We have so many laws and any move to codify some of them into one Act should be welcome. 

However, with observation six, it so happens that whenever we talk about the matrimonial home, people will always think about women and children and that it is always men who will be mortgaging the home but it could also be the wife in case she is indebted somewhere. So, creditors may come to take over the home most probably inherited from the father and which belongs to a family, especially here in Buganda where a man inherits a home and it becomes the man’s matrimonial home, and you find that it is the wife who has taken the mortgage. So, I am urging my colleagues not to think that it is always women who will suffer. But all in all, even if it were the other way round, you would think about the children, the wife and the dependants who are staying in the home. For that matter, it can also be the husband.

Creditors should also weigh the risk. We know who the money lenders are these days. These are people who want to take up prime land and they are out to lend money and come to this Parliament to get laws which can cushion them. Let the wisdom of those people who drafted this Bill prevail and we retain the exclusion of matrimonial homes from the deal. 

Secondly, when a person has been declared bankrupt, if you deny somebody the tools that they use to work, then you are rendering this person a destitute. We would like this person to go back and be able to work so as to get money and pay back. I am thinking about a person like my father, what he has is just his carpentry kit and if you are to take it, then he will become a beggar. I request this honourable House to retain the exclusion of both the matrimonial home and the tools of work. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.23
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Bill has got 264 clauses but I would like to thank the committee for being able to summarise their report in only six pages. To me this means that the Bill is not controversial. I think most of the clauses are straight forward. 

I concur with the colleagues who have already said that it is redundant to include the matrimonial home in this law because no creditor will get it. So, why do you include it in the law? It is not possible to sell a matrimonial home in order to recover money. So, we do not have to include it here.  

Observation three concerning persons below 22 years - at the moment, 18 years is the boundary between a mature person and a young one so where is this 22 years coming from? How many kinds of minimum age are we going to have? I would like to seek clarification from the committee on this particular matter. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can the committee respond to the queries raised? Okay, let the Minister make his response and then the chairperson. 

5.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I thank the colleagues for their contributions to this most important Bill. I will deal with those ones I think need attention. The others which the Members feel strongly about could be addressed by moving amendments at the Committee Stage. 

Let me start with Dr Katende who I think raised an important element as to how you handle the cross border transactions. Do we have treaties? Do we have conventions in place to govern such transactions? If you look at clause 212, it handles that very well because this part deals with cross border insolvency and in this particular clause, it says that, “Where the Minister is satisfied that any state has enacted laws for reciprocity in bankruptcy which have the same effect as this part, the Minister may by statutory instrument declare the state to be a reciprocating state and the court of jurisdiction in bankruptcy to be a reciprocating court for purposes of this court.” So, that is covered under that particular arrangement.  There are also related provisions if you could actually finish reading that particular clause. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek a clarification from the Minister. We have people right here in Uganda who have been declared bankrupt in the UK and Kenya and are here doing big business. How are you going to handle those issues? We need to understand that and then amend some of these laws.

MR RUHINDI: Have they declared them? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, they have been declared and I can give you about five names if you want.
 
MR RUHINDI: But we don’t stop here; we really have so many other areas in which enforcement of court orders can be done. By the way, you know some of the lawyers are of course well known to have schooled in international law; others have schooled in private international law and we know that that can still be enforced. There are many mechanisms through which that can be done under private international law. 

Still on hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s observations, without prejudice to what I stated earlier on the application of interim orders, where during that period arrangements can be made between the affected parties, there is also section 4. Section 4 is very helpful because it deals with statutory demand: “A demand by a creditor in respect of a debt made in accordance with this section shall be a demand notice and shall constitute a statutory demand …” and it gives you details of how that is done. That means that once you are a debtor and you are served with a statutory demand, you are put on notice and you should comply. If you do not comply, then the process takes effect. So, that gives you leeway in which to solve your affairs. 

Acts of bankruptcy are more or less codified in section 3. Actually section 3 is very useful on that particular act or situation: “Inability to pay debts: Subject to sub-section (2) and unless the contrary is proved, a debtor is presumed to be unable to pay the debtor’s debts if:
a) 	The debtor has failed to comply with a statutory demand;  
b) 	The execution issued against the debtor in respect of a judgement date has been returned and satisfied in whole or in part;
c) 	All or substantially all the properties of the debtor are in the possession or control of a receiver or some other person enforcing a charge over that property…” so that of course there are no behind-the-scenes arrangements and there are some related provisions to that. 

But I think the most sensitive issue that has been raised on the Floor of the House is this issue of the matrimonial home and in my opinion, I will leave that to the chairperson of the committee because the submission of the ministry is that the matrimonial home should be excluded but they seem to have a strong case against some very fraudulent people who will put all their money in the matrimonial home. So, I think the committee is proposing that a value be put beyond which this matrimonial home should not be involved. But I will leave that to the chairperson to explain further. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, I think “matrimonial home” has a legal definition and is bankruptcy or insolvency against the family? It must be against either the wife or the husband, unless the wife or husband and the children are in the business. Otherwise, this is their property. Why should the other people suffer because of a husband or wife who drinks and does this and that? They may not even know what kind of business the wife or husband is doing. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, the intention of this law is to protect both the creditor and the debtor. The debate in the House seems to be at protecting the debtor and his family because – 

THE SPEAKER: We are protecting the family. 

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, I will come to that, Mr Speaker, because you should also look at somebody’s family which may be deprived of its own source of living by somebody failing to pay the debts he owes to the creditor. For example, if one has some five wives and he has mansions in Kololo, each valued at Shs 2 billion, why shouldn’t we help the person to whom he owes money? We are not saying that everything should be sold and the dependants and the wife are left with nothing, but we are proposing that the Minister prescribes a threshold so that the other person is also – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tashobya, why doesn’t the creditor secure his money by investigating to know what type of property an individual has before he lends him the money?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, bankruptcy comes in the course of business. You may be liquid now and be insolvent the next day. So, by investigating, the person giving you his money may not be in position to know that you are going to run bankrupt in the next day.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much, hon. Members. I put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Insolvency Bill, 2009” be read for the second time. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INSOLVENCY BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we may not go into the Committee Stage now because I have read the report and the proposed amendments by the committee. These are the amendments I have as of now but when I looked at the recommendations, the amendments cover sections 2, 20, 31, 42, 204, 254, 260. This Bill has 262 clauses and arising from the debate which we have had here, I sense that some Members have some amendments they want to effect in this Bill and I for one have a problem. If I have to read clause by clause of 264 clauses, it will be too much. What I was going to do was to lump some clauses so that when I read them tomorrow, it’s omnibus for those clauses that are not affected by any amendment. I think it is easier to deal with such a Bill because it is like a Bible and reading verses one by one may not be easy. So, I am trying to give those honourable members who may have other amendments than the amendments I have read to prepare them so that I get them tomorrow and know which specific clauses to call out. This is what I propose to do and, therefore, the Committee Stage will definitely come tomorrow afternoon. So, go with the law and if you have any amendments, I will know by tomorrow.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, but let me put notice to the chairperson that I propose that the definition of the matrimonial home now in clause 40 be transferred to the definition section. Maybe we shall understand it better. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, matrimonial home has been dealt with here. You do not need to deal with it again. Don’t worry, we shall handle it tomorrow. The only thing is that I want to put notice to the Minister and the chairperson that I am going to bring Acts of bankruptcy from the old law to this new law tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, those will be amendments. With this we come to the end of today’s business, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.40 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 21 April 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

