Thursday, 27 April 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Dr Tom Sisye Kiryapawo

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION

DR MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality, East): Mr Chairman, I stand here before this august House to move a Motion for a Resolution of the National Resistance Council seeking to condemn the massacre of approximately 250 Uganda citizens in Atiak, Gulu District on the 20th of April 1995 by Joseph Kony rebels.  On or about the 20th of April this year, there was a very unfortunate development, which led to a lot of loss of life in Atiak, Gulu District as reported in the news media.  Approximately 250 Uganda citizens were massacred in what appeared to be a rebel attack on civilians an armed in Uganda in this part of Northern Uganda.  I recognize the immediate message sent by His Excellency the President and the high turn up of Ambassadors accredited to Uganda to the scene of this massacre.  

I would like to remind the distinguished Members of the NRC here present that all Ugandans have a right to life and that the protection of this fundamental to this fundamental a prerequisite for the exercise of all other rights and it is a responsibility of government and all Ugandans together.  Consequently, massacres of civilians is surely of crime against humanity, and there can never be any justification whatsoever for massacre of Ugandans for whatever reasons.  

Uganda has suffered through history through massacres of this type where people sometimes, since it is a way of solving political conflicts or as a means of capturing and hold on to state power.  I would like to note here that Uganda may have conflicts and tensions within and without but we must consolidate a culture which will enable resolution of these conflicts without necessarily resorting to massacres hardly four weeks ago, a prominent elder in Mbale, the father of hon. Masika and his grandchildren were massacred in the border area by people supposedly coming in from a neighbouring country.  We have continued to hear that after this massacre in Atiak there have been other massacres within the same part of Northern Uganda. 

May be here, I would like to call up on government to keep the national leadership to keep the people in the national leadership properly informed of government positions what position are to take because sometimes these news paper reports maybe, a little bit exaggerating what is on the ground or they may not be saying what is on the ground.  But I think we would need here to call upon government to issue from time to time especially, when we are in session the state of affairs.  

I would like to point out that existing government measures in place to give what I consider early warning signals may be through budgetary problems, they are inadequate or indeed they are under utilized, and I would propose to the sectoral committee representing these organs the early warning signals to examine this matter in details to see if we can really assist ourselves to prevent such murders and atrocities happening to in Uganda. You can imagine the bereaved families if they are 250 dead Ugandans the dependents, presently we may even get in a situation where we have to send relief food supply blankets and tents to these people.  Because the whole area has been rampant, and may be we could find that even the infrastructure there is a bridge in Atiak, I passed into Atiak during the peaceful time.  But we need really seriously be on the alert especially, we here in this august House. And may be, since the District of Gulu has declared tomorrow a day of mourning, if funds can permit, maybe, Mr Chairman, you could send a high power delegation from this august House -(Applause)- as a sign of in consolidation with the people of Northern Uganda and the bereaved families and that may be we open up a small book to sign and pay some ‘Mabugo’ to the bereaved families.  I am saying all this fully recognising the pragmatic decision the government has taken towards the pacification of the Northern Uganda.  

The question in Northern Uganda, is it political, is it militarily, how come that it is eluding us for so long now when will there be peace in Northern Uganda so that people can move freely and go about to build a greater Uganda than we have at the moment.  Northern Uganda has lost ten years of development and as for as I can see from this type of thing, and the towns and the municipalities are going to end up being slum areas because the people will continue to run away from the areas where there is trouble and they will congest where there can be peace or where they can be protected.  But I do not believe that the people who are going to protect and maintain peace in Northern Uganda are going to come from outside Northern Uganda.  This is why I call upon leaders from these areas to really go out of their way to ensure that they can put in place a system, a sustainable system which will ensure henceforth that we do not get this type of loss of life in our society.  

I would like to support the existing enabling atmosphere and the new culture of settling political disputes in Uganda, through such, for us the National Resistance Council here present, the Constituent Assembly and other political organs.  We must strongly condemn loss of life for political reasons which some people say is manmade, it is made by man.  And this way I would like to call on government to ensure that those responsible for this massacre and abductions of innocent young children together with their collaborators have got to - are brought to book in accordance with the law.  

We must deplore in this criminal attacks on civilian population.  Because they will cause displacement of persons destruction of property and infrastructure consequently, retarding any meaningful sustainable development in society.  I would like to request the government to appeal to the International community to condemn and exercise government to be perpetuating murders and massacres in our country.  And here may be the organization of African Unity has a role to play even diplomatic channels has a role to play.  

I strongly urge government to seek peaceful ways of settling both existing and future political disputes and conflicts, especially, those concerning our neighbours by continued means of dialogue.  And I appeal to the warning factions within Uganda to lay down arms and to resort to reconciliatory method of solving disputes. 

Finally, I appeal to government to provide more substantial assistance to the affected families, to the orphans to whom this entire House sends deepest condolences.  With that brief introduction, I now would like to read out the proposed resolution and let the Members of this august House debate the same.  National Resistance Council duly convened and constituted a Sitting in Kampala on this 27th day of April, in the year 1995 shocked by the sad news that the Joseph Kony rebels massacred approximately 250 innocent people in Atiak Gulu District on the 20th April 1995. Alarmed that in process of the attack a lot of property was destroyed.  Hearing that the attack has disrupted the economic and social activities of the people in the affected area, believing that the existing conflicts and tension with some our neighbours may constitute or give further arise to similar massacres, murders and general destabilization of borders areas citizens, aware that massacre of innocent civilians and destruction of property is a crime against humanity.  Recognizing that there can be no justification whatsoever for massacres of Ugandans by Ugandans for whatever reasons, concerned that Ugandans have suffered profound crisis throughout its history since Independence, the way of massacring each other to solve political conflicts.  Appreciating the existing atmosphere and a new culture of settling national political differences through such fora as this august House.  The Constituent Assembly and other political organs are highly applauding the decision of government; highly applauding the pragmatic decision of government has taken, towards pacification of Northern Uganda, who should be given a chance to flourish.  Now, therefore, this Council do strongly condemn, one; the attack of Atiak massacre, its perpetuators and sympathizers.  

Two; further condemn the abduction and massacre of people, especially, children and women.  Three; call upon government to use all means at its disposal to ensure that those responsible for the massacre and abduction together with their collaborators are brought to book in accordance with the law.  

Four; I appeal to the Parliamentarians and other leaders in Uganda to denounce the activities and bring influence to bear on those who perpetuate rebel activities.  

Five; strongly urge government to seek peaceful ways of settling both existing and future political disputes and conflicts including those concerning our neighbours by continued means of dialogue.  

Six; request International Community to condemn governments found to be perpetuating massacres, murders and destruction of property in our country. Seven; appeal strongly warring groups to lay down their arms and resort to reconciliatory method of solving, and eight; urge government to provide substantial assistance to the families massacre to whom this House sends its deepest condolences.  I beg to move. (Applause)

MAYANJA MOHAMMED (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are here gathered today pondering over the misfortune that befell our people in Atiak and in other sub-counties in Gulu District.  On the 7th of this month I chanced to be in delegation of Ministers which delegation included the hon. Minister of State for Works, the hon. Minister of State for Public Service my colleague hon. Betty Bigombe and myself.  We visited various places in Gulu District and we were impressed by the level of peace that had returned in Gulu.  We even went up to the extent of staying teammate in various  places in the District and we were very convinced and assured that at long last peace which the people cherish cherished so much had returned to Gulu.  

Unfortunately, just last weekend our hopes fell down the drain and became an illusion.  Last weekend we received the sad news of the further in cold blood of our people in Atiak trading centre.  

As if that was not enough, when the Kony rebels were retreating, they caused further destruction in another sub-county in the same county.  This is the county of Amuru where they burnt 400 houses destroyed property set some on fire and looted some.  They again continued and caused similar destruction in Olwal in Lamogi sub-county and also in Kilak county. 

It is unfortunate and very saddening that at this time at this point in time when the rest of the areas in Uganda are trying to be peaceful such carnage continues unabated in Gulu District. When government received the news of the activities of the murderous Kony rebels, government sent hon. Betty Okwir, Minister of State for Labour and social affairs to Gulu. She later on jointed by hon. Betty Bigombe and in the afternoon of that day, they were joined by some Ambassadors and high commissioners accredited to Uganda who together with the Ministers themselves saw the evidence of cold blooded murder of our peace loving and innocent people of Gulu. They also saw the gross degree of destruction of houses and other properties. Consequently, His Excellency the President, sent a message of condolence to the bereaved families who lost about 250 relatives in these murders.  Government has also responded by sending some emergency relief supplies to about 12,000 people who have been displaced by these activities. 

The Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs has sent some relief food and yesterday, there was a meeting in the Ministry of Labour to work out the requirements of the people affected.  And government very soon will send roofing materials to the affected people.  Because it is now a rainy season, these people whose houses have been burnt are staying in the cold and, it is therefore, important that government send the roofing materials expeditiously.  Government through the Ministry of Labour, is also going to send more food to the affected people.  Because the rebels burnt all the food stocks, so that now people store food in their houses, and when houses get burnt all property including food is burnt.  Government is addressing the food situation of affected people.  Government is also going to send to the affected people roofing nails and wire nails.  And government is also going to send clothing and blankets.  

We are also going to send domestic utensils like; sufurias, jerrycans, basins, cups, and plates to these unfortunate brothers and sisters of ours.  The government very soon next week, will be putting in place a strong and effective inter-ministerial committee which will be chaired by the hon. Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and which will be composed by - among others the Minister of Health, Local Government, Office of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance.  This Committee is going to address hazards and disaster both natural and man made in our country.   

Government is going also to equip itself adequately to do enough surveillance in Gulu, in Kitgum and other border areas so that government lessens the likelihood of such occurrences coming back again.  Government has already expressed by His Excellency the President is concerned about these endless murders in Gulu and other parts of Uganda, of Northern Uganda, and government is strongly determined to put a halt to these activities.  But government appeals to all the leadership in Uganda at all levels both national and local to enshrine the sustenance of security in their localities.  

As you realise, whereas government is obliged to maintain security, government looks upon to us as leaders in these different areas with hope in its programmes to maintain security.  

Therefore, I would like to call upon all our colleagues in leadership to assist all efforts to put a halt to insecurity in the North.  With those few words, Mr Chairman, I support the Motion.  Thank you.


MR PINTO (Kakuuto County, Rakai):  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak out in support of this Motion and to thank hon. Magezi for tabling the Motion and also to thank the Minister of State in the office of the Prime Minister for making a Government Statement of this Motion.  We are dealing with a very serious situation and as we analyze and debate this we must clearly reflect on our neighbours within Africa and the whole world at large.  We should reflect on the genocide, which occurred and continues to occur in Rwanda.  I have said before any my colleagues have said it again.  I was personally involved from the April the 25th to June 30th in picking from the rivers on the shores of Lake Victoria 10,000 beheaded decomposing people that have been massacred in Rwanda.  Not too long ago we were seeing pictures that were coming from Chechenia in Russia.  There are continuing to be massacres in Kibeho in Rwanda, currently they are counting day stalls of the bomb carnage in Ocrahoma.  We must be living in a sick world.  

I must condemn in the strongest terms the massacre of the 200 people in Atiak on the 20th of April.  The Minister of State in the Prime Minister’s Office has told us that as these people were retreating, I think they are continuously on the rampage.  In the same barbaric manner these bad people have in the past been abducting children, women, they have been rapping girls and women, boys too, they have been torturing their victims they have been mutilating them they have been maiming them.  One wonders what the motive is as are these human beings, are they fighting for a cause, is to show terror, it is to fight the NRM Government is it to cause suffering so that through fear people may follow them.  What is their purpose? Mr Chairman, Uganda has had enough and history.  In the Obote I Regime, Nakulabye and other incidents bare testimony.  

During Amin’s time, it is estimated that over 500,000 Ugandans met their death at the hand of brutal people who were behind Ugandans.  The Area I come from in Rakai in Kakuuto, we have Mutukula Prison, which was a slaughterhouse.  Like so many other slaughter houses, including the Nile Mansions and so many other places.  During Obote 11 the Luwero Triangle is a very recent example.  During the Lutwa Junter, that is also a grim experience.  

It is only after the liberation of NRM in 1986 that we begun to experience peace which has brought political stability and social economic progress.  The economy has been recorded to be growing, the major factor being political stability.  As we are perusing this we have people amidst us, we have Kony, it is not only Kony there are so many other people, and Kony is not alone, Kony has supporter both within and without and his henchmen, these people must be sorted out, they must be punished and stopped from causing further suffering. (Applause) 

I like what I hear from the Minister of State that Government is going to bring to a halt.  I think i should ask government to double efforts so that this is done the sooner than later.  In the same vain i would like to appeal that government with the Minister of Internal Affairs or whoever is responsible in this regard to come out here and give us a statement, a current situation on the security in country. (Applause) 

We are participants in this crusade we have vested interest in the peace and stability of this country, we must move together and I believe all leaders like Member of Parliament and other leaders must join forces so that we bring peace consolidate peace and make sure that the people we lead enjoy peace and tranquility. I support this resolution. Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR BWANIKA BBAALE (Katikamu County, Luwero): Mr Chairman, thank you. I would like also to add my voice to those who have really spoken in condemnation of the massacre in Atiak.  I would like to thank hon. Magezi for bringing up this Motion here. I think what is happening in the North is really worse and it is beyond description.  I hope the people in the North and particularly in Gulu have suffered a lot and we should appeal to whoever is supporting this war in the North to come to his senses and realize that people have suffered enough and that Ugandan cannot move when one are is not in peace.  

For example, what the Minister of State has told us, all the resources now which would have gone to other areas for development to equip our schools to buy medicine is now going to the Northern area because of the Kony war situation.  I think this is really very bad we should all come out and condemn this kind of behaviour.  I would like to appeal to local leaders because Kony cannot operate without a local support.  I think our people who come from there should come out and say, and tell us why is Kony really continuously in that area.  They should also real responsibility because me I do not want to believe that Kony flies from Sudan and lands there without a local support I think really it is important for local leaders to come and explain why Kony has really refused to leave the area.  Among the things this man done, has tortured women and has tortured children.  And worse of all he is now abducting our children and he is in liaison with Arab countries whereby he is now engaged in trafficking children. 

Recently, 110 children were seen and were loaded on a plane from Southern Sudan take to Arab countries, this must stop.  I think about a week ago we received information that another 50 children have been taken out of the country; they are being sold out as slaves in Arab countries.  I think on this resolution we should also add that government should come up and follow up these children wherever they are and be returned to this country. (Applause) 

We cannot afford to leave our citizens, children are innocent and they are caught up in a situation and nobody is going to assist them if it is not ourselves who have to come and condemn it and work with other countries to return these children. Gulu District has declared a day of mourning in the District.  I think this kind of massacre is not only affecting people of Gulu, it should be a national mourning. Why can’t government come up and declare to the whole country that we are going to mourn for our slaughtered people in the northern area.  (Applause) 

My proposal that government should come up and declare a national mourning because you see people in Kigezi may not see the massacre there, people in Busia even in Luwero may not see this.  But when you come and declare a national mourning people will remember and say there are our friends, our sisters, our brothers and children who have been murdered and people will come to their senses.  

I think there are so many avenues to resolve conflicts and I believe if the people who are fighting in Gulu can come forward and come to a common table we can see how we can solve the problems  May be, there is lack of communication between the Kony and government, why can’t government see how we can sit with these people and resolve their problems  What is the problem there, why should they now kill their fellow Acholis! They are not killing people in Luwero, they are not killing Bakiga, why should Kony kill his own people! What is the objective.  I think this man should come and should be invited with his fighting forces and sit at the common table and see how this problem could be solved.  

with these few remarks I would like to emphasize the point that the children who have been abducted must be brought back and I would like the government really to put in a mechanism whereby we can follow up these children and come back to this country. With those few remarks, I would like to condemn the massacre. 

MRS DUGIRA OPOTI (Women Representative Nebbi): I would like to join the rest in supporting the Motion as moved by hon. Magezi to condemn the massacre of our brothers and sisters in Gulu District.  Mr Chairman, on the 25th of March I traveled with a Colleague in Constituent Assembly to Gulu, among other many activities just before we left for Kampala we visited a group of children who had been retrieved from the bush and were settled and were being prepared to be returned to their homes.  That seems very, very pathetic to me as a mother and as a sister.  I had a chance of talking to some of these children.  All of them in one way or another are completely disfranchised.  There is a young boy who lost his arm and the sight of anybody coming near frightens him. Much as I wanted to use my little psychology to talk to him he was not forthcoming.  And later on when we settled down, I asked him what he might want to do.  He said one thing he wants to go back to his mother.  The second one he wants to go to school but he does not know how he is going to write, it was very very pathetic.  There was others some from Mbapachi some from Lira, some from Kitgum.  

One question we put to these people who are looking after them was, how long they take into that settlement before they are taken back. The people told us at Mothi when they bring them out of barracks they stay with them for about three weeks to a month then they take them back home.  But I realized that was too short a time.  Because many of these children have suffered in all ways possible.  They were able to tell us how they were ordered to kill the other children who were not able to walk at their pace.  They were able to tell how, they would even carry older people than them.  Some who had easily jointed him, a group and become completely military are still living military as they have come home.  

I believe returning a child like that to the community after a short time is only going to help him to become as harmful as he was in the bush. Because some of them are completely used to taking orders because they had lived long enough.  Among those we met there was only one who had lived for only six months the rest had lived there for up to two years.  

I was only bringing this as a background to what this Motion is all about.  I believe by now and I think everybody in Uganda believes that the people in Gulu District and even Kitgum have suffered enough and have reached a level where they are able to say no to whatever is happening.   And for this reason, I think government must come in all possible ways.  In one way or another, the people in those areas have a number of veterans, they are training local forces whom they call the vigilantes.  They even have people who left the KR, these people I think have reached a level where they are ready to take up armies and fight for their defence.  

I call upon government to identify the veterans or whoever is able to stand and fight for their people to armed.  There is no way we are going to call up on the NRA from their barracks at 4 or 5 in the night when a village in a part of Gulu District has been attacked.  But it will be easy for the villagers to respond to the allegations as they are making in case they are attached.  In making this speech I am partly affected by the problem of rebel activities in Gulu District.  

In 1987, I lost my father whom when his body was returned home, it was a problem for us, his children to recognise that, that was really our father but we were only convinced that this was your father.  Because by the time when his body was discovered with six other people, they were completely undressed, some of them - he did not have eyes, and all of them were in one way or another maimed.  I am saying this because the next thing from Atiak now Anaka is going to be, the Arua, Pakwach, Karuma Road. I imagine they are going to become the next victims of whatever is happening in Acholi.  

I do not know how to express it I am not a military personality in whatsoever way, but I urge the Minister of Defence, I urge everybody responsible to ensure that the security of the people of Uganda is paramount.  We can talk of peace, unity and development only if we are sure all of us are secure and are able to stay in our homes.  A nation or a society living in fear is a dead society.  Thank you.

MR OLUM (Nwoya County, Gulu): Mr Chairman, I thank you very much and I thank hon. Magezi for bringing this Debate to this august House. It is a pity that the incident of Atiak has acted as a route awakening of Ugandans towards other very terrible things happening in this country.  This Atiak incident just happens to be one of those things.  Sometime back in 1989/90 those of us who come from happenings of our Northern part of Uganda and Eastern part of Uganda. But unfortunately at that time we did not think it was very necessary.  

That is why I am saying that this is a route of awakening Ugandans to what is happening to other parts of Uganda. I am very happy that we are now sitting here concerned about the security of Uganda as a whole.  Many worst things have happened and people in that area continue to suffer.  

We who come from that area as leaders have been in contact with government at various times and at various levels.  We expressed our concern about what is happening to our people, we have approached the Minister of Defence, we have approached Ministry of Rehabilitation and all those who are concerned.  Some of the issues have been addressed; and the leadership in Gulu and Kitgum at various levels has fully cooperated with government. We have gone out of our way to help government efforts to ensure that insecurity in that areas ceases. We are not happy to see our people suffer and we do not enjoy it at all.  

I would like to assure the nation and this House that as leadership in that areas, we have taken full responsibility and work hand in hand with government. I have heard some remarks that the people in that area should come forward and condemn what is going on.  I would like to say we have condemned and we have gone further and even suggested to government how this problem can be solved.  As I talk now last year the Acholi leaders formed what we call Acholi pacification committee and this committee has worked very closely with the military in Northern part of Uganda, and the relative peace which we are talking about is partly as a result of our joined effort with the army.  

So, I would like to assure the Members here that the leadership is fully committed to the restoration of peace and tranquillity in our area, and we have gone fully out to demonstrate that.  We have gone all out and recruited home guards in every sub-county of Gulu and Kitgum. 229 in each of those areas and most of them are fully armed and they fully operative. I think what remains is a better coordination of the NRA and the home guards and better equipments and better intelligence gashing.  

Those fellows who have arrived recently, are batter equipped I think you have read in the newspapers, they have very heavy equipments and we come from an area which is very long.  It has a long border. Even if we had our own people there you cannot police every inch of that Northern border.  That brings me to the point. 

We have suggested to government to ensure that the road from Kitgum going to the Sudan border is made a very passable road so that you can move freely and defence of our border becomes very practicable.  There are so many other roads leading to the Sudan border which are at this moment not passable and that makes it very difficult for the army to move very quickly to the border.  Then there are also roads along the Sudan border which needs to be really properly done, these we have put in writing and government is fully aware.  We even if we are not army men we believe easy mobility along the border is very important for us to defend our own borders.  The people who live along the border at the moment are terribly frightened.  I think government needs to make it felt along the border. (Applause) 

And I believe the present deployment in those areas need to be really strengthened.  Because even the home guards whom we have now recruited and trained will need the logistical support from the government.  If we do not have it we will lose moral and there are no other people to relay on other than the home guards.  The purpose of the home guards is to allow the army to engage the enemies with greater effort and we have done that these people are around are trained, and I think the NRA should get all out and really face the rebels.  It is not true that these people are retreating, in fact, the latest report I have received they are progressing towards my County Nwoya near the National Parks.  I think something serious must be done before further damage is done to areas like Alero, Anaka and Para.  Because this is really a great issue which the nation must be aware of. 

One recommendation I would like to make I know other will not contribute on this issue is the military reaction to these activities that they must be swept.  I know military, many times, they tell you first we must be sure of how many armed they are.  But this is where the damage is done.  During that time of assessment a lot of damage is done to the local population.  I think we should have a prepared army to be able to act very sweetly, and to be - and to really ensure that little damage is done to the population.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for giving me this opportunity. 

MR OBWANGAMOI (Arua County, Kitgum): Mr Chairman and this august House at this sorry moment to mourn and burry a substantial number of Ugandans I would like to make a statement that protection of every citizen is not a favour by government. It is a duty it is an obligation, in fact, it is the very season why governments exist.  I, therefore, would like to support what others have said that I, one time said, before the Sectoral Committee that at long last we continue to see what is happening in the North as a long called Northern problems  This country will not wake up to the reality of the problem. I would like to support what hon. Olum has said.  This has been a route awakening.  

I would like to categorically state that we have come a long since 1986 to reject in all forms rebellion in the North.  The living testimony is that the population is now being rubbished.  Because it refuses to associate with Kony.  That should be the very reason for everyone in Uganda to know that the local population has rejected. It is different from what is happening around here. The population is not yet been harassed by some of these rebels you hear about, precisely because I think they are still being accommodated.  But the moment the population will start rejecting them, then you will soon hear massacres in other parts within Buganda here.  

Some of us leaders from the North have lost confidence in ourselves as leaders.  Because some of us do not understand a clear policy of this government as far as the conflict in the North is concerned.  We really do not have anything to explain to our local population or even to Ugandan.  A number of times no declaration made by no less the whole President, brought some hope to the people of North.  He declared that Kony within a month will not be there, and which year everybody celebrated.  

I really nearly lost my life in that because I was not warned and my vehicle and cousins were burnt alive obviously. What has happened to that declaration. How I would go and explain to the people of Atiak or to the people of Kitgum that there is somebody who could be more serious.  Similar doubts have been raised. When His Excellency went to Adila in Kitgum District he declared that the Karimojong should have a limited time to hand over their guns.  This has not happened.  So you can see the despair of the people of the North especially, the Acholi sub-region. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  In substantiating what the hon. Obwangamoi is saying, I come from the Eastern part of Acholi near Karamoja, the problem there is that, local people are really extremely harassed.  The President gave an ultimatum that they should not cross over with guns but they continue coming. In homes the Karimojong will come, he will sit under a tree and demand that woman of the house start preparing food for him. Before you serve your husband or your children you first of all, begin by serving him.  We are really harassed.  Thank you.

MR OBWANGAMOI: Mr Chairman, I am following up the statement I made, that the duty protect is not a favour, and every Uganda has a right to demand protection.  I would not like to develop this point. On a number of occasions and I believe in the past, it could have been true -(Interruption)

AN HON MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I am surprised to see the hon. speaker on the Floor diverting the issue to the Karimojong, when we are talking the massacre of the Atiak issue.  Is he in order, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is quite in order. Proceed, please.

MR OBWANGAMOI: Mr Chairman, I am saying what has happened, and it is a very serious occurrence, and unless we in this House show the seriousness nobody else is going to do it and sooner or later we will find this country in complete chaos.  What happens to Kitgum may not directly affect what happens here, but it does give encouragement to similar groups that, perhaps, are making efforts to destabilise this country.  I mentioned and I proposed, when I appeared before the Sectoral Committee last November that this House should set up a task force to investigate what happens in the North! Nothing has happened up to now! The Minister of State in the Prime Minister’s Office gave an exhaustive postmortem, but it is not satisfactory.  One would have wanted to know why since we are very sure that Sudan is not a friendly country, even here we are monitoring embassy, why was it possible for the entire of that force to come through Pakwach and carrying out that massacre?  We have been told that the border has been closely watched.  

During our meeting of Acholi Pacification Committee, this also had been emphasized that the border security has to be taken care of.  Now if this can happen, what else will the people in the North expect? Would we advise the people of Gulu to migrate and leave their homes, which apparently nobody now can guarantee is insecurity. 

The events in the North have caused a lot of problems in this country; a lot of resources have been diverted in very useless exercises, and these people may not feel physically - definitely the entire country has been set back.  I would, therefore, suggest that government comes out very openly and takes its fully responsibility, not to leave it to the District Resistance Councils, not to leave it to the Acholi Parliamentary Group, but take it as its priority; make statement and commitment as to when - we shall be very ready to join when we advise, but at the moment the effort of the local leadership has been exhausted to a point that a person like me speaking has lost confidence whether or not I am actually useful and whether or not I should take messages from higher authorities to the population. Mr Chairman, I support the Resolution. Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INTERIM ELECTORAL COMMISSION BILL, 1994

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr S. Kavuma): I thank you, Mr Chairman.  I beg to move that the Bill entitled: The Interim Electoral Commission Bill, 1994 be read a Second Time.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Seconded.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I am pleased to bring before you and this hon. House the Interim Electoral Commission Bill whose objectives are stated in the memorandum to the Bill, being mainly to make provision pending the enactment of the new Constitution for Uganda by the Constituent Assembly for the establishment of an Interim Electoral Commission charged, among other things, with the registration of voters, the revision of the electoral register and for the carrying out of any public elections and referenda that may be needed.  I say, I am pleased because, I think this Bill short as it is, is a very important Bill in the struggle the Ugandans have chosen to ensure that they fully democratise their society.  

Further significance of the Bill is the signal which should be read by all interested persons both within and outside that the NRM Government and the leadership of this country at the national level are committed to having a government popularly elected through a free and fair elections as soon as the new Constitution is promulgated.  

Before I go very far, allow me to explain the Constitutional base for this Bill. The 1967 Constitution as amended by Legal Notice No.1 of 1986 and as from time to amended, formed the Constitutional base for this Bill.  Legal Notice No.1 of 1986 did suspend provisions in Chapter 5, some of which were related to then existing Electoral Commission, among others. The same Legal Notice also suspended article 63 of the 1967, which gave absolute sovereignty to Parliament to legislate on all matters in Uganda for peace, order and governance of this country.  Thereafter, Legal Notice No.1 of 1986 in Clause 7(i) entrusted all legislative powers hitherto enjoyed by Parliament into this august House.  In other words, Sir by the Constitution as it stands now, the National Resistance Council, this august House, has absolute supremacy in areas of legislation on all matters in Uganda including peace, order and good governance of this country.  

I wanted to explain this so that as we move we are absolutely certain that we are on safe ground.  I am aware that there could raise some misunderstanding from the fact that provisions of the 1967 Constitution namely; Article 47, 48 and to a certain extent 45, and 46 were suspended, and these were dealing with the Electoral Commission.  But what happened, actually, Sir, was that after those had been suspended the matter was left without other provision being made for Electoral Commission basing its authority on Clause 7.1 of the Legal Notice No.1 of 1986.  

I have looked at other legislations relevant to elections, namely; the National Assembly Elections Act, Chapter 131, I have found nothing in that chapter to pose any legal impediments on this House in legislating for an Electoral Commission as the current Bill seeks to set up. 

Allow me also to remind Members that the Constituent Assembly Statute 1993, Statute No.6 of year which was passed by this hon. House was passed for a specific assignment and to last for a specific period.  Nothing in that Act can be construed correctly to be an impediment in the why of this hon.  House to enact any Bill or statute creating an Interim Electoral Commission.

Having said that, allow me to address myself to the question as to why we should have this Bill now.  I am glad to report that I have made quite extensive consultations, first with hon. Members of our Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security Affairs, and some hon. Member of this House.  It is true, Sir, that when this Bill was first published, there were questions as to why it was published at that time and why NRC could go into debating it before the promulgation of the new Constitution.  

I would like to take hon. Members a little back; at that time this august House had not yet extended the interim administration of NRM. The House had not extended the life span of the NRC to coincide with the interim period of the administration.  At that time this House had not passed the law that extended the time span of the Constituent Assembly, and there was a lot of suspicion that probably the CA will not complete its assignment with the time stipulated by law. All these contributed to an atmosphere of political uncertainty and I was not surprised when I first assumed office to learn from Members of the Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security Matters, that in their view they felt that Bill had been ill-timed.  

We initiated a dialogue since then and as I have reported, Sir, we have unanimously agreed in that committee and with the other Members whom I have consulted that today the Bill is very relevant and we must have it now if we are to keep control of the programme we have as national leaders both in government ad here set ourselves to ensure that there is a smooth transfer of power from the interim NRM Administration to a government elected by the people of this country through democratic, free, transparent and fair election.  

I am also glad to report that the CA on the other side has moved very satisfactorily; it has covered slightly over 70 per cent of the work it is supposed to do, and it is moving pretty first; it is obvious, therefore, Sir, that we must not loose any more time in getting prepared for the national elections that the Constitution that we are making has laid so much emphasis on and indeed the population is eagerly awaiting for.  

But, in order to achieve this noble objective, maximum transparency and a high degree of electoral preparedness must be ensured by all that we do.  We must ensure that the management and control of the forthcoming elections are efficiently and effectively handled by an impartial and independent Electoral Commission. Those elections are going to be held under the new Constitution.  All arrangements and facilities that we are not caught up with time and that we may not be justifiably accused as leaders, both in government and here of having facilitated or encouraged rigging in the forthcoming elections, we must pass this Bill the necessary preparations in good time.  The national elections I have in mind are the presidential and parliamentary elections but not forgetting the possibility of a referendum as part of the constitution making exercise - what is going on.  If we are to have a referendum, Sir, then that referendum must be held or must be organised by an Electoral Commission, and if again we are to meet our deadline, such referendum should not exceed the month of August

Let me also remind hon. Member of the House that in fact the idea of setting up an interim electoral commission is not a new idea.  When this august House set up the Constitutional Commission that produced a report and the drafts, that is being currently debated by the CA, that commission foresaw the need of creating an Interim Electoral Commission.  It, therefore, provided, and with your permission, Mr Chairman, I want to quote in Article 293 that the NRM Government shall by law establish an Interim Electoral Commission whose composition, appointment, functions and powers shall as far as possible conform to the provisions of article 85 and 86 of this Constitution.  The NRM Government shall, until provisions otherwise made by Parliament, under this Constitution, make laws for elections and for other matters connected with elections to any office under this Constitution.  

The idea of an Electoral Commission is not a new idea; it has been with us ever since the report was produced by a Constitutional Commission, and I am glad to report, that the provisions I have just read have already been approved by the relevant committee of the Assembly and are due for approval by the plenary.  

I may also add that these provisions were passed without any controversy, and I do not foresee any problems with them. 

We are also now fairly certain, as I have indicated that there will be Presidential and Parliamentary Elections, there is also possibility of a referendum; provisions to that effect have again been passed by the relevant committee of the CA. 

We mentioned earlier the need for sufficient level of electoral preparedness, to facilitate maximum transparency in the holding of free and fair democratic elections.  Sir, this would involve a number of things, and I will mention just a few; it would involve the early completion, revision and updating of the voters’ register; it would involve the designing and implementing of civic education programme that will meaningfully be part of the electoral process and the democratisation of the Ugandan society as a whole.  This involves training of trainers.  This preparedness also necessarily involves early mobilisation of resources both human and otherwise. I may emphasise the funding necessary for the forthcoming elections must be mobilised and must be so mobilised in good time.  Sir, that preparedness requires the putting in place of all the required facilities and logistics to ensure those elections take place in good time.  

Allow me to conclude this aspect of my presentation by stating that unless we pass the Bill that is before you, Sir, and this House we shall continue to have nobody legally authorised to do of any of the above or any of them, and yet they are very, very important to be bringing about the anticipated presidential and parliamentary elections and possible referenda.   What does this means, Sir?  

If anybody wanted now to start on preparations they would have a legal problem. No one at the moment is authorised by law to handle any matter regarding preparing for the national elections.  As I said earlier, Sir, the CA Commission cannot do it, it is not authorised by law; and for the sake of transparency government would have to come to this House with a Bill for a Statute that will seek retrospective application on matter as important as organising and preparing for these national elections.  

It is, therefore, Sir, my request that Members consider this Bill, bearing in mind that we should have probably started yesterday to make all these preparations, which makes time, Sir, of the essence in this matter.  Since the provisions in this Bill are quite straight forward, I would request the Members to give them the consideration they deserve.

Before I conclude, Sir, let me probably say a word or two about the provisions in the Bill.  Section 4.1 briefly establishes the commission, the chairman of that commission and not more than four commissioners to form the Electoral Commission. It also, in two provide for the interim nature of that - sorry, In 4.1 it also provides that these commissioner and the chairman will be appointed by the President on advise of the Cabinet.  Principally, this is because this is more of an executive function rather than a legislative one.  

In 4.2 there is provision for the interim nature of the commission and it is in agreement with the terms I read to this hon. House as contained in article 293 of the Draft Constitution. Clause 5 requires Uganda of high moral character and proven ability to be appointed members of this Commission. Clause 6, first seeks to create the office of the Secretary to that Commission, again creating job opportunities for those competent Ugandans who may wish to serve their nation in this capacity. 7.2, Sir, Clause 11, 12 and 18 these in one way or another emphasise the independent nature of this commission.  

Allow me to briefly go through the functions of this intended commission as set out in clause 9 of the Bill. These shall include the demarcation of constituencies for elections the completion, maintenance, revision and updating of the voter’s register, the conduct and supervision of all public elections and referenda in Uganda; to received and determine complaints relating to registration of voters, nomination of candidates and election campaigns; to design and implement the civic education programme as an integral part of the electoral process and for democratizing the Ugandan society; and to develop and implement a convenient system enabling voters to vote by proxy and with the assistance of Ugandan Embassies, High Commissions  and Consolidates abroad for enabling Ugandans residing outside Ugandan to register and vote.

Lastly, Sir, the Commission will also have the function of performing and other such function as shall be assigned to it by the Minister.  

I would like to end this submission by once again appealing to this august House to consider this legislation and pass it, bearing in mind that our people the population is waiting for it; bearing in mind the commitment we have made in this House that we are committed to handing over power after the interim administration of the NRA in a smooth and orderly manner to a government that will have been elected by the people of this country in a free and fair election. Sir, with those words I beg to thank you and to move that this Bill be read a Second Time.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality): Mr Chairman, earlier on I rose to second the Bill before us and I would like right now to back it by these few remarks. When this Bill was read for the First Time, the question that I had, like any other Member was that it is really necessary since there are already provisions in the Draft Constitution which will provide that the President should have as his first task to appoint various commissions; but then if you look at what is and what the Bill is all about, it is talking about interim; there must always be continuity.  Interim is not permanent and there must always be a body doing some good job. 

I have the memorandum of the Bill and I found that it is there to register voters, and also to revise the electoral registers, and also to carry that which right now is being undertaken by the Ministry of Local Government, public elections; which actually, needs an autonomous body like the one we are trying to put in place. Sir, the idea of referendum has been made here; there must be a body to handle whatever the CA might come up with.  If there is no referendum, then that particular part of the law remain silent, but it should not take people unaware because as has been stated very ably by the hon. Minister, Constituent Assembly Commission has got a specific duty which does not overlap, introduce particular area of handling the elections.  

My fear was further cleared by clause 4 subsection 2, where if Constitution is out, this particular body is in place, it will at that material time surrender or relinquish whatever responsibility that it had to be the duly appointed Commission to as indicated in the Constitution.  So, because of this the fear is that this may be a body which will remain permanent is out. 

I am also made to support this Bill because if you read the long title, you really find that there must be a Statute to guide the appointing authority, it is not just a matter of the President sitting and picking people here and there; there must be something guiding.  Though that those are good, I rush to see clause 9 which describes the functions I find that everything stated there in subsection (1) is actually good, except in (d) which in some cases my experience of the CA exercise will tell me that that may not well when they say to receive that determine complaints relating to the registration of voters, nomination of candidates and election campaign.  These we discovered that this was in the majority of cases ignore, and if there is now a body that is responsible, is able to handle this sort of complaint, I consider it is something which will actually, guide us; unlike again in (f) of clause 9, subsection (1).  

I would like to sound a warning that this voting by proxy in some cases may not be very, very well. I know of an experience here where people may remain permanently in Kampala but they tend to know who should come from Lira Municipality; they are the ones to say for us in Kampala send for us so and so whom we are sending to you from here; and that is the same thing, there will always be some people whether in exile or otherwise, who do not know what is on the ground; these are guys who may cast their votes wrongly.  So, I think there should be some modification on this. 

I would like the hon. Minister to clear, maybe when he is winding up, on Clause 10 which to me is not very clear.  I endorse fully the suggestion that counties continue to be gazetted areas for the electoral purposes  -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information. Mr Chairman, thank you.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House that he is misreading Clause 9(f) because the effect of that Clause, if it is legislated, is to allow Ugandans living abroad to participate in the election of government of their country with regard to the civil government.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Well, Mr Chairman, it depends on the interpretation of whatever is there.  I did say I read and I do agree with the hon. Member that it is as stated, but I went I went ahead and said this can easily be abused by some people who for their known reason may even - or people who are deliberately refused to be part and parcel of what should obtain here, to put in candidates who may not be the material that this country needs.  

I did say, that these counties which have been, actually, carried here is very welcome, and the recognition of municipalities is also very welcome, and because of this I would like very ably to support this Bill and I do so.  Thank you very much.

MR BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Bill. I want to speak first of all as the chairman of the Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security Affairs, which considered this Bill. When the Bill was first published I called a meeting of the committee, we went through it and our unanimous view was that this Bill be postponed until after the new Constitution; that was our view then.  We told the Minister responsible to go and convey our opinion to the Cabinet.  In the meantime we went on recess.  When we reconvened, we saw this Bill that it was going to be introduced. So, I again called a meeting of the Committee and the Minister to attend and ask him what of our opinion then, and what has transpired for you to convince us that the Bill should be introduced. You can now see that the steps being taken are being democratic, because we believe in consultation.  So, the Minister had to tell us why this Bill was necessary. 

I think as responsible Members of Parliament, we should always have our minds open. So, also we had taken a position we said now let us listen and see, maybe, something else is at stake.  We were convinced of the need for having elections taking place as soon as possible.  This country must have elected government and we are tired of interims and extensions and so forth.  Our people are going to lose faith; you will reach a stage where we are no longer credible.  So, this must stop and it must stop by what method? Let us have an elected government soon be put in place in a fair matter.  So, that was our goal; and having now accepted that we must have an elected government in place, as soon as possible, then we have to look at the Bill and the mechanism of the Bill.  

If you look at the Draft Constitution, which is not yet in place, it has an article, which also saw the need for an Interim Election Commission. I am told that that provision has been passed by the relevant committee.  But the point is that they saw a need that it will be necessary to put in place an Interim Electoral Commission.  Then I ask myself, suppose we say the Electoral Commission should not be put in place until a new Constitution is made, the question is; what all these preparations that are necessary before elections can take place? 

The present body we have the Constituent Assembly Commission has only to deal with that matter, it has no mandate to undertake any other duty; but there must be in existence a legal entity, there must be in existence an Electoral Commission which can now start administering on which everybody can look at. Even if when you are soliciting funds from abroad, there must be a known entity.  So, there must be put in place an Electoral Commission, call it interim, call it what, it must be there.  So, there is that need.  

Now, having convinced ourselves that there is a need to put in place an Interim Electoral Commission, the question was we had to look at the Bill and see whether there are certain matters that can be improved, and we did.  I am going to mention them.  The first one concerns composition and setting up of the commission; that is in Clause 4.  Clause 4.1 says; “This Commission, the membership shall be appointed by the President on the advise of the Cabinet.” 

We thought this one was highly undesirable.  Some of the people immediately will say, now rigging is now being put in place; and yet we want an Electoral Commission that is transparent and fair, above God.  So, even if we say our Cabinet Members are fine, they are okay, we want not only that, but should appear that there is fairness. So, we have suggested that the appointment of the members of the Electoral Commission should be with the approval of Parliament. (Applause) 

This Parliament is composed of different shades of opinion and I am sure if it approves the members of that commission, the country will see that there is impartiality. Again if you look at the provision of the Draft Constitution, dealing with membership of the Electoral Commission, the recommendation there is that the Electoral Commission shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.  So, why do we not be consistent even with the Constitution that has not been placed; let us be consistent, and I do not see anything wrong with the President appointing his members with the blessing of this House.  So that was our recommendation.  

Secondly, we thought that the Interim Electoral Commission should be interim in practice; it should not be without any limitations.  If you look at Clause 4.2 it says that; the existence of this Interim Commission shall continue until the new constitution is made or until members are appointed under that constitution; it is open ended.  You will end up having an Interim Commission doing all the business of the forthcoming elections; and we are saying that it should be seen to be interim.  So we have proposed that as soon as the new Constitution is promulgated, this one should cease.  

It should cease and we have another commission appointed. Otherwise, you may as well say this one do not call it interim, you appoint it and do the work.  So, that is our suggestion. 

Another consideration which we thought could improve on the Bill, concerns Clause 9 4(b); this is updating register. This is a provision which empowers registering persons who are not yet 18, and hoping that on the date when election will take place will of age. Legislation must be certain; you must be registered when you are of age, if you are not 18 too bad, why are you speculating that you will reach there? So, let us have a register that is certain; let us register people as of the day of registration who are of age. Otherwise, we can open a gate for rigging again.  Another provision is Clause 9, 5(d).  This reads: “The Commission may transfer any registered voter from one constituency to another or from one polling station to another.”  Mr Chairman, when you look at this, you remember what happened during the last election, there were mass transportation of people by buses from Kampala. I do not know where they were going, but they were destined somewhere.  

Envisage a situation where a possible candidate may be having very strong and concentrated backing in our sub-county, but feel thin in another one; they may transfer a big chunk there and they squeeze them somewhere there or even beyond. In other words, there will be a room for meandering of voters.  So, we are saying they may be abusive if this provision is in force.  

So, we have suggested as follows: that the Commission may transfer any registered voter from one constituency to another or from one polling station to another on the application of that voter and upon reasonable grounds being shown to the commission. Even I agree with the Minister and I think this Amendment will come. (Interruption)

MRS KIRYAMPAWO: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House that I think they should have also inserted something that there should not be transport of people who are going to register as voters. Because once people are transported from one area to another to go for registration, they are bought and they are bound to be transported again during voting time.  Thank you.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for that information, but it just illustrates how dangerous it is if this provision is not amended.  Allow me to proceed, I am about to finish.  If you look again at Clause 13, it deals with demarcation of constituencies. Something must be done to synchronise Clause 13, 2(b) and that 13, 3(b); in other words, although we have said that the county should be the basis, we are saying that in established constituencies just as in our county where you are having more population, you may have two Members of Parliament.  Equally, you may have a very big county, with sparse population, but because of vagueness of the area you may need to divide it in two or even three.  

So, this provision is not specifically put there.  We have suggested that if be taken into account also, and we felt that 13, 3(f) was not necessary. It reads: ‘Wherever practicable designate as constituency any area designated as an electoral area by the Commission for Constituency Assembly.’  Are these people going to do the work or endorse what the Electoral area by the Commission has done? It is not necessary, let these chaps who have been put in place do their own work; why put it there? They may follow it in practice, but why put it in law? In other words, (f) is redundant really and meaningless.  Before, I leave Clause 13, I would also like to comment in the case of the City of Kampala, that each division shall be regarded as a constituency, for Kampala. Now, rather than base it on division we think it should be based on population.  In other words, even now for Constituent Assembly purposes, this has not been followed; they have followed the population basis.  So, for Kampala, rather than to confine it to divisions, population should be the basis; just like any other county.

Lastly, I want to comment on Clause 19; this concerns regulations. It provides that the Commission may make regulations by Statutory Instrument, again that is bad drafting; they have no power to make Statutory Instruments.  But the substance of my contribution here is that these regulations should be subject to approval of Parliament. You can choose a format but should be looked at by Parliament.  They are very important regulations and I think there should be a body, and this is NRC to oversee this.  

In summing up I would like to appeal to the Members to see the importance of this Bill, the importance that we should have elected government in place so that there is a government that is accountable to be people; and the sooner we do it the better. Hence the importance of this Bill. Mr Chairman, I beg to support.

MR WAPAKABULO (Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this Bill and I will start first by thanking hon. Butagira for a very useful contribution and indeed for the spirit that has been exhibited in that contribution and for the corporation he has extended to the Minister moving this Bill through his commit. I will be very brief myself. 

I would like to say in addition to the views already expressed as to the need for this piece of legislation say; that for instance, under the present legal arrangement there is no provision for election of President, there are no provision for presidential elections in Uganda today and therefore, the present arrangements are simply this; that you have parliamentary elections and you have Members returned and those members belong to parties and the party having the largest number its leaders regardless whether he is a Member of Parliament or not automatically becomes the president I think that is the arrangement. 

So, there is no in existence today; a framework for electing the President of Uganda and, therefore, this is due to the Commission has the right to pick from the Constitution and therefore, say; we have prepared the following put in place the following arrangements if the constitution provides for the election of the president, that is, the register for the whole country as well as the necessary documentations, the ballot papers and so on and so forth which could be used in election. 

The second reason, in the question which has been referred to already by the Mover, namely; invent of a referendum to the C.A. Now, in the C.A Statute a referendum can arise in two ways, first through an impact or a deadlock within the C.A. itself when considering matters of substance not matter of procedure.  

When considering matters of substance, for instance, the question that has yet in solve relating to representation of the people, the question could arise should Uganda become a multiparty immediately or should we have a continuation of movement situation for sometime at the end move on to multiparty supposing I practically that we were to be a deadlocked situation then the law requires that Members of the C.A then they consult among themselves and also with their constituencies for a period not less than one week they come back and vote again have they to be deadlocked for second occasion then that matter will be referred by the chairman of the C.A. to the Minister for submission to the people of Uganda to develop by way of their referendum.  

Now, as the present statute goes it only states that it does not say who would conduct that referendum the question was; is it saying that present commissioner for Constituent Assembly should conduct the referendum or it does not say and under what law is a referendum to be conducted it does not say, it simply says; it shall be referred to the people of Uganda for resolution by a referendum.  Now, who will frame the question, is it the Commissioner for Constituent Assembly and so the assumption was that, that situation was not clear enough therefore, there is need for a piece of the legislation which clarifies the question i.e. under this arrangement should the occasion arise a referendum in the Constituent Assembly then the Interim Commission could be the one to conduct a referendum in accordance with a referendum Act which this House passed sometime last year.  So, I though I should put that clearly before the House.

The second occasion when a referendum may arise in the Constituent Assembly -(Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am grateful to the hon. Minister for giving way, I would like to inform him that as far the referendum is concern this House has already enacted a referendum statute under which I think including referendum under the Constituent Assembly Statute than himself.

MR WAPAKABULO: Mr Chairman, I do not disagree in fact, I said so that relating to referendum then you can tie in the two.  I was only giving the second situation where it maybe necessary to go to a referendum and deviate just by way of illustration a situation where the C.A. arrives at a decision which depart in such a manner from the original views of the people submitted to Odoki Constitutional Commission that in the view of the president the question should be put to the people themselves to resolve.  Again there it simply said it should be referred - the president shall call a referendum, but now with this in place it ties in say, that any referendum arising of the C.A. statute can be conducted by this Commission in accordance with referendum’s Act so, I thought I should clarify if I have done so these two points.  

But I did have a bit of difficult with the recommendation of hon. Butagira’s Committee with regard to Clause 4(2). I had a bit of a problem there.  It is recommended that upon the coming into force of the new constitution then the Interim Commission should ceases to exist it would be in practical terms really useless for us even to embark on this legislation.  Because I can say so far the fact that I am - to some information in my other capacity, the rate at which we are going we should be expecting to complete what we call consideration stage latest by the middle of next month but it could be urgent. Out of the 20 chapters we have done 15 now we are left with 4 one is on the representation of people or political system, the other one is on land, the other one is on transitional provision and there is another one which is quite small to cause amendment to the Constitution.

Now as you can see if we follow the speed we are following which have been of late more less a chapter a day or two we will be moving faster and therefore, finish faster.  Having done that and given the time that we have following the extension we must have the Constitution in place regardless of what happens if we have not gone to come here we must finish by the end of July there is no question about it, because under the extension the time spent on recess like the two weeks we had are not counted towards the two months, if you allow that and the time table we have set allowing for laying the draft on the Table for so many hours enacting it and then notifying the President of enactment so that we may fix a date for promulgation if you take all that we cannot go beyond the 31st of July.  

So, if we pass this law in April or May supposing it is passed now and brought in force sometime in May then really the Constitution will be in place the constitution will have been promulgated then the Interim Commission really will not have serious time to do the work.

Secondly, it is possible that the Constituent Assembly would decide to say that until a new president or a new Government is in place under the new Constitution the NRC shall continue to be the Parliament under that constitution.  And two the present President shall continue to be the President until a new president has been elected, then what different does it make stopping this one immediately upon coming into force in fact you will be required immediately same body the present NRC and the present President to pass another law setting up another commission to handle the affairs of the elections and so on. (Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to give information that I am grateful to the hon. Chairman of the Constituent Assembly.  You will notice that in view....


