Monday, 28 April 2003

Parliament met at 2:27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to today’s sitting, and to inform you that consequent upon your resolution, the proceedings of Parliament are now being regularly telecast. You can get them on UTV at the eight o’clock news and the ten o’clock news every day. So please, inform your constituents to tune in at that time everyday -(Interjection). I am sure it will eventually get there via Otuke.

Secondly, two weeks ago, I attended the 108th conference of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in Santiago in Chile between 6th and 12th April 2003. I was accompanied by three other Members of Parliament, who effectively represented you in that meeting, both in the plenary committee meetings and in the specialised committees, at which social, political and economic issues were discussed. 

I am also delighted to inform you that at the same conference, I was unanimously elected to be president of the Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights of the Inter-parliamentary Union for the next two years. (Applause).

This is a particular honour to the Uganda Parliament because I am the third woman in the history of the IPU ever to chair a committee of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. For 114 years, I am only the third woman to chair a committee. So, I look forward to your support and co-operation in my carrying out this new responsibility. Thank you very much.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO: Madam Speaker, on Members of Parliament attending conferences, workshops and other meetings in international forums, how do the other members benefit from the information, the knowledge, and the resolutions taken in such meetings if there is no requirement that a delegation which has attended a meeting outside this Parliament makes a report to this House? Because, more often than not, we go and attend meetings but there is no provision for our colleagues to get to know who has gone where, what the meeting was about, how it is benefiting us as the Parliament of Uganda, and maybe what resolutions have been taken. That is the clarification I am seeking, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, do you want to speak on the same matter?

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On a slightly different matter, first and foremost, I would like to congratulate you on being elected the chairperson of the Inter-Parliamentary Committee on external affairs. As you rightly put it, it is an honour to the 7th Parliament, and to the Republic of Uganda, and we wish you every success in your new position and hopefully that you continue to climb higher and higher and higher.

Madam Speaker, mine is purely administrative. You will recall, about a month ago, I raised a matter of the welfare of our support staff and also of our own colleagues here who are still breastfeeding.  I was made to understand by the Parliamentary Commission that arrangements would be made for our support staff, specifically our drivers who sit in the sun, in the rain and under trees. I was just wondering if there could be a report on how far the Parliamentary Commission has progressed in acquiring facilities for our staff.

Two, I also recall requesting that a room be provided in the Parliamentary Buildings for our colleagues who might wish to attend to their maternal duties. I am just wondering whether this arrangement is at hand.

Last but not least, it concerns you, Madam Speaker, and the Speaker, who are on the other wing of Parliament. This rainy season could be very inconvenient for you because between the two buildings, there is no canopy to give you a shelter. Which means you can easily get wet when you are coming to the House during this rainy season. 

I recall, Madam Speaker, I raised the matter about two months ago when the El Nino was just about to start and I was assured that the Commission would provide a canopy. I was just wondering if this is in the budget, and if not, why? I am worried about the welfare of my Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, especially during the rainy season.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I want to really thank you for your concern.  Let me start with hon. Kiraso. We have been, as a commission, discussing. I believe the Committee on Rules is about to come with an amendment so that we make a provision for reports to be made to this House and to be debated for all those delegations that go out of this country at the expense of Parliament. This will help us understand what they have been doing, so that we can follow up those matters.  So it will be coming shortly.  It is very important and I really support it.

Hon. Awori, I am aware that arrangements are being made for the welfare of the members on the matters you mentioned. I would like also to remind the House that actually, what hon. Awori is talking about is not just a figment of his imagination. It is provided for under Article 33(3) of the Constitution, and I would like to read it. 

“The State shall protect women and their rights taking into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in society”.  

So, the matter that hon. Awori raised is actually a constitutional issue, and we shall ensure that these facilities are provided because all of us took oath in this House to defend every provision of this Constitution, including that matter concerning the ladies.  

About the canopy, I will ask one of the Commissioners to report because they are handling that at the level of the budget. Thank you.

MR JACK SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of great concern which has erupted in Kibaale District. 

Madam Speaker, we are supposed, as Ugandans, to abide by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I am concerned particularly with Articles 26 and 29, which give every Ugandan the right to own property. Two, the Constitution gives all Ugandans the right to move freely and reside and settle in any part of Uganda.  

Madam Speaker, the current situation in Kibaale is causing great concern to a number of us. I am informed that the settlers, or the bona fide occupants, particularly in areas of Mugarama, Lwemiyaga, Kakindo and many others are in great fear as their properties and land is being taken away from them.

Madam Speaker, I am informed that a one Mr Kandole Kazairwe has mobilised the youth, and in support of the local authorities, the land that is occupied by the bona fide occupants is being encroached on, demarcated, and allocated to others.  

I am informed further that the RDC and DISO of this area have protested and asked the local authorities to stop that exercise but the Mubende-Bunyoro Committee has, with the support of the local authorities, particularly the LC III Chairman, instructed the youth and this committee to continue with the exercise. 

Madam Speaker, we are all Ugandans. Most of this land being occupied by the bona fide occupants was bought by these people. Some of it was allocated to them by the local authorities and other chunks of land was given to them by the government. I request that this current situation – this case is an executive function. I would like to be assured, or to know what the government is doing because these bona fide occupants are actually threatened. They feel they are refugees in their own country! I, therefore, request the relevant government official to explain to this Parliament and to make sure that these people’s property and land is not taken away.

Last Friday, Madam Speaker, the case of Hoima was brought up on the Floor of Parliament. Over 170 people came and camped outside Parliament – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Sabiiti, I was looking at the Hansard and I recollect that this matter came up again on Friday. This matter of Kibaale was raised by hon. Awori, that is how it started and I believe we ruled that it should come as a substantive matter but now you are bringing it as a matter of procedure.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, a matter raised by hon. Awori was the Hoima case not the Kibaale case.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think, honourable Member, you want answers. But first of all, I do not see the Minister for Lands here; I do not see the Minister for Security. Can you raise a substantive motion; we can give you time during the week. Can you raise a substantive motion so that people are notified and we can debate it properly?  I do not know whether there is anybody on the Executive now who can really give satisfactory answers. Oh, Minister without Portfolio?

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I respond to this concern by hon. Sabiiti, let me also, on behalf of government, congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for this new position that you have brought to Uganda, following your attendance of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. As hon. Awori said, this is an honour to this Parliament, to government, only that Awori left out the Movement, definitely. The Movement needs to be congratulated.

Madam Speaker, I note the concern as articulated by hon. Jack Sabiiti regarding the situation in Kibaale.  Although I cannot claim to have the exact details that hon. Sabiiti has articulated, I nevertheless want to put on record that it is true there is a cause for concern now again in Kibaale District. A number of cases have been reported by the political leaders there and also through the Police system. I would like to assure Parliament, and hon. Sabiiti in particular, that firm steps are being taken to ensure that there is observance of law and order in that area, and also that the Constitution is respected.  

Let me also give the background to this situation. The honourable members, Madam Speaker, will recall when we again had very serious disturbance in Kibaale, and the President had to take the necessary steps to bring calmness, law and order in that area. A committee under my chair was appointed and we did a fairly thorough work. And following the report, the government has taken serious steps to ensure that we get fundamental solutions to the problems that keep recurring in Kibaale. 

    1. Right now a National Task Force is being appointed of seven people, and it is going to start in Kibaale to ensure that these issues of land reforms, land disputes can be fundamentally looked into and solved. The government has already started on the Land Fund. Money is available with the Ministry for Lands and a number of people are either already being compensated or being negotiated with; those who are absent landlords in Kibaale. So, a Committee is under appointment.
    2. A Commission of Inquiry is also to be appointed because there have been accusations and counter accusations as far as acquiring of land is concerned in Kibaale. We think this should be looked into openly so that everybody is satisfied with the solution that will come to be.  

So, I would like to assure Parliament, and hon. Jack Sabiiti, that the concern he has is also ours, and we shall ensure that law and order reign in that part of the country. I thank you.

MR SABIITI: May I know whether government has instructed the relevant security organs in that area and the local officials in that area to stop this exercise? Because, if it is not stopped, the re-distribution of land is likely to cause more problems! May I know whether this directive has been given to the relevant authorities in that area?

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I may not have the specific detail to say whether a specific instruction has been sent, but I know for certain that the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, who is also the First Deputy Prime Minister, has not only talked to me about this current recurrence of disturbances, but also sent teams there. He has also called an inter-ministerial meeting to meet on Kibaale specifically by the end of this week.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of concern. Sometime this year, I raised a motion in this Parliament about the privatisation of Kinyara. The import of that motion was that Kinyara should be floated on a Security Stock Exchange so that people could buy shares and benefit, the way they are supposed to. There was a commitment by Government that it would move along those lines, but since that time, Government has kept quiet. It has not briefed this Parliament and there is a lot of anxiety down there in Kinyara. I was there yesterday and I am going back tomorrow over the same issue.  

I am aware that a Cabinet sub-committee was appointed but its findings and recommendations have never been communicated, and we are reading in papers where Government is being quoted as saying they will continue to sell 51 per cent to the core investor disregarding completely the resolution of this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to put this on record that Booker Tate, the current managers of Kinyara, were invited by Government at one point to get interested in buying or acquiring 10 per cent of their shares on top of managing Kinyara. But Government is turning round to say Booker Tate is the one which requested to buy 10 per cent of the shares, and that Government is turning down that request. I think that as partners in development, we should respect each other and communicate accurate details.  

My concern is, and I am happy that both ministers who are responsible, the Chairman of the Cabinet sub-committee and the Minister of State in Charge of Privatisation are here. I would like to be informed about the status of privatising Kinyara and what they have done about the resolution, which was passed in this House. Because I will be expected to communicate both to Council and to Kinyara and to the people of Uganda about the status of Kinyara as we stand now and the future! Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members. It is true we made a commitment that we would not continue with the process of privatising Kinyara before coming to Parliament. We have lived to our commitment. We have not moved further than the point we had reached when this issue was raised here in Parliament.

Madam Speaker, there are many stakeholders concerned about the privatisation of Kinyara, and Government undertook to consult them before we come back, to report on the strategy for privatisation of Kinyara, to Parliament.

What is going on is that we are undertaking consultations, and we are towards the end of these consultations. So we will come back and report to Parliament before we proceed.  

Madam Speaker, about the report in the Monitor, which the honourable Member is referring to, I would like to say that it is not correct. I also read it this morning, and I do not know the source of that information. So, we should not use it as grounds for understanding what is going on.

Madam Speaker, I would like to reiterate our commitment that we will not move until we have come to report to Parliament, so that we all move together in the process of privatising Kinyara. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, there is information from the Budget Committee that the sessional committees were expected to have handed in their reports by Friday the 25th. Those who have not done so should do the needful. 

I also want to inform you that the Budget Committee and all chairpersons and vice-chairpersons will be sitting everyday, henceforth. I think you know where you sit and the time you sit. So I am just reminding you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 50 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) OF THE ADB GROUP FOR THE PURPOSE OF CO-FINANCING THE POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY PROGRAMME (PRSP)

(Debate continued)

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motives for this loan but at the same time I oppose the loan.

The purposes are noble but, Madam Speaker, I do not think we should borrow this kind of money when we have got it here already. The money is here. Why am I saying so, Madam Speaker?  

Every year when you look at the Auditor General’s report, we cannot account for more than US$ 50 million, which means there are huge cracks in our system of financing here. Why should we continue to borrow money, which we are going to lose once again? If we are to look seriously in the Ministry of Finance, we can find this money locally.  

Two, recently we took 23 per cent of the Budget from every ministry except - I do not know which one - including probably Parliament, for the purpose of strengthening the Ministry of Defence.

In my opinion, this money will never be accounted for. This money is going to be wasted or stolen. I can give an example. Instead of strengthening our infantry, we are into purchasing expensive toys called helicopters. Why am I calling them toys? Madam Speaker, I happen to be knowledgeable on M-24 helicopters - (Interjection). It was not an M-24; the one I had was a civilian aircraft. This M-24 is Russian made, which the Russians themselves have discarded because it could not be used against the Chechnya guerrillas. They are now being dumped in Belorusia from where we purchased them recently.

Madam Speaker, we know very well our problem in the North, especially with Kony. It is not lack of equipment.  It is the morale of the soldiers, the management of the -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of clarification, and I thank my colleague for giving way.  When the request for the loan was presented here, we were told that this was money we are borrowing for budget support. We also realised that this is money, which is already incorporated in the resource envelope for the coming financial year. 

Now, the issues, which my colleague is raising, are very pertinent issues, but they are issues of accountability.  Shouldn’t we spend because our accountability is weak? Should we not finance our budget because accountability in Ministry of Defence is weak? Because now we are going into the details of some of these very high sounding machinery like MIGs, or whatever, which we do not know! 

On another point of clarification, Parliament now has got an opportunity, through the sessional committees and the Budget Committee, to sit and scrutinize the budget, both on the resource side and the expenditure side, and come up with recommendations. Now, hon. Awori, my colleague, are those really grounds on which you should oppose the borrowing?

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. If you cannot account for money I gave you last year, why should I continue to give you? Privatisation was done with a purpose of stopping haemorrhage on our resources. It did not mean we did not want all these parastatal bodies; it is just that they were losing money! Likewise, I am saying that if you cannot keep what I gave you last year, why should I continue to borrow and give you more, just to lose it?  

On the matter of this particular loan on budget support, we know that 75 to 80 per cent of this money is going to be used in procurement, and this is where we have a problem. Madam Speaker, I do not want to go into security. Let me leave that alone; it might cause other problems We are debating it tomorrow. But when it comes to the real purpose of this loan - poverty alleviation - that is how I look at it.  

In this country, between 50 and 60 per cent of the poor are women and youth. This loan is going to be spent through a tender system or tender board of one kind or another - put up a school here, put up a lab here. I ask myself, nationally, what percentage of tenders issued - local government up to national level - go to women, or women-owned companies or women-managed companies? 

We lose most of our money through tender procurement. Women are not involved in any procurement system in this country. The youth have been kept out because, allegedly, they do not have experience to manage business, they do not have capital and they do not have reference. Once again, we are going to put money in the hands of the people who already have it, or people who have misused it in the past.

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk more about tenders and women, the gender factor. Why are we keeping the women out of it if we are going to address this issue of poverty? If it is a question of schools we are putting up, where do we get that equipment? Who are the people that provide the services? Again, women and the youth are kept out.  I am going to the root cause –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, these tenders are distributed through the district councils and the tender boards of your districts. Don’t we have an opportunity as councillors to influence what transpires there?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Basically, I skipped one important point, and that is lack of transparency - (Interruption).

DR KAMUGISHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to the member on the Floor is that, yes, for quite some time the women and the youth did not benefit in the tenders to supply various goods and services, particularly at district level. But of late, I want to inform the member that groups of youth have started taking on small contracts, as small as they can afford. 

For example, I am aware that the youth are participating in road construction projects and in supplying building materials for schools. And the sensitisation is going on to involve them in more and more of these tenders.  

I would encourage members here that when you go out to your constituencies, this is one area where you can continue to encourage the young people to participate. Remember also that these youth have not been used to work, they are just coming up and the culture to work must be built in them. This is where you can also play your role. But rest assured, in the tendering process the youth are not going to remain behind, because they have already started. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I yield the Floor to the hon. Minister of Entandikwa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I am the one who gives the Floor.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Awori for so graciously giving me the Floor. I want to try and persuade him not to think of refusing this loan because women do not get contracts or tenders. 

I want to persuade him to think that when the tenders are awarded, say for building schools or health units, or for any poverty reduction project on the ground, among the population that will benefit are women and the youth. Therefore, it is okay. I appreciate the fact that he supports us, women, very much and wants us also to control money, but do not choke us at the same time by refusing the money to come. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also appreciate –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much for giving way.  I have additional information on hon. Aggrey Awori’s concerns. First, the conditions for this loan include: improved financial management, accountability, anti-corruption measures, demonstrating satisfactory progress in implementation of sound economic policies, and maintaining appropriate macro-economic policy framework. This really adds to your oversight function as a Member of Parliament and, therefore, leading to supporting the motion for Government to borrow these funds. Thank you very much for receiving this information.

MR AWORI: Thank you very much, my honourable colleague. I appreciate your information, although it is a little bit distanced from the reality. Why am I saying so? Can any of my colleagues here this afternoon tell me whether they have felt the impact of a similar loan in the past in their constituencies? 

I would have put a caveat on this particular loan. The number one condition for the caveat is that, out of this money, at least every member of the august House, the 240 of us who were elected by the people of Uganda, should have a say in a minimum of five million shillings per project, per constituency - (Interjections)- Yes! I should have five million shillings so that I know that from the loan I authorized in Parliament, at least a project I know of in Samia Bugwe North, worth five million shillings, went there.  

If it is a question of roofing the school, a maternity home or whatever it is, I want to see the impact, so that next time around, I can tell my constituents, “look people, I authorized the following loans for you, and I can show you an example, here is a project.” Why can’t we do that?  

Why can’t the Ministry of Finance at least allow every member of this august House control five million shillings’ worth of a project? It looks very simplistic, but it is the reality of the matter. I want to have an impact –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Awori for giving way. From the submissions, we have been told that this money is going to support the Budget. And through the Budget, we have various projects that go on in our different constituencies. So, it would not really be in order to sit here and determine that each constituency is going to get so much out of this money. It is already enshrined in the overall project process. So, it does not really need us to come to that point he is submitting.

MR AWORI: Once again, thank you, my honourable colleague on the Front Bench. It looks like once you get to the Cabinet you are distanced from the reality. Madam Speaker, I am simply saying that I want to see one of those projects, which they put in that common basket called "projects", specific for my constituency. 

I want to see a project specific to my constituency, where I can tell the people that I authorized 40 billion shillings we borrowed from ADB, and I can tell them that a school in Busia, or Katakwi or somewhere is also a beneficiary of this system - (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Awori, are you really suggesting that there are no projects in your constituency, which have been supported by the Budget? That is what you are implying.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I can tell you what is on the ground in my constituency. We borrow a lot of money for various projects and budget support, but the distribution and accountability is what I am disputing. This budget support is a glorious IMF terminology just to confuse us. We want a reality!  

Madam Speaker, I would like to go back to the report of the relevant committee.  When you look at the recommendations on page four of the report of the committee, actually this could constitute a caveat on the loan. In other words, the Government must fulfil these conditions before we actually authorize this loan. These are conditions that must be fulfilled! (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which page, hon. Awori? 

MR AWORI: "The Government should report to Parliament on the performance of the first tranche of 25 million dollars. The Government should brief Parliament on how the conditions set for the serial instalment have been put in place before its release." These are conditions, which we need to know about. They have not attached these conditions to this loan request. 

Last but not least, these funds should be used for development programmes and not recurrent expenditure. We want to know, can the Government give us evidence to show that this money is actually going for development and not recurrent expenditure? 

I started off my argument by saying this money is around here with us, but we are just borrowing to fill the gap. I gave the example of Defence. We know that the donor community, the partners in development as we call them, have now refused to finance our defence expenditure. Now, what we are doing is to scrap our social services projects in order to fulfil the voracious Ministry of Defence. They are even killing themselves! We put somebody in the helicopter who does not even know how to load guns. Instead, they blow themselves up! 

This is the kind of money we have removed from the Ministry of Health and put in the Ministry of Defence. In the end, we go to ADB to borrow money because our original money, from our own revenue, went to Ministry of Defence where people have no idea on how to even utilize the equipment they have purchased!  

On the matter of Defence, I will talk about it tomorrow. But, Madam Speaker, I insist that we should not approve this loan until these recommendations of the committee have been fulfilled by the Ministry of Finance. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the spirit of regional co-operation, and especially co-operation between Kenya and Uganda, we have in the strangers’ gallery a group of teachers from Chogoria Girls Boarding Primary School. There are 21 teachers and ten members of the Chogoria Girls Boarding Primary School management committee. They are in Uganda on a three days’ visit. They have come to see how we conduct ourselves in this august House. You are very welcome.  (Applause). Hon. Awori, is Chogoria near Samia Bugwe?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, Arua is nearer Samia Bugwe than Chogoria.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also, not belatedly, congratulate you on your deserved election, and particularly because you are chairing that sub-committee on human rights. I think it will assist to make the Movement respect human rights more. (Laughter). 

Now that the National Political Commissar is around and he mentioned it, I am sure that the role of the Deputy Speaker chairing that committee will make my colleagues respect human rights more, especially those with regard to the freedom of association. 

Madam Speaker, when it comes to borrowing, we need to be extra careful. In fact, I would argue that when a person is borrowing, it should be exceptional, and it should also be for a justified cause. 

Madam Speaker, it is needless to emphasise that unreasonable borrowing in Africa has caused a debt crisis. In fact, because of that borrowing, which I may call unreasonable and unjustified borrowing, most countries, especially African countries, find themselves in a very serious debt crisis. This has hindered their development. 

For me who does not sit on the National Economy Committee and on the Budget Committee, I would have been very happy to be shown these areas of allocation, where exactly in the specific sectors or sub sectors, and how much, so that when I go to the people of Otuke, who are totally displaced and they do not support this borrowing until their security is guaranteed - I will conclude with that because they are not going to benefit from this borrowing. They are going to repay, but they are not benefiting. 

Madam Speaker, I have criticised the report because it gives too many negative riders. For example, on page 2, it says, “The funds will be channelled through the Consolidated Fund to be disbursed through the Treasury system. Misallocation and diversion of such funds will therefore be controlled by the established mechanisms” 

You know very well that the established mechanisms at the moment do not control misallocation and diversion. They are the source of diversion and misallocation. Therefore, this very statement itself convinces me that there is more to do with the problems of control of accountability, which makes me very hesitant in approving this loan.

On Page 3, “the committee reminds the House that a big percentage of Government expenditure is on procurement of goods and services. This has also been a major source of corruption due to incompetence resulting in cases of expired medicine, poor quality food" - junk helicopters, undersize uniforms, construction of classrooms, all sorts of things. Now, if this is where we are going to take these 50 million dollars, is it worthy for this House to approve it, surely?  

Madam Speaker, on the same page - I am just tackling the report. It says, “Whereas the above conditions for the first release are in place, the committee observed that the strengthening of justice, law and order section has not been adequately addressed.” 

This is a sector, which is going to deal with corruption, with accountability, with ensuring that this money is properly used. If you cannot close the hole on a pot before you bring water from the well, why should you waste your time filling that pot? I think we should close the hole before we put more water in this pot.

Madam Speaker, it is also said that, “the Committee noted that the following conditions, among many set, should have been set in motion in readiness…” They are not yet set in motion! They are not there, and it goes on. Finally - and I think this is the nail on the coffin. In conclusion, it says: “Mr Speaker, the Committee will start to monitor” – “will start”, it has not started – “will start to monitor the performance of this and other laws approved by Parliament to ensure that these moneys are doing what is contained in the project implementation plan.”  Even the Members of Parliament in the committee are not yet ready, let alone the civil servants, the institutions for corruption and so on.  

Madam Speaker, 50 million is not small money and I would urge this House not to hurry to approve this money. As far as my people of Otuke are concerned, they are not ready to have this loan approved. At the moment, they are totally living in camps; they are displaced. The issue of poverty, agriculture improvement and so on - their priority is Posho from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, and security; their priority is accommodation. Even their children are not going to school. So you are forcing the people of Otuke to approve this loan and you are going to tax them, and to pay for this loan yet they are not benefiting from it.  

Madam Speaker, I think that as far as I am concerned, the fact that the machinery to see the implementation of this loan for its accountability is not in place, as indicated by the report of the committee, and the very fact that a half of this country is in a state of insecurity and cannot benefit from this loan, I suggest that we postpone a decision on this loan until every Ugandan is ready to benefit from it and the machinery of accountability and fighting corruption is put in place. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): I thank you Madam Speaker. I am in difficulties trying to understand how money, which is going into budget support or a common basket, can be subjected to conditionalities. I am in total confusion whether the money, which is going to be mixed up with all the moneys and then joggled around can be allocated to anything, can be subjected to conditionalities.  

Secondly, I am even more surprised that, that kind of financing modality, the committee is even daring to suggest they will be monitoring it. I just do not understand! How will they know which shilling has gone where, or which dollar has gone where for them to monitor, or are they going to monitor the entire annual budget system? Unless my understanding is totally different from that of the committee, I think there is a problem with our appreciating the modality of budget support and how it works.

Unless again my English is a problem, on page 2, the report says “Other conditions for the release of the first instalment.” Now what does this mean? Does it mean that these conditions will have been fulfilled before the first release can be given or the first release will be given in order to achieve these conditions? The way it is stated here, I cannot understand. 

If the situation is that this money will only be released on condition that these conditionalities prevail, then we are not going to succeed in getting this money released. Because, even at the bank, we are already saying that the law and order section is not in order, the procurement system is chaotic and these are the conditionalities! 

Even the wording “Government may tender an appropriate micro-economic framework” - this is an ordinary statement made all over. But when you say “demonstrating satisfactory progress in implementation of reform measures”, are these going to precede the release or is the release going to support that process? 

“Improved financial management, accountability and anti corruption measures” - If my brother is correct, it means that this money will only be released if financial management, accountability and anti corruption measures have been improved.  This is improved English. In some cases we are saying, “improved”, in some other case we are saying, “improving”. In some cases we are saying we use past tense and in another we are saying we use present continuous tense.  

Strengthening the justice law and order section: Will this money be used for strengthening or will it be released when we are sure that the justice, law and order section has been improved or strengthened and so forth?  So really, these conditionalities, I do not know whether they are subject to be achieved before the funds are released, or the funds will be released in order to achieve them.  The committee does not make it very clear to some of us whose English may be completely weak.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you hon. Epak for giving way.  Madam Speaker, in the wisdom of the committee, since the money is in the basket, I think the committee is going to monitor the conditionalities.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you, honourable member. Now last week, I asked,  “What are the conditions attached to the second release, because for the first series of releases, from what I have read pertaining to the first, we have not. And I said that apparently we have not been given conditions for the second release.  But if you read on page 3, the last paragraph reads:  

“Mr Speaker, the committee noted that the following conditions, among the many set, should have been set in motion in readiness for the second tranche.” 

I hope that these are the conditionalities for the second tranche and it is a little better stated here that: “A bill establishing an autonomous Auditor General’s office; presentation of the report on leadership code of conduct - which actually is supposed to be done annually; national drug policy and strategic plan on pharmaceuticals and human resource policy for the health sector." 
Until the above are in place, the second tranche will not be released.  This is a little clearer English, but the conditionalities for the first one do not help me to appreciate that the money will or will not be released.

Finally, really, I do not know because we have to sit in the Budget Committee. It will be quite a task to pinpoint that 25 million dollars has gone in the law and order section; so much of it has gone into anti corruption; so much of it has come from the budget support and common basket system.  It will not be possible. It is like picking a grain of sugar from sand.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way.  The measurable targets for demonstrating that conditions have been satisfied need not to be tied to a dollar released under this loan. If for purposes of argument that the tender committees have been established in ministries and inflation has been controlled under certain targets and so forth, you can carry out a review and you are satisfied these are in place and you can release the funds under the loan without necessarily having to trace a dollar released under the loan, it is possible, it is measurable, it can be done.  

DR OKULO EPAK: I do not know whether that information has been helpful at all. It has even made me more confused. He is talking about the conditionalities for release and methods for measuring the impact of the allocation. He is talking of two things at the same time, and I am not helped at all. 
  
These funds should be used for development programmes and not recurrent expenditure.  Now, the committee has imposed its conditions on these funds, but if you look at the conditionalities, quite a number of them can only be recurrent expenditure.  Now they have imposed their own conditionality. We really do not know! 

 I want to agree with hon. Kamuntu, former Ambassador plenipotentiary.  I would rather think that these were supposed to be objectives for the loan, but if they were somebody’s conditionalities, then that somebody is going to have a lot of problems in ensuring that these conditionalities apply, or we are going to have a lot of problems for this money to be released.  I thank you.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  I am glad to be taking the floor after my able friends Omara Atubo and hon. Okulo Epak. 

First, let us be fair to ourselves as the seventh Parliament.  In my view, honourable colleagues, I think in terms of strengthening accountability, as Parliament we are doing reasonably well. Why do I say so, Madam Speaker?  We have the practice, despite having the Public Accounts Committee that Sessional Committees and Standing Committees have got into the practice we hold meetings here, we query ministries but we also go out in the countryside.   

As we speak now, for example, members of the Committee on Social Services are going in different parts of the country to check the Minister of Health's report on building health centres.  I think this is a good development which all of us must cheer and support. What the Public Accounts Committee is already doing - (Interruption) - I am sure they will reach Otuke and other parts as well.  

You see, we have been passing other loans as a Seventh Parliament, so when an additional loan comes, we should remember that we are going to be judged on our collective performance on what has happened to the other loans we passed. Are we supervising them, or we are only focussing on one particular loan?  

But now this takes me to the fundamental point that hon. Amaro Atubo made that now we cannot just borrow without involving Parliament.  That it is a directive of the Constitution that when we borrow, Parliament must be involved.  

I thank hon. Omara Atubo for making this very fundamental statement, and he should join me in thanking the reform by the Movement to ensure that - unlike during the UPC time. The Constitution was there, we looked at it, maybe we were not concerned about accountability; we did not build this strong reform that no borrowing should take place unless Parliament itself is involved – (Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, when the National Committee of the Movement met in Kyankwanzi and NEC met in the Conference Centre, they proposed amending many provisions of the Constitution.  The issue of the two-term limit and the powers of the President- I think this is also one of those recommended to be removed by the Movement. So there is no future you are talking about. So do not be too proud of it – (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Let me help my brother Omara Atubo.  First, when we met in Kyankwanzi, it was the National Executive Committee, and when met in Kampala, it was the National Conference.  I want to assure hon. Omara Atubo that this is one of the reforms we are so proud of.  We could not even think about removing it - the fact that Parliament must approve loans before they can enter our books.

The point, Madam Speaker, is that this was a reform by the Movement, and I think we should uphold it.  Public Accounts Committee - I also wanted to inform hon. Omara Atubo that by the time we came to power with him - because hon. Omara Atubo and myself have been in the Government for a long time - we did find that the Public Accounts before us were hardly functional. We were clearing public accounts of three, four years backward.  

In the 7th Parliament and the 6th Parliament, we have been able to look at accounts fairly currently: We are able to look at accounts of last year and pass judgement on them in the following year.  All these are credits to the Parliament, which is keeping track of the money of the public accounts.  So, while I welcome that Parliament must be critical when loans come here, Parliament must feel satisfied. 

I also want to appeal that first there must be some amount of trust in our colleagues. Because we have a committee, when the resolution comes here, it first goes to a committee, the Committee comes back to us having taken much more time than ourselves in scrutinising the particular resolution or particular request. So, it is incorrect for someone to say we try to pass a loan in three hours.  No, there has been work, which has already started in the committees scrutinising on our behalf.  So, we should not convey the impression that we always rush in passing these loans.

Also, I think when we read the reports from the committees, we should read them alongside the resolution, as brought by the honourable minister, so that we have the full context.  As hon. Okulo Epak was correctly precise that, this sentence does it mean a second tranche condition or the first?  Clearly, if we look at the primary document that the committee looked at, we would be able to have a deeper clarity.  

This loan, as it is clearly spelt out, is coming to support the budget; it is coming to support other funding that we have obtained before, so that the work that has been done can be consolidated. In my view, to deny ourselves the benefit of this loan will be to weaken work that we have already started.  

I sympathise with the view of hon. Omara Atubo that the people in Otuke north are having insecurity and, therefore, unless this is cleared quickly, they may not benefit from this loan.  But to suggest that because of war the rest of the brothers and sisters of hon. Omara Atubo should not benefit, I think is not fair. 

I think what would be fair is to demand that as we get this loan, more effort must be made to bring security, law and order in the constituency of Otuke North and other areas of the country that are currently disturbed.

Finally, two points, Madam Speaker.  First, the story of 23 per cent budget cut.  I see this constantly going into our Hansard because this is an inaccuracy.  

As all of us know, our Government, by Constitution and our Budget Act cannot take a supplementary above three per cent, except with the authority of Parliament.  So to come on the floor and say the budget was cut 23 per cent is to imply that the Government has acted unconstitutionally or illegally.  

What happened - and this has been explained many times by the honourable Minister of Finance - there are some items in the budget that were excluded: Those that could qualify are the ones, which were cut by 23 percent.  But the overall cut was certainly within the limits of the law as set by us.

Finally, I want to thank hon. Aggrey Awori for continuing to highlight these fundamental reforms that have taken place in our society.  That now we can talk about women's rights; we can talk about the youth accessing loans. We should really keep pushing this line so that the reforms of the Movement really take effect.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have generally said what we wanted to say about this motion. Can I ask the chairperson whether she has something to respond to?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, when we parted on Friday, there were two issues that needed the minister’s explanation: One, in spite of the fact that this money is going in a basket, members were interested in knowing precisely to what extent this particular loan is going to help those items that are mentioned in the report.  

The other one was that this money would only be released if the conditionalities have been fulfilled.  The House wanted to know to what extent has Government fulfilled these conditionalities.  Because it is no good passing a motion approving borrowing and at the end of the day you cannot access the money because the conditionalities have not been accessed.  

But I thought that the minister should have earlier cleared those two matters because hon. Rukutana promised that he was going to leave a written brief to the minister so that he explains those matters to us.  But if we vote on this report and members are not convinced, they may not support it if these two matters are not actually explained.  So, I would beg that the minister really clarifies these two matters before we vote; otherwise, he runs a risk of losing the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, nobody asked for a vote.  What I did was to ask the chairperson whether she had something to respond to.

MR MWANDHA: I was saying, we assume that hon. Rukutana had briefed – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Mwandha, after the chairperson has made her responses, the minister is going to be given a chance to respond to your queries.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I have a few clarifications to make.  First of all, I would like to appreciate members’ concerns because this is not indeed little money, and we are really committing our Government, our children and our grandchildren who will be paying this loan.

I would like to inform members that much as this report is brief, it contains all the facts as presented in the committees, and I will take you through some of those, which apparently were not very clear to members.

Members are concerned about how we are going to know how much money goes to where, or to which sector or which project?  Because, as you very much know, we are moving from the project approach to the Budget Support Approach. And there is no way in the Budget Support Approach you are going to say 100,000,000 from the PRSP loan went to build a school in Ikoba; it is almost impossible.  So, I would like to suggest to this House that if you were going to follow this loan in that manner, then the approach would have to change from a budget support approach to project support approach.

About the conditionalities, I thought we were very clear but apparently some members are not.  This is the second request for an ADF loan, and the first conditionalities we are talking about were for the first tranche. I will appreciate, Madam Speaker, because this loan was presented or laid before this House early 2002, and the minister’s brief containing all the details were given to all honourable members about March/April 2002. So, members should have read through this document. 

I wish to remind you that the conditionalities that we indicate here were for the first tranche, and that is financial management, accountability and anti-corruption.  There are many things there: reform tender board and central tender board, which have been done. That is what we are informed about and the minister is affirming.  

Then there was strengthening the justice, law and order section, which were indicated in this report, a lot needs to be done. 

There was improving quality of education, which has been done through TDMS  You very well know that positions of responsibility have been filled in districts, both in schools and at the headquarters, and this has been complemented by improved utilisation of textbooks.  

Then there was conditionality to improve the quality of Health Care.  Government was required to produce a Health Sector Procurement Plan for 2001/2002, which they did. 

The conditionalities for the second tranche, which we are considering include – of course, we carried them forward- They are: tranche standards being maintained; teachers  being trained, and on top – it is a whole list, I do not know if I should read it all - financial Management; Accountability and anti-corruption; created contract committees in all procuring ministries, departments and agencies.  We were told that this was done.  

They should have presented a bill to Parliament on the establishment of an autonomous Auditor General’s Office.  This is what we have raised on page 3 that the bill establishing this office should be before this House but we are told it is being worked on.  

Clearing the backlog on audited accounts, preparing final accounts for all ministries, carrying out the second integrated survey and its related results. We are told this is done.  

Develop a strategic plan for criminal and commercial justice reform, including monitoring indicators. We are told this one is also done.

Improving quality of education.  The conditionality is that Government should have implemented an action plan to improve the distribution and utilisation of textbooks.  We were informed that this is already done. All districts have been filled - at least 75 per cent of their established staff ceiling.  

You know the problem we have, both as a committee and as Parliament, is that once this money comes to the consolidated fund, it is very difficult to pull it out and follow it coin by coin. But I would like to inform members that as we go down to monitor, each Government programme will have benefited somehow from this loan.  So, you should be interested in each and every project or Government programme going on in your constituencies.

There was a question about Government priorities. That one, I have already said that they are clearly indicated on page 1: Primary Health Care. That is under the field of Ministry of Health; Primary Education that is under Education; and, rural feeder roads. These are the priority areas and much of these funds will go towards funding these priority areas. But there is no way you are going to say which school have you built specifically with this loan, or which health centre or which rural feeder road have you constructed, or which bore-hole have you drilled, because there are several other programmes bringing in money in that line.

Somebody mentioned something about - I think on page 2 - how will the controls or monitoring or supervision of these funds be done?  We have said and indicated that the funds will be controlled by the established mechanism and Parliament is part and parcel of that mechanism through your oversight role.  So, you will have to follow this money. Vague as it may appear now, with time it will become clearer and clearer. You could do it through PAC, or you could do it through both the National Economy and Budget Committees.

We have been alerted that this money will go to these sectors. When they come to brief you during the budget time, which is coming soon, please ask them. I also tell you that the donors themselves are not going to release this money automatically just because we have approved this loan. They also have their mechanisms and indicators, as put down, to check whether government has fulfilled the conditionalities or not before this loan is released.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague is talking about “donors” and how they cannot release this money. Who are the “donors”? I thought we are borrowing this money, which means there are no “donors”!  

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, hon. Awori. Perhaps I should have used the words “funders”, “lenders” or “development partners”. Whether donors, development partners or funders, they are not going to release this money. For this particular one, ADF will not release this money, and African Development Bank will not release this money just because we have approved this loan. 

They will first crosscheck with government against the indicators, which were set to ensure that this money is not misused. But this is just an added effort. I am saying that we as Parliament and other institutions should follow up this money wherever we go, in terms of monitoring government programmes and projects.

Yes, Parliament and the committee will monitor this. An example has already been given. When we say we are going to monitor, we could do it ourselves, but we shall also monitor through the Sessional Committees. We have already alerted you that this money is coming and you are the ones who are going to approve it. Kindly, where things go wrong, the Committee on National Economy is charged with overseeing the performance of the economy. We shall come in to pressurise government to do the needful.

There were some issues, Madam Speaker, which were raised on Friday, and I would like to address those that were specifically directed to the committee. There was concern about the priorities and programmes that this money will target. That one, I have answered already, and we were promised that this money would be specifically spent on capital development programmes, not recurrent expenditure.

There was an issue -(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I am increasingly getting concerned about the way we are budgeting. Here is a loan we are going to approve, hinged on conditionalities, and already it is in our budget. If these conditions are not met - and I can see certainly that over 50 percent have not been fulfilled – shall we continue with the budget to say we have the money and yet the money is not there? 

Procedurally, Madam Speaker, this loan should have been approved last year so that it is in this current year. That is why this year, as you are aware, Madam Speaker, over US $150 million could not be injected into this budget and that is why we had that terrible deficit. I believe that Parliament is just being used to have a budget, which is not going to be implemented.  

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and honourable member for raising that concern. It is a pertinent concern. However, we did raise that concern in the committee, and the response was - you have seen these conditionalities. Government is trying to fulfil some of them. And when this money comes in, as I have told you, if the staff ceiling, for example, of Masindi District is about 30 percent, already conditionality number one is being fulfilled. When this money comes, that ceiling of staffing level is supposed to improve from 30 to 70 percent.

If you do not, for example, pass this loan, then there will be no way government will fulfil these conditionalities. I hope I am understood because this money, when it comes, will go into improving the conditions and the performance of the economy. It is part and parcel of our budget, but it is not yet released.  

I go on to the next –(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I am at a loss because the chairperson has said that when this money comes, they will improve the conditionalities that have been imposed by the lenders. Perhaps I did not hear well, but I am wondering whether that could be the case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odur, what she is saying is that there are certain conditionalities but they are really not static. They have been monitored from time to time. So, you will be seeing some changes and improvements. I think that is what she is trying to tell us.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am getting increasingly confused the way my honourable colleague is presenting the report. Are you the Minister of Finance now? You are defending the Cabinet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, the chairperson is very well versed in matters of budgeting. That is why she is saying what she is saying. Let the chairperson complete her presentation.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, let me wind up. I really want to say that the conditionalities are concerns for the improvement of the management of our economy and they are not imposed. They want to make sure that once this money comes, it is really used for the purpose it is intended. That is why they are talking of financial management, improved accountability, strengthening of anti-corruption, and improving of quality of education. I did not say that the conditionalities are really imposed on us, no.  We have to improve on the way we manage our economy, that is all.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, there was a concern about the National Drug Authority. It was also the view of the committee that the National Drug Authority should not be privatized as of now. However, a study should be carried out so that when it is phased out, the duties it used to perform are fully catered for. 

I think those were the issues, which were put to the committee. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. The Minister of Finance, could you first address the other two matters that were outstanding?   

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Kasenene): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the honourable members for the contribution they have made. I will answer the issues they have raised and the questions of concern. 

Hon. Awori started by asking that if the money is available here, why are we borrowing? Certainly, nobody borrows when he or she has money. So the money is not there, and yet there is need for money to support the budget. That is why we are borrowing.  

The issue of accountability, which was also raised by hon. Awori, the National Political Commissar has answered that question very well. I do not think we really need to repeat it. But just to add something, Parliament, a short while ago passed the Public Finance and Accountability Bill, which is a clear testimony that steps are being taken to strengthen the transparent and accountable conduct of public affairs. So, the mechanisms are in place, and already efforts are being made to strengthen them.

Hon. Omara Atubo was talking about borrowing and how African countries have suffered from borrowing. I think he is right, but that applies to anybody who borrows. Nobody borrows for pleasure. If you call borrowing an evil, then it is a necessary evil. Like we are saying, that this money is required for budget support and we really need it. If we do not get it, it will negatively affect the performance of the budget.  

Another point he raised was that the report was brief. In my view that is a credit to the report because if it is brief it means it is concise and that it is easier to read. Therefore, we should give credit to the Committee for making things easier for us to read, understand and comprehend. 

Madam Speaker, I move on to other technical issues, especially the issues that were raised last Friday. One of the serious issues that have been raised again and again is that the money should not be for current but developmental expenditure. Money for the budget is naturally for both conditional and non-conditional expenditure, which means it is for both current and developmental programmes. So, this aspect of development is already taken care of.  Certainly, the budget is for both current and development purposes.  

Another issue that has been raised again and again is that of loan conditionalities and as the chairperson said, I just want to add a little more clarification. The loan conditionalities have already been negotiated between government and the African Development Bank, and they are satisfactory to both sides. So, the fear that we might approve the loan and it is not granted should not arise. Certainly, Government will not accept loans whose conditionalities are not appropriate for the people of Uganda. So this has already been taken care of. 

So, Madam Speaker, with those clarifications, I would like to beg honourable members to approve the loan request.  

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, there was concern about the National Drug Authority. The Minister has not explained that concern. The officials of the National Drug Authority were taken to court for having allowed in fake drugs, and a charge sheet was sanctioned by the DPP. The court case is still going on. When these people were released on bond, they were returned to office instead of being interdicted, and they continue handling fake drugs coming into the country. Could the minister explain how they are handling such a case?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if this matter is before court, what do you want the minister to say? Do you now want the minister to decide for the court even before the matters have been heard?  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, it appears my colleague is mixing up two different entities. The report is clearly talking about the privatization of the National Medical Stores. National Medical Stores is an importer and distributor of drugs in this country on behalf of government. 

The authority my colleague is concerned about is the National Drug Authority, which is a regulatory body and which is responsible for the quality of drugs in this country. The two are not one and the same. So, National Drug Authority does not fall under the purview of this report before the House.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before the honourable minister resumed his seat, I assumed he was going to answer certain questions, especially those ones you highlighted from the previous session. There is a brief owing to this august House by his colleague, hon. Rukutana. I do not recall him answering that particular question. 

Number two; I would like to know from the honourable minister, how fast do you want this money? I am asking that question for two reasons. One, there are certain conditions that the chairperson of the committee mentioned, certain conditions that have yet to be fulfilled. They say they are in the process. How is this august House sure that once we have cleared this loan they will clear them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Awori, the chairperson was very clear. She said that this Parliament is part of the established control mechanism. You have your committees, which oversee the Executive. She clearly said you have the power in your hands and you should start using it. So there is no vacuum. 

I now put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorize government to borrow Units of Accounts 50 million from the African Development Fund (ADF) of the ADB Group for the purpose of co-financing the Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme (PRSP) be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2002

Clause 1:

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): We propose the following amendment to clause 1. Substitute 2002 with 2003. The justification is that this is the year in which this Bill will be operational. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 1 as amended agreed to.)

Clause 2:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendment: Delete clause 2(2). The justification is that the role of the Central Bank is defined more clearly in the Bank of Uganda Statute, 1993. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to clause 2 as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2 as amended agreed to.)

(Clause 3 agreed to.)

(Clause 4 agreed to.)

(Clause 5 agreed to.)

Clause 6:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendment to clause 6(3). It should read as follows: 

“In the case of an acquisition referred to in sub-section (1), the Central Bank shall, in accordance with regulations made under this Act, appoint a firm of accountants to examine and report on the financial position of the undertaking to be acquired to ensure that the acquisition is not detrimental to the interests of the depositors of the acquiring financial institution.” 

The justification for this amendment is to provide adherence to the regulations when acquiring financial institutions. I beg to move.

(Clause 6 as amended agreed to.)

(Clause 7 agreed to.)

(Clause 8 agreed to.)

(Clause 9 agreed to.)

(Clause 10 agreed to.)

(Clause 11 agreed to.)


Clause 12:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose two amendments to clause 12. One is to clause 12(6) and the other on 12(10). In 12(6) we propose the following amendment. Delete the words “be liable to” in the second line after the word “shall”. 

The justification is that it is redundant, since there is no conviction. 

In clause 12(10) we amend the clause by adding, at the end of the paragraph, the following words: “and refund to the institution the fines so far paid”. 

The justification is that it should cater for losses incurred due to a possible wrong decision, and to act as a cautionary measure for the Central Bank to be more careful when deciding on such issues. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 12 as amended agreed to.)

(Clause 13 agreed to.)

(Clause 14 agreed to.)

(Clause 15 agreed to.)

(Clause 16 agreed to.)

(Clause 17 agreed to.)

Clause 18:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments to clause 18(1), clause 18(5), clause 18(6)(a), and clause 18(6)(b) as follows: 

In clause 18(1) we propose an amendment to delete 1(c) and 1(d). The justification is that the relationship has not been a problem in the management of these institutions. What has been a problem is supervision. 

Secondly, a number of successful financial institutions worldwide are family businesses or relationships of some form. 

Then, we delete “20 percent acquisition shareholding” appearing in clause 18(1), and replace it with “49 percent”. The justification is that 20 percent is too restrictive, and could be unattractive to investment in the financial sector and become a disincentive to attracting core investors. 

In clause 18(b) we propose the following amendment. Redraft the first line to read as follows: “If, through on-site inspection, the Central Bank discovers that though…" The justification is that the Central Bank should not act merely on opinion. It should first have factual information before acting. 

We again propose deleting the words “a person” or “a group of related persons” in line three. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment.

In Clause 18 (6)(a), we propose an amendment to replace “five years” with “seven years” in the first line of that clause.  The justification is that we want to provide ample time for financial institutions to comply with this law.  

Further amendment: we delete sub-section (2) and insert (1) in the last line. The justification is that there was a typing error, which we are correcting.

In Clause 18(6)(b), we are proposing an amendment to replace “90 days” in the clause with “six months.” The justification is that 90 days are inadequate for this action.

The last amendment is on Clause 18(1) and (2). We propose to delete the word “foreign” and the justification is that “foreign” is discriminatory against domestic or national investors in this regard.  Madam Chair, we propose these amendments and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, did you say something about 18(2)?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, I omitted 18(2) after consultation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to tell the Members that Clause 18(1) should be left as it is at “20 percent limit" for the following reasons: One, if we move the limit to “49 percent”, this will create a domineering effect, and undue influence by a single shareholder in the bank. So, in order to limit the domineering effect and undue influence that majority or a substantial shareholder may have in the bank, we suggest that 20 percent would be more realistic.

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, good corporate governance in the bank is unlikely to be achieved when directors or managers of an institution are subject to the whims or, let me say, dictates and manoeuvring of one powerful shareholder. A shareholder with 49 percent will have a substantive say in the bank, and would easily move the operations of the bank to go into his or her own direction.

Another danger of having one shareholder having a controlling stake in the bank is that it will promote insider loans; and this has been common in the past in family owned banks. So, raising the shareholding to 49 percent, in our view, would seriously compromise the safety and soundness of individual banks in the financial sector. So, I would request that Clause 18(1) remain as it is at 20 percent.  I beg to move.

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like clarification from the Minister of Finance in charge of Privatisation. At what stage did the Government drop the idea of having core investors with a very big stake in their organisations? When you change policies, please try to bring us on board. The word, which the Chairman is proposing to delete, gives preferential treatment to foreign institutions. Who says corporate governance should only be looked at when you are looking at indigenous institutions? 

Then on insider lending, honourable minister, did we not agree that the main reason why we are bringing in place a new law to replace the other one is because the other law was not strong enough, it was weak? We have found out the flaws and we are trying to bridge them by bringing in a new law! Did we not also agree that actually some banks failed because the supervisory function in the Central Bank was lacking, it was deficient?  Have we not been told, honourable members, that now, today, the Central Bank has strengthening the supervision department by putting in place able men and women who are doing a very good job? I need to be clarified before I agree with the honourable minister.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I foresee a situation where Government is applying double standards. They are favouring foreigners and leaving local investors. I will give a small background before I put up my case.  

A man called Barclays started Barclays Bank, and it is a very strong bank. Why should we make laws, which are discriminatory to the locals? The foreigners take away all the money they make in form of dividends and in form of capital. 

Now I come to you. During the debate, you have told us that Bank of Uganda has put up the best mechanism to deal with all financial institutions. Incidentally, the collapse of financial institutions earlier on was because of Bank of Uganda participating in making them collapse. One, those in supervision were borrowing money from the same institution, those in supervision were trying to protect collapsing institutions for getting something small. Tell me now, when did you decide that we should not deal with local investors as core investors? Where is the incentive?  

Two, in Swiss banks, there are family banks, and these financial institutions we are trying to talk about are formed under the Companies' Act. Why are you even restricting it to 49 percent?  Why not 99 percent? I think the Committee has been too liberal to accept 49 percent. In my view, for purposes of all investors being treated equally, we should go back to 99 percent as per the Companies' Act, because financial institutions are registered under the Companies' Act. 

The purpose of making the law is not to bring supervision for the bank, but we always have supervisors in the bank, who could do the work of supervision.  There is no need for us to make a law so that the Bank of Uganda officials will sit there and wait for the dividends and salaries.  I want to ask you one question now; how did you come up with the issue of 20 per cent, not 99 per cent or not one per cent?  Thank you.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I find the minister’s amendment very, very strange because we have the Companies' Act.  In the Companies' Act, we have what we call Articles of Association and Memorandum of Understanding.  Issues of this nature normally should be handled in that law.  

Secondly, to restrict indigenous citizens who have the money, who have the capacity to run business; you are saying I will force you to work with X and Y!  We went in detail to look at Kin and Kith, who should not.  But if, for example, I have friends and we have 20, 20 percent, I could value the money and it becomes 100 percent.  So, I do not see the rationale.  

We should liberate Ugandans to start business even in the banking sector; we should not restrict them.  In fact I would agree with hon. Mafabi that we should have liberalised it as long as the advisory capacity in the central bank is taken care of. We can put there certain measures, certain barriers to make sure that whoever defaults is brought to book.  

So, really, I am shocked by, particularly, a government that wants to make Ugandans move faster, particularly in the finance sector.  I would appeal to the minister to reconsider his stand, and even think of increasing from actually 49 per cent to 51 per cent.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I want to draw the attention of Members to two issues.  The first one is why the Committee arrived at this conclusion.  Some of the sentiments you have already raised them, but the reasoning that was advanced for wanting to limit the shareholding to 20 per cent was that when you limit the shareholding, you will also have limited the concentration of ownership, and by limiting the concentration of ownership in few hands, you will have avoided lending to insiders which, as the Minister has put it, was paraded as the reason why the banks have not been performing quite well.  

They defined "related persons" in the Bill.  When you look at the related persons, it does not cure what is trying to be addressed here because related persons in the definition is a group of related persons, natural persons, close relatives who are not defined and so on.  The Committee, therefore, concluded that to be consistent with government policy of core-investors, if you want core-investors, surely the core-investor must hold at least 51 percent.  Therefore, we compromised at 49.  

So, in a way, I am also surprised that this point is being brought again for debate because we discussed it quite exhaustively in the committee when we came to this level.   Examples were put, with which I do not need to take your time.  But the central point of stopping lending to insiders is a function of the capacity of the Central Bank to supervise. It is not the ownership question.  

The bank can increase the capacity to inspect, to supervise, to monitor the question of lending to insiders, and the question of concentration of lending to a single individual or to related companies can be cured without having to imbed it in the law by prohibiting what a prospective core-investor would have done in the financial sector.  We therefore, as a Committee, stand by the recommendation that we have proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, are you still insisting on your amendment?

PROF. KASENENE:  No, Madam Chairperson, in view of the arguments that have been presented, and in view of the explanation I gave, I wanted to suggest a compromise position that at least we could raise the shareholding to 35 per cent.

MS KIRASO: Let me give information, Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson, there was actually a compromise, if I may remind you, because we had honourable Members like hon. Jack Sabiiti who were saying, why should we restrict at all in the Committee?  

I think hon. Mafabi and hon. Ruzindana were saying this in the spirit of encouraging our people to invest in the spirit of core-investment which we have been talking about. But some of us, having listened to the explanation from the Government side, and looking at the nature of the industry, putting depositors’ money, you never know. So we said fine! Let us compromise at 49.  Actually some Members are saying we could go to 51.  So the compromise was 49.  So I am surprised that the minister can come up to talk about compromise again on the Floor of the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 18(1) be amended as proposed by the Minister of Finance.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 81(1) be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Clause 18(1) as amended agreed to.)

MR MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in the spirit of promoting local investors, I want to move an amendment that the shareholding of a core-investor moves from 49 to 51 per cent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, we have just voted.  I did not receive your amendment in time, and we have finished voting.  We have approved the chairperson’s proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that sub clause (5), sub clause (6), sub clause (12) of Clause 18 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 18 as amended agreed to.)

(Clause 19 agreed to.)

(Clause 20 agreed to.)

(Clause 21 agreed to.)

(Clause 22 agreed to.)

Clause 23:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments on Clause 23.  Clause 23(2) and Clause 23(4), the following amendments are proposed. We delete the word “after” in the first line of Clause 23(2). The justification is that it is redundant.  

We propose to replace the word “significant” with “substantial” in the second line of Clause 23(4).  The justification is that we want it to be consistent with other provisions in the law. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 23 be amended as the chairperson proposes.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 23 as amended agreed to

Clause 24:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments to clause 24(1) and (2). On clause 24(1), we propose to delete the words “subject to section 18 and the Central Bank’s approval”, in the first line. The justification is that it is redundant.  

We also delete the word “foreign” in the second line. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment. And the word “foreign” is also discriminatory. It discriminates against domestic investors.

In Clause 24(2), we proposed an amendment by replacing “Act” with “Section” in the first line of that clause.

Justification: We want to be specific.  

We also delete (a) and (b) and renumber accordingly, so that (c) becomes (a) and (d) becomes (b). The justification is that they are already catered for in clause 18.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, I was just trying to understand 24(2). Can you explain why you are removing the word “Act”? Because the presumption is that ultimately this bill will become an Act, and this is the context in which I understand this.

PROF. KAMUNTU: If you look at clause 24 sub-clause (1), on page 47, for those who have the bill, we are proposing that where it reads, “subject to Section 18 and the Central Bank approval”, we delete that. I guess you can follow on page 47, clause 24(1).  We are deleting the words, “subject to Section 18 and the Central Bank’s approval”. That is what we are proposing should be deleted. 
 
Then within that clause, there is the word “foreign”. The word “foreign”, as we have said, has discriminatory tendencies, as you can see in that phraseology. Then we have moved to 24(2), which says, “For purposes of this Act…” Instead of “Act” we put “Section”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the problem I have. This clause refers to the whole Act, the Financial Institutions Act, when it is finally enacted. I think it is saying, for the purposes of this law, the person shall be deemed to exercise all that. That is how I understand it.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I guess we could take your amendment, because we were referring to this section and it seemed like we were bringing in the whole Act. I think the word “law” is genuine enough. 

If we say, “For the purposes of this law, a person shall be deemed to exercise control over a financial institution if, where that person is a company, the financial institution is a subsidiary of that company, or, whether or not that person is a company, if that person, by himself or herself, or together with his or her associates, related persons or group of related persons…” and then we delete all these. Taking a second look, I think there would be no loss even if we maintained "Act", although for us we are specifically referring to this section.

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, it is different if we say for purposes of this law or this Act, or for purposes of this section, because the control we are talking about in sub clause (1) of clause 24 is specific. It is specific on the shareholding. But if, either before this section or after, there exists a word or words relating to exercising control, which are not specific to control over shareholding, we have no problem with that. Those other clauses should not relate to exercising control over the shareholding. 

So, this one is subject to the control of the shareholding that is talked about in sub-clause (1). That is why we said “this section” instead of Act or law. I wanted to remind my chairman.

PROF. KAMUNTU: If you look at the marginal note of clause 24, it is referring to restrictions of right to control financial institutions. Therefore, for that control within that section, we thought that by mentioning “Section” instead of “Act”, you have focused the restriction, particularly as it relates to the control of the financial institutions law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there no other part of this law, which mentions control of financial institutions, and should it have different definitions?

PROF. KAMUNTU: There are controls on shareholding, as has been proposed. There are also controls on transfer of shares, controls on so many other things. But this one was influenced by the marginal note itself, which refers to restrictions on ownership - the right to control financial institutions, particularly in this section.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24 as amended agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATIZATION) (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the bill entitled “The Financial Institutions Bill, 2002” from clause 1 to clause 24, and passed them with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have done quite some work for today. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 April 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)



