Wednesday 27th April, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vic- Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

1.  Mr. Charles Kabulindi
2.  Mr. Joram Bruno Pajobo


THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION (Mr. Paul Etiang):  Mr. Chairman, with your permission, may I join those who welcomed you back yesterday.  It is so nice we hope you are in your natural position.  It was meant for you generally. May I in the second instance, take this very an opportunity to congratulate our colleagues from the Trade Union World to this august House.  We look forward to their very useful expected contribution.

Having said that, I beg to move that this august House - Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled: ‘The Mass Media and Journalist Bill, 1994’, be read the First Time.  (Applause)


THE MASS MEDIA AND JOURNALIST BILL, 1994

BILLS
SECOND READING

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for being kind enough to allow me to complete my contribution to the debate, which ended yesterday while I was in the middle of my statement.  I hope you and the House will bear with me if I be allowed to congratulate those Members who have just been sworn in as Members of this House, and as the hon. Minister said, we look forward to a worker like contribution in our debates.  

Also, allow me to welcome back some of our Members who are just returning from the battle of front seat -(Laughter)- we congratulate those who won the battle and those who lost I am reminded that participation is probably more robe essence than the end results, and we wish -I may assure them that there is always another time to try and probably they will join me in being smarter next time. (Laughter) 

Their battle, really on a serious note, many people do not realise how far this country has gone, that we can be going through an election and we still are able to laugh genuinely laugh.  In many places sooner than elections over, blood is shed.  And I think Ugandans should take his achievement very, very serious. (Applause)  It is not accidental; I think there has been deliberate effort on the part of leadership to make sure that Ugandans can go through an exercise like this without serious response in the waters.

Turning to the debate, I would like to add to what I was saying yesterday that may be the exercise we have gone through is an eye opener after all when the Ugandans have a free forget about fair but a free election -(Interjection)- yes, because the moment you get internal election that is not free, obviously it cannot be.  Certainly, this election was free; there is no question in my mind and I think to a very great extent, it was fair because it reflected the decision of the people who cast the votes.  How they arrived at those decisions is for everybody to imagine. (Applause)  But they freely expressed themselves.  So, it is very important.  

Now, on the question of the Amendment regarding the Referendum, certainly I unreservedly support the amendment for these reasons. Quite often, elections do not solve problems, they compound them, so that we should every time we have a problem in the House or in the CA rush to the people and ask them to solve problems for us is not correct.  The leaders at every stage must be prepared to solve problems and show the people the way especially in our country.  Therefore, I agree with the Minister in proposing that before we rush to the people any referendum, let the leaders sit down over a period of time and see whether they can find the answer to the problem that is at hand.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to request my Colleague hon. Tiberondwa not always read something else into proposals.  In my opinion, this is a very proper proposal. (Laughter)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to refer to me when I have not talked about this Motion?  I have never talked about this; it was a different Motion.  Is he in order, Mr. Chairman, when I have not talked?

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for protecting me.  In fact, I have wondered whether we should not get these people in the CA, like the cardinals when they go to elect the Pope and we keep them - sat in there until we see the white smoke.  If no white smoke they do not get out to come and disturb the people with the referenda and the elections, we must lead the people rather than always go back to the people to be led.  

So, in other words, really referendum should be a fine and an absolute necessity.  I would also like to add that the Minister should in future think about controlling the level of expenditure in elections.  Personally, I think there are good reasons why in other countries like the United States there is very strict control on the amount of money that candidates do spend, and I think we should take a few from these countries; understand why they did, and even look at our own selves and see the necessity for controlled expenditure. 

As a matter of fact, I would like to add that maybe, Government in future should think about partially if not holy sponsoring the election, in other words, people who stand in the election should receive support from government so that even those - a Colleague who is shaking his head but I do think, it should not be money to qualify people to stand in an election.  I think there are many decent Ugandans who would otherwise serve in public offices but when they look at what involves financially, they just shy away from it, and government must find means and ways of tapping these brains.

Finally, allow me to make an observation about officials involved in elections.  It is only natural that every human being has got choices they make, and even in an election, officials will want to win you over; that is perfectly fine with me.  But it becomes a very difficult thing when someone is supposed to be an official in a place where they have special interests in certain candidates. (Applause)  It will be very difficult for them; it probably will be difficult for me to be very fair.  

Therefore, in future I think it would be good that as far is possible a prophet is not without honour but in his own country and, therefore, you should go and have the honour elsewhere and serve elsewhere so that people who supervise elections are people who generally do not have personal interests in the candidates who are standing. (Applause)

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The hon. Member has really brought a very pertinent point here.  I would rather give information in a sense that we should in future spend more funds on the procedure of casting the votes.  I agree that all other requisites and arrangements are vital, but the actual process, where you have a Presiding Officer and polling agents, I think this is where most loopholes surface, and where there were big problems.  

So, I agree with the hon. Member on the Floor that in our planning for financing elections we should look at that particular aspect and that definitely involves getting independent presiding officers if necessary from other districts to come and preside at various centres in different constituencies.  Thank you. (Applause)

PROF. KAGONYERA:  I was going to complete by saying that in future we should know how long the race is, the people who start off running a hundred metres and the rest ends up as a marathon run.  Now, obviously it makes it difficult for people and it even wastes a lot of time spending six months campaigning is not a very fruitful exercise.  So, in future, I hope we shall be more prepared more than we are, so that when an election is called, there is a short period of time; maybe a couple of weeks or a maximum of four weeks, for people to campaign. That, by the way, indirectly reduces on the financial obligations of the candidates involved.  Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.

MR. KASAIJA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Let me also take this opportunity to welcome you back from outside where you went.  It is because I have not been around that is why I am just taking this opportunity to welcome you.  I stand up to support the Bill presented by the hon. Minister.  But before I do so, allow me to congratulate the Commission of the Constituent Assembly for having done definitely at least -(Applause)- a reasonable job.  

We are all mature people, and we should give credit where credit is due; and the mere fact that a person stands and loses, does not take away, okay, the good aspects of a person doing a job, and in any case, I think what we have to do is to look at how the Commissioner started doing his work.  In fact, he started from scratch, and some of the resources he was using had to come from outside. But despite that, at least he tried to do some good job.  I am not trying to say that he wholly did an inaccurate job.  I think the good outweighed the bad and I think it would be and it is our duty, when we are here, to try as much as possible when we are here to look at those loop holes and we see how we can make them better so that the next election can be a good exercise.

When I was looking at the object of this Bill, definitely I came to realise that sometimes when we are here debating, our colleagues on the Front Bench should be looking at our proposals or opinions, which we bring as something that is for the good of this nation.  Because I remember at that time when we were discussing the present law, the Constituent Assembly Law, somebody brought in the idea of not necessarily always solving the contentious matters through a referendum.  

There are many disadvantages or problems that affect if you are to solve a problem through a referendum.  One; is that looking at the situation where we are as a developing country, our people have first of all to be taught an issue where a referendum is going to be held.  In fact, even during the election we learnt a lot.  The processes that hon. Philip Byaruhanga was talking about, can easily be rectified if we identify the problem of holding a good and fair election.  

In fact, what was lacking I think, in the making the election good, was the - I think the educating of the masses; civic education - actually that one in the whole country was a problem.  For example, in Kamuli, I do not remember seeing anybody talking about the procedure of electing a person.  In fact, when they looked at the photographs, some of them even got surprised because the civic education was not done very well. But I do not want to wholly blame it on the Commissioner of the Constituent Assembly; maybe his officers or the people at this level are the ones who never assisted him.  

Then the other problem, which is not solved, involved holding a referendum in a situation like Uganda; it is the expense.  It is very expensive definitely to hold a referendum because it is like holding an election.  Look at an election like this one which we have just completed; so much money was spent, and even up to now, a number of people have not been paid, in a number of districts; even the registration assistants have not been paid their money.  So, the expense of going back and holding a referendum, which is like an election, is an expensive affair.  

So, some of the objects which are put here give us chance to look at some of these issues which are of a National nature. I think it is something which is commendable, because if you look at something and we see that it is of a National nature and we come here as people who have attained a certain degree of education, we can be able to articulate some of these matters at least more adequately and convincingly, than if we were just to take it wholesale to the rural areas.

Let me now go to some of the sections, which are in the Bill.  I would like first of all to look at - if there is an issue which is contentious, here in Section 17, it is stated that, ‘there can be three votes if an issue is contentious through which you can go and determine whether that issue is contentious before you can determine whether got to/for a referendum.’  But I wanted to know where, if for example, we determine that an issue is contentious, why do we not use the first vote if for example we get two-thirds.  If we get the two thirds, do we need actually again to go through the rigor of having the second process of again having a vote?  Because this is another thing which I am talking of; the expense of holding a referendum.

MR. TURYASHEMERERWA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, the point the hon. Member is making is very important; putting into consideration how much money the people used during the CA elections.  It is possible that after the first voting, when they adjourned for a week, they were coming for a second voting, and this is going to involve the money factor; when it goes to the third, it becomes worse, and finally what may come out, and it may not be what people want - what money can buy.

MR. KASAIJA:  Mr. Chairman, okay, whereas I thank the honourable for that information for me actually the point which I was trying to bring about is the - how we can cost effectively carry out an election in a developing country like Uganda.  I was trying to articulate this point that do we really need the three processes?  That you vote at first, then you go to the second stage, and then you go to the third stage, before you go to the nation to seek their view about that issue.  What I am saying is that, if we get two thirds of us here, accepting on that issue, then there is no need of going to the second.  That is what I was trying to develop.  

 Going on to Clause 9 of the Statute talks of the Chairman presiding over the meeting - the delegates meeting. I want to ask the hon. Members to think of an additional safeguard for having a person who can preside in the absence of a Deputy Chairman, because we have been having problems even during your absence; definitely we had to have a meeting here to determine who would be obliged to chair the meeting when you were away.  

So, in case the Chairman is not there and the Deputy Chairman is not there and since you are working under a tight schedule of four months, we should definitely think of how we can get somebody to preside over the meeting during the time when the Chairman and Deputy Chairman are not there.  And that is when we elect a Chairman and Deputy Chairman and we have been holding meetings for sometime say one month or two months but that time we have known a good Chairman after all it is stated that a person to be a Chairman has to be a person with some ex-practical experience in public matters, somebody who has worked in the Public Service for quite long, somebody who is high moral integrity, I think at that time, we shall have learnt ourselves and we can easily determine who can be a Chairman, so here I want to suggest that if possible the CA meeting be given a chance to elect among themselves at least a Chairman to act on that day when the Chairman and Deputy Chairman is not present.

Before I conclude, I would like to talk about one issue here, I am amazed about some of the people who have intentional tried to oppose this Motion, because when we were discussing this law, some people said that having a referendum is snot good because it deprives the people of the opportunity to determine matters of national nature.  

Now, when we debated here, when this thing was tabled yesterday, some of those same members again are the ones who were saying why do you deny the people the chance to determine things of national nature?  So, I think what I am talking about is that, let us have what we call consistence in our way of reasoning, if you think that having a referendum is a good thing, you insist on that one.  If you see it is not good, then do not again change by the circumstances because this one would mean that with some of those few amendments that I have suggested. I support this Bill wholeheartedly.  Thank you very much.

MR. KIWAGAMA (Bunya County, Iganga):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Perhaps you will not be tried of being welcomed back to your seat after a short absence.  I want to welcome you very much.  In your absence, some of us had very sleepless nights -(Laughter)- Members you will remember his absence resulted in an amendment to Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986, we made a complete law because of his absence.  You see, previously he had done so his work so well, that we took him for granted, and I remember in the past, I do not remember a day he was absent, but the first time he went away for a few days, eh, my friends you know what happened here.  So, we welcome you back very much.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.

MR. KIWAGAMA:  I would also like to thank you for the marathon, counseling the voters before they cast their votes.  I think you helped people to cast their votes in a wise way. I support this Bill very strongly because it sticks to bleach some of the loop holes in the law, you see when there is a loop hole in the law, but once a law has gone through this House and the Minister brings in a draft and we debate that law and we pass it, it becomes ours.  

Now, later if we discover loopholes, we should feel ourselves ashamed but we should not blame the Minister for that.  If the Minister has come up - has spotted certain loopholes and he comes up to suggest amendment, we should thank him and I thank the Minister for coming up at this state when the CA is going to start sitting to ensure that before the CA stats sitting, the law governing its proceedings is perfected.  As I said, it is wrong to blame the Minister for the bad law, so here I advise Members, whenever a law comes here, take it upon yourself as it is your law.  You may scrutinise it but if you pass it with loopholes, it is your fault -(Interjection)

That is not to say that a Minister is blameless -(Laughter)- whenever the Minister brings here a law, he is to make sure that he brings a good law.  But in this case, I agree with the Members who have suggested earlier that other amendments should have included to make sure that should this law be used for future elections like a referendum or filling up vacancies, the Commissioner should not have the problems he had in conducting the CA elections because of a faulty law.  

I have two comments to make on these Amendments, first of all, Section 5, which amends Section 8 of the principle statute, this one gives the CA power to sit after a referendum which may take place outside the scheduled or the statutory period for CA sitting, but the Minister does not limit time the CA can sit after outside the scheduled time.  Which means after a referendum, the CA can resume sitting, I do not know for how long, for one day, for two days or for a week.  I suggest that a limit be put and I suggest a maximum of - otherwise we shall find ourselves the CA being drugged into more and more sittings.  

The other comment is on Section 9 which seeks to amend Section 17 of the principle statute, this refers to the vacancies, says, a vacancy will have no effect on the proceedings of the CA but I do not know whether he has thought of vacancies.  I am imagining a situation where more than one people are absent which can happen, maybe a few friends may be traveling in one car, maybe four of them or five, they have an accident and their places fall vacant.  What is the effect; is it the same effect as a vacancy or does a vacancy mean vacancies? I think the Minister should make this clear.  Otherwise, the amendments are good, and I support the Bill very strongly and I advise Members to do the same.  Thank you very much.

MR. TURYAHABWA (Kinkizi County, Rukungiri):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me an opportunity to contribute to this Constituent Assembly Amendment Bill, 1994.  First of all, allow me to congratulate the NRM Government for promoting peace in the country which peace has enabled Uganda to participate in the recent elections of the Constituent Assembly.  I would also like to thank all the candidates who participated, because during the candidates meetings, the population had the opportunity to be educated on the importance of the new Constitution that it should be a national document to bring about unity, to bring about stability and development in Uganda.

I would also like to make two remarks for the attention of the hon. Minister of Tourism, that the National Park should be well attended to, otherwise the people neighbouring National Parks like the Queen Elizabeth National Park are insecure from wondering lions and this is much moreso in Kinkizi.  I would also like to bring the attention to the hon. Minister of Education who has simply said that he will re-count primary teachers such that he can know how many he should pay, I would like him to go ahead and count even the Secondary School Teachers, because the problems of not being paid are also expressed by some Secondary School Teachers.

Supporting this Bill, I would like to make two or three observations on the principle Bill.  The principle Bill or the Statute was passed here but we observed that it lacked machinery, which could implement it very, very well intending to create or to make elections free and fair.  The implementation machinery was not facilitated to remove, to store the Commission offenses and even to report these matters to the Commissioner, which eventually made elections in certain constituencies really unfair.  I think the office of the District executive secretary at the district level is not impartial enough.  Of course, we know that being civil servant they fear certain politicians depending on the muscle they have.  

In the principle Bill, the election rules especially Rule No. 12, talks about the cost of candidates’ meetings.  This cost of candidates meeting was put on the candidates and I think it was a very big door, a wide door for some candidates to be tempted to break Rule No. 32 because in the effort to provide lunches you would be bribing the voters, making them feast and celebrate.  Of course trying to maintain or to fulfill what Rule No. 12 requires, which states that, ‘the cost of candidates’ meeting should be met by the candidates themselves’. So, I support my NEC Member, hon. Kagonyera when he says that the candidates should be assisted to a certain degree such things like cost of candidates meeting should have been made by the government.

Another observation on the principle Bill is that at the places of voting, table No.2 that I think we all know, table No.2 was so open that we feel it should be enclosed.  So, if a voter enters to vote, he should be allowed the chance to vote independently because as it is, some arrogant agents of some candidates would pull and guide the voters to table No.2 and vote for them denying them the chance to vote for themselves.  

So, I think it should be enclosed in some shelter and then you get out to deposit your ballot paper in the box on table No.3.  And I do not know why this ballot paper should need folding maybe in future the hole of the box should be wide enough so that you just put in the ballot paper without the need of folding it because at this level, some illiterate people would still need someone to come and assist and by so doing somebody would see to whom you have voted for and you do not think you have made a secret ballot.

The Memorandum of this Bill is clear.  I would like to thank the hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs for displaying a quality of evaluation of this law.  In Clause 9, he proposes three votes for the Constituent Assembly.  I think he is trying to foresee a situation where somebody may vote without consulting the electorate.  But I think the hon. Members who have come to the Constituent Assembly will always consult with the people.  So, even at the first voting, they have consulted; they have consulted so I do not see how somebody can vote ‘yes’ one week and vote ‘no’ another week - on the same Motion.  

So my point on this is that may be the Minister could allow the candidates a long time to consult, to make sure that they have consulted but when they have come they vote and their vote is counted as such; that is enough democracy, I think that is enough time to make the responsible citizens do their job because, why I am strongly in support of this one vote is that too many of them might work on the mind of the electorate, and we know very well that the electorate especially up-country the people are suffering from a number of problems, problems of fees for children, problems of taxes, infrastructure and this and that so to constantly visit them to help you to vote they may play a passive role and they even have no time to advise accurately.  To help them, let us also do certain jobs, decisions, without asking them too much.

In Clause 9 of this Amendment Bill, the Bill talks of strangers participating in proceedings of the Constituent Assembly.  I would think that this is too much; we should be vigilant and stop the strangers from participating in the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly.  In fact, I was happy with the original wording of this matter in the principle Clause, sub-Section 4, it was written in the way I support, this expansion has watered it down as far as I am concerned.  So, I would request the hon. Minister to explain why he would want this amendment in the way he has put it further.

In Clause 10 of this Amendment Bill, which talks about matters of local character, matters of national character, I know that people know the difference but I would still request the hon. Minister to define for clearer understanding of the phrases the local character and the national character because, in my view, even local characters end up sometimes becoming national character.  So, let us have a framework of definition that when people are talking about it, they do not waste much time talking about national matters when it should be local matters.  You should define it for them.

In Clause 14 of this Bill, talking about replacing a delegate who may be frequently absent or who could be absent at a time of the procedures of the Constituent Assembly, it is said that the Chairman will consult with the Commissioner to see - he talks about insufficient time but what is insufficient time in this Clause?  I wish us to define what we would understand as insufficient because that may be insufficient could be sufficient for the electorate to actually replace the original delegate with another one instead of having the process of making the Constitution go on without a representative from one electoral area.  So, with these few observations, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support.

MR. KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I join the other Members of the House to welcoming you back.  I support this Bill in part and I oppose it also in parts.  I am in a very big problem.  I oppose the first part of this Bill, which tends to amend the statute by replacing the word delegate.  I can see the intention of the hon. Minister. He went to get a Chairman who is not necessarily a delegate and perhaps he has his reasons but I want to remind him that when we were debating the main Bill here, we had reasons why we thought that the Chairman should be a delegate.  It is not very good to have a Chairman who has no interest in the discussion.  That would look like appointing a judge who has to listen to the two contending parts and then does not really have direct interest in the discussions -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Point of information from hon. Dr. Higiro please.

DR. HIGIRO:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member holding the Floor misunderstood the whole purpose of the amendment which we approved whole heatedly. The Amendment was that the President should select amongst 17 million people, five persons, eminent Ugandans who will be presented to the CA and the CA will elect the Chairman and the Deputy from those.  The reason for that was that when you are a delegate you are representing your constituency and if you are a Chairman, then they will have to elect another one because you are not going to debate, you are not even going to vote and that is why we passed it over. (Applause)

HON. MEMBERS:  That is enough.

DR. HIGIRO:  No, it is not enough, let me conclude.  Mr. Chairman, you see there was a typographical error on Clause 10; it was just an error that they used ‘delegate’ rather than ‘person.’  That was all, Mr. Chairman, thank you.

MR. KIWAGAMA:  Mr. Chairman, it is not just as simple as all that.  By the amendment the hon. Minister is moving now and the definition he gives to a Chairman, we are going to have two members, we can have both the Chairman an the Deputy Chairman elected from outside.  So, it means that whenever you have the Chairman chairing, and you will have a Deputy Chairman who is not a member, sitting in this House listening.  (Interruption)- is that the kind, just sit around throughout? (Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  What is wrong with that?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order; order please. Continue hon. Kawanga.

MR. KAWANGA:  And he has to wait at the door when the chairman is not around.  Mr. Chairman, I find that to be a very strange position myself.  I would rather, we have somebody who can also participate in the discussion rather than have somebody sit there permanently just waiting until the Chairman cannot be around.  But for the other amendments that are being moved, they are supposed to be an improvement on this Bill and they are welcome except that in some ways they are half-hearted and they may necessitate calling this House again.  

I have been looking at this proposal where you have to vote three times in case you do not get the two-thirds which is a good proposal but put the case that you have got about five items on which this kind of thing comes, so it means you have got to have three weeks perhaps times five other weeks.  I want to be sure from the hon. Minister that he thinks we shall be able to do this within the time frame that is being given in the Principle Statute.  Because if it is not we may find that by that amendment we have to have a lot more time to be able to pass various resolutions under the principle Bill and I suggest that the Minister should look at it because, I do not want him to come and say, I think we made a mistake, we should have been foresighted enough to know that the framework given with the new amendments may not be able to include these changes.  

On the question of the amendment to allow the issue of a local nature to be debated and passed by a majority vote again, I think this is a welcome arrangement.  It is something, which would be disastrous if we have to wait for a two-thirds majority to decide whether a matter is of a local nature, and should be determined locally.  

My worry is, however, what happens after you have determined that a matter is of a local nature and should be submitted to discussion and if that discussion necessitates completing the discussion and including those agreements within the Constitution?  What time frame do you give the people supposed to take part in that one to discuss it, complete it and bring it back to the house to be included in the Constitution?  That is something we have to look at.  And two, I am not very clear as to whom, with whom you discuss this matter of a local nature.  Who are those people who should do the discussion and with whom do they discuss it and where.  

I think it is a matter, which we should resolve now otherwise we are going to leave a loophole, which may cause further delays in the subsequent discussions.  I think the hon. Minister gets my point. Now, finally, I want to remind Members of this House –(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that it would necessary take a long time.  For instance, matters like circumstances in Mbale, it cannot be decided within a week because it needs a much longer period.  Therefore, this whole matter of saying that it will take a week I think it is being shortsighted, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KIWAGAMA:  Mr. Chairman, I want finally to point out that we are in a process of nation building.  So, we must act very cautiously all of us in this matter and I think the point that hon. Mondo Kagonyera made yesterday and today should be stressed a great deal.  If we are to involve money in determining the issues of this country, then we are not nation building.  If we have to give the electorate the impression that we have to pay them to vote for us then, we are not nation building.  Similarly, if the electorate believes that he has to be paid in order to vote, they are abdicating their national responsibilities.  I had problems telling my electorates that if I give you money to vote for me, you cannot turn round and ask me whether I did a good job, because I shall have paid you to do what I want when I go back to the House.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Mayengo.

MR. MAYENGO:  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that it is exactly along those lines he is proposing that I will tomorrow oppose that delegates to the CA be not paid. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR. KAWANGA:  Okay, hon. Mayengo is entitled to his opinion but if he has to do that, he has to mend a whole section of the original Bill that we have before us so he will have to give notice for that.  But I had to tell them that if I pay you to go and represent you then I am entitled to do whatever I want and if I have spent money to get elected the danger is that I may have to find ways of regaining that money after I have reached there.  So, really in the process, I think in civil education that we are giving to the people we should stress the point of knowing that votes should not be for sale and are not for sale. (Applause)

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Information.  I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, Mr. Chairman, that even with civic education he may have problems because in some instances people have insisted that they be paid before they go for these civil education. (Laughter)

MR. KAWANGA:  I think with that point of information, I think the problem is compounded, we have not yet nation built but that as it may, I wanted to add that when we went for these elections, the assumption was that everybody was standing on his own merit and this was stressed very much and I think it is absolutely necessary that it remains so if the Constitution we are going to make is for this nation.  

But if we start talking about some people winning and others loosing, it will give the impression that actually the election was not on personal merit and that may jeopardise the process of debating the Constitution.  I would pray that whoever have occasion to speak should stress the idea that actual we are seeking a national consensus.  There are no winners and losers in the Constitution.  The Constitution is for all of us and, therefore, we must build on this and go to the Constituent Assembly with that spirit.  It is only then that the Constitution will be looked at as a National Constitution.  If it is not done then people may feel are not part of that process.  With those few remarks, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill with the reservations I have mentioned.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the proposed Amendment or the Bill.  While supporting the Bill, I wish to draw the attention of the Minister for Constitutional Affairs that at least we hope that we may have some by-elections but then there were some shortcomings in the list of voters.  It was in some areas as it was indicated by the hon. Maumbe Mukwana that he had to run all over Bungokho looking for his name. 

I think it is time that the registers are put right; they should be categorized according to villages that we know in this village that is where you should find your name, but people had to run from one village to another the whole constituency and some people lost interest if a man walked from one polling station to another and the name is not there, that is why you find that it is not surprising that in some areas we had - the turn out was as lower as 70 percent or 75 percent, it is not because people did not want to vote but they were frustrated looking for their names from the registers which were none existed.

Secondly, I wish to put it on record that it was not in order at the eleventh hour for the Commissioner to come out and say that whoever have a registration certificate should vote regardless whether he appears on the list or not.  What transpired for those who are very conversant with printing that maybe, we had more forgeries than genuine voters anyway, I am not doubting I hope it was not so but, I think we should make sure that we have a good system for the future.  Let us leave what has gone and let us prepare for the future.  

It is for that reason that I think the Commissioner is overwhelmed by the work it is too much for him, he was responsible for registration, he was responsible for appointing presiding officers, the returning officers, the polling assistants, receiving the results now, I understand already I have read through the papers that some candidates have come out contesting some of the decisions which he made and have already gone to court and among the areas of contention was the directive by the Commissioner that so long as you have a registration certificate you can vote.  I know one hon. Minister who has challenged the Commissioner and I think he is due to appear in court for having taken that decision.  It is for that reason I think the Commissioner is over loaded -(Interruption)

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor through you -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  That the Commissioner was not only out of order but broke Rule 34, section (b) which states that any presiding officer or polling assistant who wrongful and with just cause permits a person not registered as a voter to vote commits an offence.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  So, Mr. Chairman, maybe, the Commissioner had justification that is a case for the court, but now he is due to go to court for some of these contentious matters, I think for the good running of the assembly we should separate.  Under the principle law statute section 12, sub-Section 1, the Commissioner for Constituent Assembly appointed under sub-section 2 of section 21 shall be the head of secretariat of the assembly and shall be responsible for a day today administration of all the affairs of the Assembly, you have seen we have just a House National Assembly, we have our own Clerk who is responsible for a day today running of this House and sometime he is overwhelmed and sometimes he fails to pay the Members for so many months.  

Now, the same has happened to the Commissioner that - I hear that there were those who were responsible for registration who had to ask at - either you pay us or we do not give you the books.  I think it is time for the good running. I am suggesting to the Minister that he accepts the Amendment that we have a Clerk to the Assembly who will be responsible for the bell running the Constituent Assembly once assembled, and then he should be responsible for the Members because now, if there will be a referendum to be held, it will be the Commissioner.  Now, if the end petitions in courts the Commissioner, where will he be to assist this House and then under this if you checked under Section 21 of the principle statute Section 22, you find that the Commissioner under the functions, the Commissioner is responsible to carry out the day today administration of the Assembly.  Now, if he is in Mbale where will he be to assist?

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Member -and there are some officials who are working under him doing the work of the Commission responsible to the Commission - these officers would be in this station and if they are necessary in the court, they will appear on behalf of the Commission.  So, really hon. Members should not try to completely make the issue look out of proportion.  Thank you.

MR. KAWANGA:  Point of information. The hon. Member is moving an Amendment to the Principle Statute, it is not an Amendment which arises out of this Bill. So, unless he convinces the Minister to do the Amendment, his amendment will be quite out of order.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know, he is a learned lawyer, what section is he quoting according to our interims of rules of procedure, I think as far as I am concerned, I do not think there is any section of our interim rules of procedure which will deter me from bringing these so long as the Minister has opened up and I have found that the loopholes and in good spirit of having a good law, it could not be that if he can make a mistake and then the Members cannot come out to put the mistake right, it will be in that good same spirit and if we were to say that, okay, we have a Secretariat to do this, and to do that.  

We are borrowing from other countries that have gone similar exercises; I will give you an example of Ghana.  Ghana had a similar exercise, but then they find that it can work better if you separate the two and we have the Clerk to Assembly who can give daily reports other than the Commissioner who may not be able to do this job.  The idea is to facilitate the Assembly but not to be rigged over the law; the Minister was brought in the proposed amendment to amend Section 17 of the Principle Statute.  

I am having the problem which the Minister - if it is possible should assist this House, one under the Principle sub-Section 3(c), and it is indicated that the Chairman shall have neither an original nor a casting vote than the same Minister is proposing under the Amendment under Section 17 of the proposed new Bill.  The Minister is saying no person other than the Chairman, actually I am sorry, I am referring to Section 31 of the Principle - the Minister is saying that no person other than the Chairman can sit and vote that is what is implied in the new amendment whereas the original one it is indicated that he should not vote.  

Now, I want the Minister to advise this House whether he is now giving him a mandate for the Minister to vote, yes that is according to what he is trying to insert in that Section -(Interjection)- for us should not vote, he can sit which is okay, but I would advise him that he should not leave it with that option of voting.  

Under Section 17 of the Principle Statute sub-Section 3(f), I have a problem, which I think the Minister should highlight.  It reads the matter shall be regarded as contentious if the Motion is supported by the voters of the majority of delegates voting but does not obtain support of two thirds of delegates voting.  Now, when you say two thirds of the delegates who vote, what do we mean in the House; we know that the quorum is half of the Members.  Now, the House has 288 half of this would be 144, now if we put a matter to vote, we may find that 15 vote for 3 against, the rest may abstain.  

Now, has that been carried or it has to go for a second voting because that one refers to those who vote.  I would advise the Minister that he should be one of the delegates, not only the voters, because those who abstain, are never considered when you come to take decision.  

Now, the Minister should look at it because we may find that we may take a decision by fewer Members and then which will be binding all Ugandans because as you read, it is only the voters but I would advise that we also amend that one that it will be the majority of the delegates and not only those who voted.  Mr. Chairman, I think with that, I support the other amendments of the Minister.  Thank you very much.

MR. ABBEY MUKWAYA (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Allow me before I make my contribution to make few observations.  The past exercise of Constituent Assembly, has been historical even for this nation and whoever have participated in this process must be saluted to whatever contribution he made. (Applause)  

First of all, we must congratulate our people and thank them and salute them for having participated in this election although there was a number of bottlenecks which they had to go through to make the exercise success.  

In the first place the arrangements were not adequate for civic education to put our people in the right position there was a lot of manipulation, in the population to the extent that at one time they were not aware of what should be done; you will recall that some of our very big officers and leaders in this country had to go out to the countryside to guide the population. However, at the end of the exercise they relatively made a good decision and I am proud to say that I am one of those people who managed to go through and I must congratulate the people of Busiro East for having made such a wonderful decision. (Applause)  

And I want to promise the people of Busiro East that I will effectively represent their views in the Constituent Assembly.  We should not be shy to congratulate our Commissioner for Constituent Assembly, because as some Members have already state here, some of the omissions were created by the House, you have seen how many times you have amended the statute and you already have the controversies and a number of sections of the Principle Statute.  

Mr. Steven Akabway is a human being, and he has to make some of these mistakes, which we should have accepted in good, here and try to put it right, and his staff also had to in some cases they were forced to make some of the mistakes although many of them are experienced in their offices.  The human element in deciding which candidate to support and to make sure that that candidate because of his interest rather than the office because of his interest in the candidate bearing in mind that he will also or she will have to vote at one time or the other may have some negative impact on the exercise and maybe, the results.  

But generally, I think the exercise was - as hon. Kagonyera said, was free and relatively fair.  I want also to make observation on the voting material. I was not satisfied by the votes - the ballot paper; the photos on some of the ballot papers were so unclear that it was difficult even for those people who were literate to identify their candidates although they could read their names, in some cases they could not even trace whether the photo was of a man or a woman and it was difficult for some of our people to make their choices and the spacing was not so very good in certain extent that they were placed to close to one another. I pray that next time there is enough space between one candidate and another one on the ballot paper so that they do not make the same mistakes or do not repeat the same mistakes again.  

Many Members have talked about the polling assistants or the polling officers especially when it came to assisting the disabled people, it is clear knowledge that it is now - most of those assistants had their candidates of interest and in the guide of assisting these disabled people, they misguided a number of them which may lead into petition as you have heard.  I do not know why we do not stick to the first regulation that any disabled person should come with a relative who should assist him or her to identify the candidate of his or her choice or alternatively the agents of the candidate should be allowed to assist the disabled candidates so that these -(Interruption)

MR. KALULE SENGO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, in connection with the agents, I really do not understand why these agents were placed 10 metres away from the voting table.  Because these are the people who are supposed to have assisted these illiterate people because if a person came in and he did not know to identify the photographs that person had a right to say well, he was supporting Candidate X, then the agent of that candidate should have assisted that person, but these were put 10 meters away and I am even wondering what the use of these agents who were put there because they had no job with the ten meters away from the scene of the action.  

And I hope the Minister in future if he gets a chance, will try to put this right.  Because most of the complaints are arising from the fact that these agents were placed very far away from the main table and they could not do the job for which they were supposed to be participating.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. Member who is on the Floor to mislead people, when the law specifically says it is 10 meters?  This is in the law that was passed here in the Constituent Assembly.

MR. KALULE SSENGO:  I do not know where the hon. Member is pointing the law from, Mr. Chairman.  It was just a regulation of the Commission and I am saying that regulation was very wrong, and it is causing a lot of petitions in the courts.  And I am requesting the Minister to put it right in the future.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. NJUBA:  Point of information. - to be the ones who to assist the voter, then the elections will seize to be a secret ballot.

MR. RWABIITA:  Point of information.  I want to inform the speaker that in some cases, that was not a secret ballot it was a public secret.  Because, the voting table definitely must be charged in future, we must put an enclosure so that when somebody is voting, he is not seen by everyday.  Now, the case was that, if you are number 4, hon. Kigongo, everybody would know that you are number 4.  The man will come down and say - and everybody sees your number.  There was no secrecy about really.  So, in future, the table where they do voting, the electorate should be protected by enclosure so that one can bend and vote secretly.  But this time, it was a public secret.

MR.ABBEY MUKWAYA:  Mr. Chairman, I think I have received enough information.

MR. KIRYAPAWO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think in future what we should get rid of is the photographs and we go by a symbol.  Because a symbol, if I say, I am for a certain symbol, they will know that Kiryapawo is for a pen.  So, a pen will be identified by even my grandmother.  That is the information.   

MR. ABBEY MUKWAYA:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Members for giving this information.  This is overwhelming evidence but the point I am trying to make is very important and the Minister should take critical view of it and make the necessary corrections.  My point is on the voters register.  I do not see why you alleviated from the tradition of using our villages or zones in the city for - during the registration.  Because the modality of registration also caused - compounded this situation even worse for our people.  I suggest that next the registers be compounded by villages independently, and the assistance of our traditional chiefs or RCs should be used to avoid the mix-up.  

My next point is that we are allowed to appoint agents to monitor or to represent us at the polling station.  But at a later hour, we realised that we had to appoint also coordinators.  It was very difficult for our coordinators because some of them could not move out of the station. So, we needed some coordinators; people who coordinate information from here and there, and then give information wherein you had put your headquarters.  But it became so difficult for our coordinators even to collect information from here and there, and then give in information wherever you have put your headquarters.  

But it became so difficult for our co-coordinators even to collection information from our agents.  Because whenever they appeared, they were labelled that they were going to disturb the elections; that they were trying to campaign during the elections. I think the element of coordinating elections was the purpose of the candidates to know what was happening on the ground, and even to detect where anomalies are taking place and maybe the remedy found immediately should not be overlooked.  I think the candidates should be given the opportunity to ensure that, if he wins, he wins properly or if he loses, he loses satisfied that he has lost and there was no manipulation.  I think the element of coordinating the exercise is also very important.  

I have also pains for those people who are living in remote areas and who suffered like those who are on the Islands and mountains who suffered during the elections.  Some of our polling officers and their assistants were not very keen to go to areas where it is difficult to traverse.  So, they look for places that are convenient for them and then force the voters to go to those places for voting as if really the voters were being punished.  

I think the Commissioner should, even before deciding where the polling station would be, should make sure that that place is convenient for everybody to go and cast his or her vote other than him sitting in his office and thinking that everything is okay, and at the end of the day, you find thousands of voters not turn back because the station was put in a difficult place.

Lastly, I would like to make a remark on civic education.   There was confusion about civic education.  Some of us, who have been in the mobilisation exercise, were willing to go and educate our people on the role of constitutional process and what they should do.  But some of the candidates who were not mobilisers took this as a step boat and started to accuse us of manipulating the population, which was not true.  

In fact, many of us went out wholeheartedly to assist our people but we were curtailed by these accusations.  By the end of the exercise, it is a common knowledge that most of our people did thoroughly what the situation was all about and most of them were confused.  The civic educators are appointed by the returning officer or Commissioner, and did not do their job at all; in many cases, they did not even try.  

Others who tried, because of their being biased and partial, confused even our people more by saying that you should vote so and so, you should not vote so and so.  There is information where some of the civic educators were saying that those who are in government already especially those historicals who are in the Movement have eaten enough, and should not be voted for. That the purpose was to make a change.  And the change was actually to remove these people in office - out of office and bring in other people.  I think this is something that our people are properly informed so that such a national exercise is not impaired by self-seekers and people who are not strong enough to face the challenge of the population.  I must congratulate the Historical who made it through the CA -(Applause)- for having stood and challenges whoever was calling them or useless and I think the task head all of us is big and we shall also have to prove the CA that we are worth sitting there.

Lastly, I just want to make a brief remark on the Bill, and I have already circulated some amendments, which I think the Minister will accept on Section 5, I seek the guidance of the Minister and if it is correct, then you will accept at the Committee Stage.  Because under Section 5, it refers to Section 8, then refers - it reads as sub-section 4 of sub-Section 19.  I think he was referring to sub-section 18.  I think the Minister was referring to sub-section 4 of Section 18, which is talking about that referendum.  So, I think the Minister will make that correction.  Next is Clause 11, Section 19 of the Principle Statute, which is amended by inserting immediately after sub-Section 3, the following sub-Section.  

My submission is that the Minister accepts my Amendment and insert ‘Assembly’ and that, ‘where the maximum term of the Assembly under Section 8 has expired, before a date of appointment by the President under this Section, for programation of the Constitution, the Assembly and the National Resistance Council shall meet for programation of the Constitution not withstanding the expiry of the term.’  Why I am putting this is that, it should be consistent with Section 19 sub-Section 3 of the Principle Statute.  Otherwise, if you leave it like that, then the CA can sit without the NRC and do the job he is talking about.  I need to be guided also here, and if it is acceptable, the Minister to accept that amendment.

Lastly, I wholeheartedly support the Amendment Bill and all the provisions especially on the referendum, especially where it appears that even when you go to the referendum, you may not get the results required.  Because our population is so verselating that what they are talking today maybe different tomorrow.  So, I think, it is for us the leaders to guide them because even the current element of campaigning and money, and gifts and the rest of it, has made some negative impact on some of our people.  So, I think, it is important for us to guide them and only go to them when it is absolutely necessary and when the CA cannot make the decision.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. OBWANGOR (Soroti Municipality, Soroti):  Mr. Chairman, I am happy that, I am in a position to associate myself with a spirit to welcome you back from your sick leave in order to discharge some of the most important state acts that rather required immediate leave within the influence and pressure of our development towards a civil government.  I say, a civil government because this process of making the new Constitution is for us to move as we ordained in Statute 9 of 1989; to prolong the life of NRM and the life of this hon. House (NRC); as a Legislature to ensure that the items laid down in Statute 9 of 1989, to progressively to those 13 items, to ensure that we make a national constitution.  

Now, we read and we understand even from the speeches among ourselves in this hon. House that we move into initiative, we move into a referendum in order to decide upon some things that the Constituent Assembly will not be in a position to determine once and for all in the making of the National Constitution.  

Now, what are these likely contagious matters that we leaders intellectuals, intelligencers and the body politic particularly the hon. House which is the leading body politic in advising the government exhausting the government to solve problems as a legislature, because we make policy.  What are these contagious matters?  

First of all, there is the hon. Mover, is often mentioning that we want a consensus.  Yes, we want consent, naturally.  But the Uganda Constitutional Commission as a Statutory Body under Statute 5 of 1988, made a report to Government, which was brought to this House in order that this House was in a position to make Statute 6, of 1983 for the Constituent Assembly to deal with matters constitutional.  Which are the matters Constitutional?  A country through that allegeable eminent constitution, made 314 proposed articles to enter into the National Constitution of Uganda.  Now, the same House, under Statute 6 of 1993 ordaining a Constituent Assembly to examine, to study and to make the Constitution out of the 314 Articles or Constitution proposals. 

As we made Statute 6 of 1993 last year, we also ordained as hon. House under Section 8 what that Constituent Assembly ought to do.  And I think here, the House can through you accept me to read vote that particular section says this, the functions of a Constituent Assembly shall be (a), to scrutinise to examine in other words, debate, deliberate and prepare the final draft of the Constitutional text, prepare and submitted to the Minister by the Uganda Constitutional Commission to the Minister as required by Section 6 of Statute 5 of 1988.  

The amendment, therefore, of the proposed Article 314, in my submission and the hon. Mover can agree, with me lies entirely under this.  So, if this is the case, why and why should the House sit in my submission to enable the Constituent Assembly to go in a calm, orderly, national, patriotic spirit?  So that it can discharge it the service it is called upon by this nation through this House to make the New Uganda National Constitution for the best of the country and for the best of the citizens.  These 314 proposed Articles are clearly and through all of us.  Why do not we as leaders of our people influence, encourage, advance, tell the people that this is 314 proposed Articles into the New Constitution whereas a result of the examination of the reports and memoranda brought to the Uganda Constitutional Commission by 25,547 people.  

Now, some people say, this is a majority.  These are confusing agents.  When you are given to get information from say 100 people and 25 willing people give you the information. Naturally to the body that those submissions are made must be an acknowledgement of 25 people.  So, in our case, I was one of the co-waters of this report of the Uganda Constitutional Commission.  The 25,547 people actually, factually contributed willingly to give their evidence to the Commission, and we made Commissioners, we make the report, like Professors as the findings through our ability of what was stated by the people, without any impartiality whatsoever.  So, the country should be ought to be appreciative to what Uganda Constitutional Commission historically did for the best of this country.  

Therefore, in my submission particularly, we hon. House, let us cultivate that spirit of fraternity to make people understand what the Draft Constitution is all about.  In my submission, clearly intellectually speaking, Draft Constitution, it is not for UPC, nor is it for DP or UPM or for NRM.  It is for a purpose of producing a national Uganda Constitution for the common welfare.  Leave alone those other –(Laughter)- when I give an example, I know what I am talking.  

So, it is in this respect, I particularly recently in the elections of CA, yes, I acknowledge, I must be honourable to do that - I must keep my dignity because it allowed me, in my case, Soroti, we had the biggest competitors about 14 offers.  But, the law could allow other people from outside Soroti Municipality to come and compete or to become candidates and even vote and even allow other people to export people who were registered -(Laughter)- other people into interfering with the arrangements in the different electoral areas.  So, when we looked up the law, there was nothing to prevent people who were registered normally elsewhere, but having some kind abode for a night in a place of voting - to vote, so these tricks were done by some candidates.  

So, in this respect, we now know that in future, when we are making laws, our laws must be meticulous and then the people actually the running of an election depends on the honesty and integrity of an office of State to run it.  I have known it since 1957, when I was elected to this House.  

So, when I speak with the right experience, I know what it is.  So now in future, the law must be meticulous.  Officers of State should not be necessarily the Presiding Officers and that will, there are presiding officers, they should not come from that locality as he has put point.  It should be in a different locality, say, for example, those in - if they are a, b, c, d, localities those in (c) should go to (a), and from (a) to (c) and (d), like that, because we should not trigger trouble among our people.  When there is trouble in the village, there is no productivity, please understand this, there is no productivity because people fear that they will be killed, whereas elections should not be a cause for killing one another, it should not be a cause for hatred.  It should be a cause and pride of exercising democracy and putting democracy in action through political parties particularly.  Yes, political parties will -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up, please.

MR. OBWANGOR:  You see, these are some of the things, Mr. Chairman.  Constitutionally speaking, they are inevitable.  So, it is in my respecting this, so long as I am a citizen, there are those who say that we are old, we are old, yes.  We owe our country allegiance; I pay tax for example, myself.  Long before you were here and I was working in the Uganda Constitutional Commission, I paid literally millions of shillings back to the ex-chequer.  So, as a citizen, I must participate in politics.  

Now, the speakers like Peter Ongaria of Entebbe and the hon. Minister for Women in Development who says, when he replied to hon. Nekyon who is not here, that they are tired of old me, we need one another. (Laughter)  Why?  Because, under a common denominator, the State gives us all freedom.  Freedom for what?  

Therefore, politically, we have got to enjoy it, whether you are a youth or an old man like Obwangor, you must enjoy freedom. (Laughter)  Therefore, this segregation here, we have forgotten the law, but outside this House, we talk about nonsense and that should not come from this place to be elected and what not.  These are men and women of small spirits.  So, the law I want, is under this particularly because this is historical, and we should put principles here guiding honourable elections and proper procedures to evolve, to produce, through the means and the process of the Constituent Assembly, a body which culminates to make the Uganda National Constitution.  With those words I, therefore, side with the Motion.

MS. NAMIYANGU (Youth Representatives, Eastern Region):  Thank you hon. Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill, but I have some observations.  We find that whereas the Statute provides for the disabled to be helped by the relatives, it does not provide for the illiterate who are not only illiterate, but they cannot identify the people that they want to vote for, they do not know them.  they come when they are not decided, but just because they are scared, they are told if you do not vote, you will be imprisoned.  So, these people end up coming, but you find that the presiding officers take it upon themselves and go ahead to tell these people, give this one, vote for this one.  So, the Statute does not provide for such people.

Secondly, I realise that whereas we are talking about the presiding officers being transferred to a certain area to another area, we find that there is a certain factor that is controlling everything.  Money is speaking now.  You find somebody after receiving money, definitely, he will be on the side of that candidate and he will do whatever possible to make sure that people give that candidate.  So, even if we talk of transferring presiding officers from Kampala to go to Bundibugyo or where, still they will be bought.  

So, may be, I will urge Government first of all to bring up or to come up with a tool.  First of all, to fight corruption, because I overheard it when I was somewhere.  People were saying that, these NRCs have eaten money, mostly from these women, the ladies who have just been elected, since it was the RCs electing them.  They have eaten money, but let us wait for the elections.  Unless they also yield, we are not going to give them.  So, unless we really come up with some strong weapons to fight these things, honestly, I do not think we are really going to succeed.

Then another issue is about the confidentiality in these elections.  We realise that they termed these elections as secret ballots, but already some Members have commented that it is no longer secret because you find that the table is just there.  I was may be 100 meters away, but I could even see what the other person was ticking, mostly when it comes to these ones who stamp.  You see where the ink is.  If he has put done or at the top, you know he has voted for so and so.  So, maybe this time they should try to make it a bit secret, so that at least, I was monitoring the women elections but these ones were fair.  You could may be go to a certain room and vote.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Lady holding the Floor that, the purpose of holding this election in the open air was precisely to reduce chances of rigging.  For instance, when one, the experience has shown that while people in the past used to vote in the enclosures, were sometimes removing the posters from the ballot boxes and when something is put in the open, it deters those people who are likely to be tempted to rig, but at the same time, I do not understand why the hon. Member is very worried about somebody seeing the ticking.  The ticking -

THE CHAIRMAN:  Give the information and stop.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  The ticking is the chance and the right of that voter and he was not of course coerced to tick.

MISS NAMIYANGU:  Thank you hon. Member for the information, but meanwhile, you have informed me about the ticking being the right, then I do not think the Government would come up with the confidentiality issue.  They would have allowed us maybe just to line up, eh?  But you realise the reason why I am worried about this issue of ticking, when you are being seen, already I have told you there is money being dished.  So, if I have eaten your money and yet I am now going to vote the right candidate, the one whom I think is the one going to speak.  Now, how will I tick a certain candidate when you are seeing? (Laughter).  I thank you hon. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  Have you finished honourable?

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira):  Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the Bill before us, but with these observations.  My first observation is coming from Bill Memorandum, point No. 4, where the hon. Minister is seeking the views of this House to allow the Constituent Assembly to continue with their work even after the expiry of their tenure of office. When people were conducting these candidates meetings, two views came up.  One, those other people who might have succeeded in going through these elections, misled the people into thinking that they were going to Parliament but not going to Constituent Assembly, and if given more time, indefinite time, this will come to mean that that week day is foreseen, is coming to there, and that is why I still hold that, for example, Constituent Assembly as an assignment, as a delegated authority to carry out one thing and that is, promulgation of Constitution.  Though, if that is the case, the Statute is still very clear that they are given four months which can be extended by another three and then the precedent is given 60 days to go through and find out and then thereafter, there will be a ceremony of receiving, whereby NRC Members will also go to attend but not to say anything all the same, that is the ceremony.  

Now, if all this time consumed, even into the tenure of the NRC that has been extended to may be about January, who will then come there again in case they need any other time?  I imagine that this is a very - although the other part is through you, I am in total agreement with the hon. Minister for his other proposal especially this particular area as has been actually cited by my Colleague from Iganga, that these people should have a sealing if it is one week, let it be one week.  Otherwise, these people are going to turn themselves into a National Assembly.  That is life here.  

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor through you, that the extension of five years which was done in 89, has given many of us a lot of headache to explain to the people of this country and this time, I am praying that that a politician of this nation, be sincere and make sure that there is a proper programme, if this House is to end on January 25th 1995, and it should end there, so that we make sure that all whatever we are doing is within the programme of that specific period so that we give the people time to go ahead with another programme.

MR. KATEGAYA:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, the extension should not have given him headache since he was not here when we decided on it.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So, I hope the hon. Minister, to end by winding will clarify on this issue so that we know that these people whom may come and wind up their work at a particular time in point will stay for a period of time as he should suggest, because sometimes we leave this latitude and it stretches very far.

The second point arises from Clause 9, sub-Section 7, which I consider to be very vague and if I may read, ‘a vacancy in the membership of the Assembly shall not invalidate any proceedings of the Assembly nor shall any such proceedings be invalidated by the fact that a person not entitled to do so, was present and participated in those proceedings.’  This is where the Commissioner for the Constituent Assembly is from nowhere had that courage to shout, ‘even those whose names are not appearing in the registers are now free to vote.’  I see now a situation where even those in the gallery will be called to participate, and it will not be invalidated, and this is why I am also seeking his guidance, when he comes to the Committee Stage, that I need some education as to why the absence of a Member should not matter in anyway.  How many Members has he suggested?

MR. NJUBA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that, in my opening remark, I gave an example of a situation where somebody comes to the CA and participates having won the election, but on a petition subsequently given - put across by his opponents succeeds, now, that man is thrown out, what happens to the proceedings in which he has taken place?  This is a situation that is catering for that and nothing else.  Somebody will come here and subsequently be disqualified on one ground or another, following a petition of his rival, then that is the king of situation we are trying to cater for.  We are. I think sane enough to exclude people from the gallery from participating in these debates.

MR. ONGORA ATWAI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the information advanced to me by the hon. Minister.  Finally, yesterday Members were attacking the Commissioner very much against what we should have actually rebelled on him.  Why we had allowed in the Statute a lot of loopholes mandating the Commissioner to issue guidelines, directives, all those things, as he thinks necessary and you can see from the weakness of that sort of law that we made here, that the Commissioner had an extended power even to direct us to come and have photographs nationally and yet it was not provided for in the Constitution.  Anyway, we were giving somebody something.  Maybe some money.  That was already business for somebody but I think this time we have to be very strict with all these Amendment and also adhere to the rule of the game so that we do not give any more provision for -(Interruption)

MRS. KALEMA:  Point of information.  I would like to -(Inaudible)- hon. Member holding the Floor because there is something funny about these photographs.  The photographs were taken in coloured and then on the voting cards, they were in black and white.  So what was the use?  Because coloured photographs do not go well in the print.  It must have been just business.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  So, may be, Mr. Chairman, with that observation the hon. informer is actually enticing me into buying the view earlier on advanced by the hon. Lady across the Floor that, maybe symbols will do, because with the passes of time - the older you grow, the uglier you become -(Laughter)- and you may not be presentable in photograph and people are entitled to look at this ugly face and not vote for that one, and that will be very unfortunate, but with all this, I beg to support.  

MR. ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have to support the Amendment but the problems that we have seen in elections leave a lot for government to review all the exercise.  Let me say for example, recently for the women, it did not go well as ours.  In Soroti where I come from especially in my area, women regretted that why did we allow these men in RC.II to vote instead of them.  Women wanted to vote for their women.  They did not see why there were barred, they say, why did you allow us to select other people but not the women.  So, that one also government should consider.  If we are really serious about the women, the law was not very good, women flock in that matter.  

The issue of contentious matter is disturbing people very much.  Moreso, the minorities in Uganda.  I am sure something which we will call the issue of contentious matter will involve a bigger group against a smaller group which is most likely that the smaller group will remain fixed and fixed for all.  

For example, many men and women in the village side do not understand why the word contentious matter should be raised to any issue constitutionally.  For example, what is it that you can call contentious in Teso?  Apart from the cows lost but there is no issue.  So, you can find that the word ‘contentious’ is giving us a lot of headache because why do - this clause says, ‘there will be a first voting, then the second voting, and then third voting.’  I have a problem there.  

Supposing we are only twenty in the Assembly who do not want it?  You think if we go again the second time and the third time, we shall change anything - nothing.  So, there is some problem.  We should study the interest because are making a Constitution to respect, even the minority, not only the majority.  Here is the case where only the majority will succeed and they will be happy against the few people who will cause trouble in Uganda again.  So, I think that area -(Interruption)-

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the fewer the voters are, the easier they can be manipulated.  The information I want to give is that this august House should consider that matter because it is a way of manipulating may be to buy off those who maybe disagreeing in the first ballot and then in the second ballot and it is easier because we have found from the experience of Rule 32 under Section 4(2) of the Statute that you can easily manipulate people.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ELYAU:  Thank you for the information.  That is the touchiest issue in our Constitution making because I imagine where these people are popularly elected.  They have come in popularly although there are few classes that have come in different forms.  Now, we expect these people to be carrying the hopes of every citizen in Uganda that whatever they will be doing there will carry the aspirations of Ugandans.  Why do we buy them and say that we should go back to the same people behind, who may not even understand the role of that thing?  So, I find a problem with this referendum business.  It may be good with people who understand; the educated class, but it is very bad for those ones who do not know anything.  They will be biased.  They will not know what to do and I do not think the Minister will achieve anything out of this thing.  We shall instead achieve problems.  

For example, I remember the only referendum I can appreciate was between Buganda and Bunyoro because this was clear; even a baby knew it, but which is ours that is going to become so contentious - what is it?  I do not seem to see.  

So, that is the thing which I wanted us as Members to know that we are going to give the Constituent Assembly a very difficult work.  They will look smaller because if the issue will fail them, and then you consult people, I am not very proud to see it happen because these people have come to seriously work for this as hon. Obwangor was putting it.  We should trust a group, which has been given a task to dig or to weed.  Why then refer it to the master who may be sick, because a voter is the master, he is waiting to see what these delegates will do.  So, I think, there, although I agree partly but I have a doubt about our society.  

Now, I again want to remind the Minister that the officers called presiding officers and then polling assistants, messed a lot everywhere.  For example, these people were given all opportunity to dictate even to candidates not to appear in a polling station.  I remember, I can quote in my area where I had gone to appoint a counting agent because I had missed that polling station.  These people chased me saying I was not wanted here, and that they could close the station.  I was shocked.  So, you can see these people are given unnecessary powers.  How do I campaign?  In our area if you went there today and if somebody does not want you, it will remain the same.  You saw what happened?  

So, these people should not be given total power.  There should be given where to respect.  Secondly, there was no good supervision of these elections.  I put it to government.  For example, collection of boxes.  Some people were riding with boxes on a bicycle.  A ballot paper box without escorts.  These are very dangerous issues.  There must be a government organ removing these boxes from stations to the central place, which did not happen.

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member is suggesting that there should have been a vehicle to move the ballot boxes.  I wish he came to my Islands where vehicles are not known to exist. (Laughter)

MR. ETYANG:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, in case of my Constituency, policemen who did not have motor vehicles to transport boxes used bicycles to transport them and there were both guards as well as transporters.

MR. ELYAU:  That is where policemen were, Mr. Chairman, but in our case, you find that we have no police station in some of our areas as yet.   So, you can see a chief riding with a ballot box.  So, that is another thing.  

Thirdly, these people who are working on elections should be paid promptly.  There is a case already in Soroti, this is where I witnessed some of them came crying.  If a polling assistant was supposed to be paid 45,000/=, the officials deducted 5,000/=, that is for their work.  Can you allow that kind of corruption to continue?  I want you to investigate.  I want you to investigate.  Why should somebody who get his money say, 75,000/=, he gets 5,000/= taken away by the officials there and people go back grumbling and they come asking for an explanation.  So, investigate that thing.  These people who work for elections be well-paid so that next time, there is no corruption.  You see, let us be realistic when we are doing an exercise like this one.  

I want to conclude by saying at least, by now in Uganda, we have gone a big step forward to democracy - although some of our people suffered inconvenience, arising from what we do here.  Our friends mostly from Teso and other areas suffered about two area.  That these meetings which we call here and we call them political organ.  The politicians have taken advantage to divert the Ugandans that we are called here for Museveni to brainwash us and point at us that please, if you do not do this, I will lock you in the jail.  Which is not true.  We have been doing this thing happily.  

So, I think next time as we continue, these kind of meetings should be given a chance for people to know what we are discussing because Ugandans want to know what is happening in this Chamber.  It is vital for them to know what is happening, that is all.  Otherwise, we have gone well and we have done well and I think we shall continue to succeed well.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, there is urgent information which the hon. Minister of Agriculture would like to pass over to the Members.

THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs. Victoria Ssekitoleko):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform Parliament, this august House about the food situation in Uganda.  Some time back the New Vision, I think it was 18th April, came out with a report that there was famine in 16 districts and that government was distributing food to those districts.  Fortunately, most of you come from the rural areas and I know you have just come back after CA, so you know what is happening.  Some of your districts were included and I know you know that there is no famine there.
 
The true situation though is that some districts really have a problem.  The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries would like to inform the general public that the seriously affected districts that deserve relief food include Kotido, Moroto, Soroti, Kumi, Pallisa and Tororo and some parts of Kamuli.  The localised drought in the districts of Luwero, Masindi, Mbale, Kibale, Kapchorwa, Apach, Kitgum, Lira and Masaka only caused localised food shortages - meaning some sub-counties may be having more food.  They actually have a surplus while some sub-counties either just have enough or some homes do not have enough food but for example nobody is dying in those districts which I have just read.  What we in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries are supposed to do is food production.  

The distribution and the care for people who need relief is done by other people.  Distribution is by the private sector and the relief is by the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare.  Therefore, what we have done is, we have actually found money, bought seeds and we have already delivered these in the following district.  We have delivered to Kotido 3,000 kilograms of maize, 3,000 kilograms of beans, 1,000 kilograms of finger millet and 1,500 kilogram of sorghum.  All that is for planting, it is not food.  This is for planting.  Most of these seeds have been dressed with copper sulphate.  You had better advise your people under no circumstances to eat them because what they do sometimes is they soak them then the seeds become a bit whitish and they imagine that the chemical has been removed.  It is normally imbibed, meaning it goes inside, so you eat it, you may not die instantly but if you eat a lot of it you may die.  

The same amounts have been sent to Moroto, Soroti, Kumi, Pallisa, Tororo and Kamuli.  I would lie to appeal to you Members to please follow up these seeds because they deliberately given to the Central Government Representatives.  Basically, because I did not want to involve the Agricultural Officers, the Vet Officers into distribution of seeds because for them their job is extension and relief but I am told that in some districts the GCRs are still sitting on these seeds.  Please do intervene and for your benefit I will read the districts again.  That is Kotido, Moroto, Soroti, Kumi, Pallisa, Tororo and Kamuli.  Please see your GCRs and make sure that the seeds are given out right now.  Otherwise, thy will be useless.

Another problems has cropped up.  In some districts like Rakai and Masaka, the rain is becoming too much.  Therefore, we are expecting a fantastic crop of maize but a bad crop of beans.  Therefore, the Minister is advising those areas where the beans crop may be spoilt that in about two, three weeks the rain may be tailoring off a bit.  They please plant another crop of beans because they will have a good harvest.  Just plant the new crop away from the old crop; you will get a very good crop of beans.  

Secondly, as if that is not bad enough, the country has been attacked by army worm.  We have received reports at the Ministry that the districts of Kasese, Masindi, Iganga, Tororo, Mukono, Jinja, Kamuli, Soroti, Mpigi and Luwero.  Those are the reports we have received, have been massively attacked by the armyworm.  What I request you to do please as NRC Members is please mobilise every farmer to scout their gardens.  Meaning even if somebody has finished weeding, he should regularly visit the garden - so that if you see about 10 plants which have been defoliated, meaning without leaves, where the leaves have been eaten.  Please do two things, buy an insecticide one of the commonest and most effective is called phenetrothyl and this is available in every district and two of course, spray the same - that very day, do not wait even it means spraying at night because these insects eat very early in the morning and normally when you go to the garden you do not see them because you go during the day.  

Secondly, after you have sprayed or during the spraying send somebody to the District Agriculture Officer and give this information so that at headquarters we know what is happening.  The intention for this is so that if the attack is very massive and the farmers cannot control it, government will then move in and in one day we should be able to kill all these worms.  They are very devastating even in one day; they can finish a garden of about 100 acres.  So, please be on the look out, we do not want to have famine in the country.  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman; that is what I wanted to say.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session, we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.  


(The Council rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 28th April, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)


