Wednesday 26th April, 2000

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to ask the hon. Minister for Internal Affairs the following questions: There is sufficient evidence that prisoners who were sometimes half naked and others without any protective gear whatsoever were forced to exhume and later bury decomposing bodies of people murdered by Joseph Kibwetere's cult.”  

Could the Minister inform the House on the following:
a) Under what circumstances were the prisoners involved in this exercise?
b) Was the labour extracted from these prisoners part of the sentences they have to serve?
c) Given that the exercise was so de-humanising, could the Minister state whether the prisoners’ health and their rights were not jeopardised?
d) Whether there is an established Government body to deal with such occurrences? If so, why did this body not participate in the said exercise?  
Thank you, Sir.

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Edward Rugumayo): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of the House, I thank Major Kazoora, M.P for Kashari, for this question. I shall start off by contextualising the answer I will be giving.  

On 17th March this year, about 330 people died as a result of a fire, which was deliberately caused by leaders of a cult known as the Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God. Preliminary investigations revealed that there were other mass graves containing remains of members of this same cult.  As a result, two graves were found at the residence of one of the cult leaders, Rev. Father Dominic Kataribabo, at Kabira village, Rugazi, in Bushenyi District.  

On March 24th this year, in another branch of the sect at Buhunga in Rukungiri District, 153 bodies were found in three separate graves, at the home of one of the sect leaders. 

On 30 March, at Ruhinda, Bushenyi District, one grave was found at one Joseph Murinde's home. In this grave, 58 bodies were exhumed.  

This calamity took the nation by surprise, and efforts are being made to ensure that the perpetrators of these crimes are brought to book. Arrangements are in final stages to have a commission of inquiry into the incident. Now, I will answer step by step of the hon. Member's questions.

“Under what circumstances were the prisoners involved in this exercise?” The Police was involved in the investigations; the officer in charge of Rukungiri Police station and the officer in charge of serious crime at CID Headquarters were involved in the exhuming process. A number of prisoners participated in exhuming these bodies. At the beginning, the prisoners were availed with gumboots and gloves, however without nose protectives. As the volume of work became overwhelming, it became impossible to provide all those involved in the exercise with protective gear. It is because of this reason that the whole exercise was suspended, pending the provision of these items. Arrangements are now in final stages to acquire the necessary gear so that the exhuming process can begin again.  

“Was the labour extracted from these prisoners part of the sentence they are supposed to serve?” I will refer you to Article 25 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which covers the employment of persons under lawful custody and the use of labour of citizens of this country. Article 25 (2) and (3)(d) do state:  “(2) No person shall be required to perform forced labour. 
 (3) For the purpose of this article, “forced labour” does not include- 
(d) any labour required during any period when Uganda is at war or in case of any emergency or calamity which threatens the life and well-being of the community, to the extent that the requiring of the labour is reasonably justifiable in the circumstances of any situation arising or existing during the period or as a result of the emergency or calamity, for the purposes of dealing with that situation."  
The prisoners, therefore, became involved as by the provision of that law.  

“Given that the exercise was so de-humanising, could the Minister state whether the prisoners' health and their rights were not jeopardised?” I will elaborate. It has been realised that it is necessary to determine the health status of the 50 prisoners who were involved in this exercise. This is the latest information I have. The report on the health status of prisoners who exhumed bodies is as follows: 

Following the use of in-mates in the above exercise, medical officers were dispatched from Prisons’ headquarters, led by the Director of Prisons Medical Services. The task was to do the following:  
a) Make a comprehensive clinical assessment of the prisoners to establish both their physical and mental status.
b) Diagnose and treat, where necessary, any condition that may have come about as a result of the exercise.
c) Establish the prisoners’ base line health status, with which to base future follow up assessment.  

This is the first phase of an exercise that will be carried out in phases, with the eventual aim of identifying any conditions the in-mates may suffer or may have suffered as a result of the involvement in the above activity. 

The findings from the first phase so far reveal that the in-mates have suffered immediate psychological and associated physical effects, in form of post-traumatic stress syndrome. In other words, they have suffered from psychological trauma.  Relevant treatment has been given, but investigations are continuing, and relevant progressive reports will be submitted at strategic intervals. The question of their rights being jeopardised does not arise, simply because their involvement has already been explained, as provided for in the above Article.  

The other question was whether there is an established Government body to deal with such occurrences and if so, why did this body not participate in the said exercise. To date, there is no established Government body or department to deal with such emergencies and calamities. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is only in its infancy.  Arrangements to establish such bodies, I am sure, are in the making. However, my Ministry did its best, though it was not adequately prepared to handle an emergency of such a magnitude.  

I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I hope my response has satisfied the hon. Member and the House. 

MS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Minister, for the explanation. Considering that there was no capacity at all to exhume bodies from the mass graves, and in view of the fact that a shoddy job was done, I want to inquire from the Minister what the hurry was in going ahead to exhume these bodies, using innocent human beings. I was in Kanungu this Sunday and the stench of rotten bodies is growing, evidence that there are more bodies left in the pit. Why could the Government not wait and build capacity for proper verification, so that the exhuming exercise could be done. Could the hon. Minister please explain?  Thank you, Sir. 

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister justified the exhuming of the bodies using Article 25(d) of the Constitution. He said that, in the sense that this was forced labour, which was necessary in the case of an emergency or calamity which threatens the lives and well-being of the community. In view of the provisions of this Constitution, could the Minister elaborate as to what extent the bodies, which were already buried, threatened the lives of that community? Would the Minister agree with me that it was exhuming the dead bodies, which actually threatened the lives of the community, rather than living them unburied? 

Therefore, the Minister would further agree with me that under the circumstances, the use of the forced labour was totally unjustified, as conceived in Article 25(3)(b) of the Constitution. Because the Constitution is looking at the circumstances in which there is an emergency or calamity, which threatens the life and well being of the community, and therefore, it was burying bodies, which were not yet buried, which was necessary.

Finally, Article 44(a) of the Constitution says:“Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, there shall be no derogation from the enjoyment of the following rights and freedoms- 
(a) freedom from torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of punishment.”  

In view of the provisions of Article 44(a) of the Constitution, would the Minister not agree that using prisoners to exhume decomposing bodies, in an unprotected way, is a violation of Article 44 of the Constitution, and therefore, the Government should stand liable and accused for this violation? 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. PINTO: I am grateful to you, Mr. Speaker. As we know, to date, the communication channel in the matter of what has happened at Kanungu and the free flow of information was closed by the Minister. He did this by not allowing information to come out to the public. In the circumstances, could the Minister give the House and the country at large, the full story behind the Kanungu affair? And if it is not available now, would the Minister pledge to make a full statement to the House of what has happened and what is happening in these affairs? We used to get information, but now this matter is closed! The Minister took it upon himself to block the free flow of information.  

Secondly, in the event that some of the persons who have been used in this exercise fall sick, will the Government bear responsibility? A psychiatrist, Dr. Mungerera, has already stated that many of these people suffered traumas. I participated in the exercise of lifting over 10,000 bodies of the Rwandese, which had floated to River Kagera. I know how traumatic this exercise is. I can tell you that there are people who went permanently crazy -(Laughter.)- Mr. Speaker, when people laugh at serious matters, one wonders whether they understand the seriousness or it is because they do not fully comprehend, therefore they make it a light issue. Because we tend to laugh at everything; and it shows you the level of comprehension of the matter. I am talking about dead bodies in various states of decomposition, but if people think this is a laughing matter, I am sorry. I am sorry, but this shows quite a lot.  

Does Government bear responsibility? Some of these people may have lasting mental problems because they were really not supposed to carry out this labour. Will the Government bear responsibility? May I hear this from the hon. Minister?

DR. KAKUNGULU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of Masaka Municipality are not happy about how the saga has been handled. To date, there so many questions they put to me, and as such, I have to put them to the Minister. Why was there a deliberate attempt to cover up the true identity of those people who were exhumed? Why do I say this? There was haste in exhumation and haste soon after, in the re-burial of these bodies. They reburied them even before a public announcement could be put on the radio or in the mass media to call for people who had lost their persons to come and possibly identify the people who were exhumed. 

Because of my training, I know what a post-mortem involves; why was the department of Pathology of Makerere University not at all involved in this whole saga? They have the technical know-how, they have the expertise, and they have everything that would have helped us truly identify who those dead people are at their disposal. There are so many questions, but I wish to get clarification over this.  I thank you.

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the Minister as to what type of prisoners he used in exhuming the dead bodies. Were these fully sentenced prisoners or were they prisoners on remand? The difference it makes is that it is only sentenced prisoners who can do such a job.  

Secondly, may I know what the social consequences on these prisoners will be? I ask this knowing that many of them have families and relatives, and because of the way they were handling dead bodies barehanded, this could have an effect on their social wellbeing, when they come out of prison and go to their homes. May I know what the Government's position on rehabilitating these people socially will be?

DR. KINYATA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to know what the Government intends to do with the mass grave, where more than 500 people were buried. I have been to the place more than four times and every time I go there, I see that the rains are washing away the soils. This big grave, where all these people were buried, is on a slope, so sooner or later, the bodies will be washed outside the grave. Can I know what the Government intends to do with the place, so that the bodies are properly covered?

MR. OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are talking about the violation of prisoners' rights; I would like to know from the Minister responsible whether he is aware of the rampant use of prisoners as free labourers, by officers at upcountry stations. Almost everywhere, prisoners are taken to dig; even if you want to hire them, you hire them and pay, but where does the money go? 

Secondly, at upcountry stations, in most cases, there are no separate cells for the juveniles. Juvenile offenders are accommodated together with the adults. I would like the Minister responsible to comment on what effect this will have on the juveniles.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OWINY DOLLO: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since Kanungu, the Ugandan public has not been very happy about the manner in which the State has handled this catastrophe. I will confine myself to the legal aspect. I listened to the hon. Minister finding support in the Constitution to explain the unexplainable.  I want to know whether the hon. Minister knows or took occasion to consult with the Attorney General to find out, in the Public Health Act, not the Constitution, that there is a provision for exhumation. 

According to this Act, one can only exhume a body from a grave after six months have elapsed from the date of burial or from the date of disposal in the grave. If you are doing it before the expiry of six months, you can do it upon seeking and obtaining a court order to that effect. So, I would like to know if the hon. Minister took occasion to consult the Attorney General before exposing these unfortunate prisoners to this hazard.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to find out from the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs whether he is aware of the vices that are going on in prisons. When people arrive on remand, on their first night in various prisons, is he aware of the calamity and the torture they go through? There is a lot of sodomy that takes place in prisons. And if he is aware, is he doing anything about it? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, why don’t we confine ourselves to supplementaries arising out of his questions?

MR. KARUHANGA: Okay, let me ask a supplementary question to that, but the Minister is free to answer it if he feels like.  

The second question is on this Kanungu story, the whole story of the Kibwetere and Kataribabo saga, and the death of our people. The Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee invited the Minister for Security, hon. Mukasa Muruli, to meet us three weeks ago. We asked him 46 questions, and he was to research on them and come up with answers today. At 10.00 O'clock, we waited for him, apparently he was held up in a Cabinet meeting and could not come to our Committee meeting.  

We recently passed a law on the National Security Council, which we hope the President has accented. The Minister for Internal Affairs is also being asked a lot of questions on Kanungu, which obviously means that in this Parliament, we are very concerned and we are looking and searching for answers to our questions. I just wanted to know from the Minister whether it is him we should pursue or somebody else. Because we are pursuing hon. Mukasa Muruli with 46 questions, which are a burden for him to come and answer. Should we transfer them to the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs? Who is going to carry this problem and answer the population’s questions? Is it the Leader of Government Business, who is always the last person to whom the buck on matters of legislature is passed?

So, I really want an honest answer, because this is just a question of dealing with prisoners. The whole issue of having another grave suspect in Kampala, in Buziga, is now serious. Are they finding these people? And when you see the houses, they are so expensive; these people have so many properties scattered all over Uganda. Have we just gone half way or a third or is this the end, what is the story?  We would like to know, but who do we ask? Who is going to come to the House and address these issues? Hon. Muruli Mukasa has 46 questions pending.  

THE SPEAKER: Maybe to be fair to the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, if you are unable to answer the nature of the questions or the topics they cover, then you will be able to say whether it is you or the hon. Minister of Security who is responsible. But anyway, I give you an opportunity to respond.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Fortunately most of the questions are not of alarm, and some others are not pertinent to the topic under discussion, however, I shall try and respond to them.  

Hon. Babihuga says that we had no capacity, we did a shoddy job, and she asked why I was in a hurry. Of course, if we had not exhumed the bodies, she would be asking why have we did not exhume them. We had to exhume them; we did not know what was there. If we had known, of course, we would have prevented the problem. This came as a surprise to all of us. Perhaps we thought there were two bodies, only to find that there were more and more and more bodies.

This is a matter which really concerns all of us. If I might give an example, Kataribabo's home is next to his brother’s; they are separated by about 100 metres, yet his very brother and the children around the home could not detect what was happening in that very house where 100 dead bodies were exhumed. These are issues, I think this House should face. We were dealing with a very evil genius. Therefore, we definitely accept that we did not do a wonderful job, but the hurry was because we wanted to find out what was below the ground –(Interruption) 

MS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Minister in charge of Internal Security to shift the burden of security on to Kataribabo's brother, when he has got institutions, which are in charge of security, which could have done the job? Is it in order Sir?  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Let us face it, the Minister was giving an extraordinary example, where over 100 people are buried and the people next door, who share a fence with them, do not know anything about it. Perhaps the explanation is that they were also involved. This is what the Minister is really saying. I think it is a fair comment or an exclamation of disgust and frustration.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that wonderful explanation. Hon. Omara Atubo interprets forced labour in the Constitution differently from the way I understand it. So, it is a question of how we understand and interpret the Constitution.  As far as I know, there was no forced labour, and there was no torture. However, I have already stated that we have set up a Commission of Inquiry and the Commission of Inquiry will surely address all these questions which are being raised. The Commission will present its findings to this very august House, which set it up. I, therefore, would request this august House to be patient until the Commission of Inquiry provides the answers. Otherwise, we can go on ping-ponging and trying to settle scores here and there, but I can assure you -(Interruption)(Mr. Nyai rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, he is responding to very many clarifications, can we give him that opportunity.

MR. NYAI: But, Mr. Speaker, he says there is a Commission of Inquiry, and a Commission of Inquiry normally is constituted -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dick Nyai, your peers are drawing your attention to one point. I do not know whether you are interested in hearing it from them, and not from me. Anyway, you proceed, I think they have changed their minds.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, all I was asking from the Minister delivering his responses, is some clarification. Since this country was told that there is a Commission of Inquiry being set up to investigate this whole affair, the country has never been told who the members of that Commission are. When will it start its job, what is its time frame, what are the terms of reference? Can the Minister let us have that information?

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Speaker, I came to answer questions, which were put before us here. I am responding to the questions, which were asked. If I recall, this House did resolve to set up a Commission of Inquiry, which must report back to this House in a period of six months, and we still have time.

I now go to hon. Pinto’s question. He alleges that the free flow of information was closed. I would like to assure this House that there was no free flow of information, which was closed. The statement from the Ministry was to the effect that photographers of these terrible scenes would not be allowed because there was indiscretion in the way some of these photographs were exhibited in the print media. They were to get photographs of the real bodies from the forensic experts; this is done everywhere. So, this country would be no exception; I think we are a little more liberal.  

Hon. Pinto alleges that this House has never been given the full story behind Kanungu as it evolves. I think it is on record that this House was given a report on Kanungu; and it is in the Hansard. Hon. Pinto also talked about how those people have been traumatised. I have already elaborated that medical experts have gone in and they have found out that these people are suffering from stress trauma, and they are following it up in phases. So, they are treating them medically. I cannot add more than that.

Dr. Kakungulu talks about the issue of the identity of the people being hidden. I really do not know where the hon. Member got that information, because we do not have the identities of these people. So, we could not hide what we do not know. I thank you. Now, on the issue of prisoners being released, as I have already stated, they served under the Constitution, which, I think, I clearly interpreted.  

Dr. Kinyata talked about rains washing away the soils. We will make sure that we repair that damage. Once again, the other issues like using prisoners, free labour, where the money goes, juveniles sleeping with adults or with old criminals, or vices being practised in prisons were - (Interruption) 

MS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. I am seeking clarification regarding the grave, because the hon. Minister seems to be glossing over the need for the appropriate burial of the remains of those people. When he is talking about repairs, does he think that that grave at Nyaruhoto is appropriate and adequate? Is he aware that there is a lot of rain currently, and a lot of topsoil on that ridge has already been washed away? And what are the plans for that repair? Whose baby is it any way, whose responsibility is it to look after that grave? I thank you.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for raising the issues. The issue of appropriate burial of the remains is being addressed, and definitely, we are going to work out a method of a proper burial, in a proper manner.  However, given the resources we have, it has not been possible to do everything at once. But definitely, that matter will be addressed.

I was asked whether, before we did exhume, the Attorney General was consulted. The answer is no. We did not know, at that time, the serious legal implications that might arise out of this. We did not consult him, but now we are definitely consulting with him.

On the issue of who answers the question or who is responsible, the answer is very straightforward, the Government is responsible; we have collective responsibility. I can speak on behalf of the Minister for Security, the Minister of State for Defence and Internal Affairs and vice versa. Here we are exercising collective responsibility. So please, any questions directed to any of us will be answered to your satisfaction. I thank you.

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I have not been answered.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have some other business, the Minister has responded to your questions and in any case, there is going to be a Commission of Inquiry. Why do you not wait for that? There will be a Commission of Inquiry, it will report here, and you will take it on from there.  

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, my question was not answered.

THE SPEAKER: Al right, can you repeat the question so that the Minister can answer it.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: My question was very simple. The Minister is relying on Article 25 of the Constitution, where forced labour is supposed to be used either in an emergency or in calamity.  Here are people already buried in some form of graves, then you bring prisoners, unprotected as they were, to exhume their bodies. I wanted to know from the Minister where the emergency and the calamity was. Was the emergency in leaving the bodies as they were, or in misusing the prisoners to exhume them? Under the Constitution, where was the emergency? Where was the calamity?  That is all.

THE SPEAKER: I am not allowing any more questions; can you proceed and finish.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Speaker, as far as my Ministry and Government are concerned, this was a calamity. Secondly, under the Article, which I have quoted, forced labour does not include work done under these conditions. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAMBI KIBAALE: My question was not answered, Mr. Speaker.  Since, under the Constitution, forced labour goes for those prisoners who have been sentenced, I wanted to know from the Minister how many of those prisoners that were used in Kanungu were sentenced prisoners and how many were on remand.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Speaker, I cannot answer that now, I need time.  I thank you.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My Friend on the Front Bench, in charge of Internal Affairs, might need assistance from his Colleagues about security. In his opening statement, the hon. Minister said information was not even available to immediate members of the family. The Kibwetere type of massacre, misadventure and unwarranted killing of the public is not new. I would like to inform the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs that in Kyambogo, in the suburbs of Kampala, between 14 and 13 Devon Street, there is a big compound surrounded by a wall of about eight feet high, in front of Zakariya Garage as you go up to ITEK. For the past two weeks, the neighbours of that compound have been seeing a group of between 13 to 18 youngsters, who monitor the compound. 

One neighbour on 13 Devon Street was curious, and he used a ladder and looked over the wall, and noticed that three of the youngsters had AK 47’s and spades. He personally telephoned me, and last Friday I went there myself. We have been monitoring this situation; they used a vehicle, a kamunye, UWR 261, which we believe is a forged numberplate.  

I just wonder how, in the Capital City of this great republic, security forces have not been monitoring this compound. We suspect it has Kibwetere related people, or people who are about to commit a hideous crime, which will take this House another week or two or three to investigate. Are the Ministers in charge of security in this country aware of such activities?

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for that information, but he also knows the rights and obligations of a citizen, which include to report matters which threaten the security of the State. I request the hon. Member to furnish me with that information, then we can follow it up. Perhaps my people have it, but I do not know. I urge him to be a loyal citizen of this country and to discharge his responsibilities of securing the sovereignty and peace of this country.  I thank you.

MR. AWORI: I just want to inform him that I have done my duty in reporting to him now, through this august House.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: I thank hon. Aggrey Awori for this information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we move to the next item, I would like, on your behalf, to recognise Mr and Mrs. Hawell, who have come all the way from UK, having heard how you transact your business. They have come to show their solidarity with you. They are up in the gallery. Mr. and Mrs. Hawell, can you please stand up for recognition. For those of you who went through Busoga College Mwiri, you should be able to remember them, and particularly those of you who did chemistry. They have come all the way, because they know that their offspring are deliberating the affairs of this country. They are now reaping the fruits of their labour. You are welcome. May you resume your seats.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I am sorry that the matter we had been discussing has been closed, but I have a similar problem, almost like Kanungu. In Mawanga Zone, in my constituency, the Police say -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can I say this; report to the nearest police station and it will reach the Minister of Internal Affairs.


BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CIVIL PROCEDURE AND LIMITATION (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, yesterday we were expecting an amendment from the hon. Elly Karuhanga. Unfortunately, because of other responsibilities, the hon. Karuhanga was not around and we gave him up to today. I would like to call upon him to tell us whether he has done the needful.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I am extremely grateful to you for the ex-gratia consideration that you have used to allow me move my very small and insignificant amendment. Though small and insignificant, it goes a long way in showing that the Minister in Charge of our Constitutional Affairs, who is also in Charge of Justice, is able to dispense justice.  

I have consequently had sufficient interaction with the chairman of the Committee, hon. Ogalo, who gave me his considered advice. I have also had interactions with the Minister in Charge of the Bill, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, who in turn consulted his Colleagues, and an amicable arrangement has been reached. I have had to give up my original amendment of 30 days and conceded 45 days to replace the 60 days that are in the Act.  

Therefore, the amendment would read as follows: “Clause 3 section 1 of the Principal Act to be amended in sub-section (1) by substituting for 60 days the words ‘45 days’.” 

I know that Colleagues may want to continue to insist on 30 days, but I have also gone as far as persuading those who were behind that idea to accept this amendment. I hope that there will be no problem, and I want to thank the Minister for this. I think it is good understanding, and it brings very good understanding between the Front Bench and the Back Bench.

For Members who may not have been here, the amendment tries to do away with a law, which was passed here in 1969, by Obote then, an active student of our visitor. This was at a time when he had declared the one party state, at a time when he was ruling this country and taking away all the rights of individuals and just caring only about Government. So, at this time, in order for anybody to have justice with Government, which was a much stronger party, one had to give 60 days’ notice. And not only Government, but also the scheduled corporations, which were parastatals. 

So, if a parastatal came and picked your vehicle and drove it from your garage, you would have to give them 60 days' notice to say that you intend to sue them. After 60 days of the inconvenience of not having a vehicle in your house, then you would file the normal case, where they would have to put in a written statement of defence. It would also be days before they heard the case; you would cue up and line up for court to hear your case. You know how many cases we have pending in courts because of long backlogs, so this was a cause of great injustice. We had intended to move it to 30 days, but because the Minister had not got clearance from Cabinet, the alternative we were left with was for him to withdraw the Bill. He has the power to withdraw the Bill at any time of the proceedings, including now. 

If he was to withdraw this Bill now, because we were insisting on 30 days, this would perpetuate injustice. Considering that we may have to see this Bill to the next Session, we think that we should compromise and give in to the Minister's wish. We should thank him for accepting the 45 days, and also thank him for extending the period of suing Government to 2 years from 1 year. Now, if you do not bring your case before 1 year, you will again lose your case. So I really think this is a significant way forward. I want to tell you how grateful I am to the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and to all his Friends on the Front Bench for accepting this amendment. I thank you.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do remember that you gave me an opportunity to speak on this Bill, when the Minister moved amendment. I opposed the amendment of 2 years and I proposed that the provision which the Minister has brought be put to 3 years. We have not come to that, but I did raise the issue of the notice of 60 days, even though I am not a lawyer by training or a practising lawyer. Those whose business it is to earn money through practising law argued very well, but they did not take into account the interest of those who are normally affected by this case.

I still propose that the Minister should concede to 30 days rather than 45 days. Schedule corporations sometimes deliberately do not respond, and if they do not respond within 60 days, they still have leeway to apply for reconsideration to submit their defence. In most cases, you find that those who have litigation against the Government are eventually the losers. 

So, knowing the bureaucracies involved, and if you want to talk about human rights that the previous Government violated, then we should also realise that this Government has maintained this law on that Statute until today. For 14 years, we have also been violating the rights of the individuals who should sue Government. While we pride in bringing change, we must also look at the aspect of those who have been suffering, particularly under this case, where you would take Government to court. 

My view and my submission is that the Minister, in the wisdom and in the spirit of the Constitution, where Article 126(2)(e) clearly reflects that substantive justice will be administered without undue regard to technicalities, should soften and put this amendment to 30 days and not 45 days. I would like to urge the Minister to soften; after all, what is 14 days, if the Minister really wants justice to be dispensed.  I beg to move.

MR. MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support the Motion moved by hon. Karuhanga, but like my Colleague who has just been on the Floor, with regret. I only wish we could reduce the period to 30 days. Those of us who have been in the legal profession know that the 60 days' notice has been a monster. It has perpetuated a lot of injustice. It is a cardinal principle of our law that justice delayed is justice denied.

You will know note that when you give 60 days' notice, there is no action, there is no remedy you can obtain for a litigant, and yet some of the matters for which you are litigating are so urgent. Imagine a situation where a servant of the Government is threatening to demolish your house unlawfully. He has given you notice that within 14 days, he will demolish your house, and he has no ground whatsoever.  Now, you cannot do anything, you cannot go to court, you cannot go to any authority, unless you have given the Attorney General 60 days’ notice.

Look at the reasoning, somebody wants to demolish your house within 14 days, but in order to stop him, in order to get a remedy, you must first give him 60 days’ notice. What happens within those days is that, if you give the notice, that is the reason he should speed up the demolition, and within 7 days, the house is already demolished. By the time you go to court, there is no remedy.

The rationale behind this rule was that the Attorney General should get ample time to consult the departments concerned, investigate the matter, and see whether the Government can settle and avoid costs.  But today, I am sorry to say, I have not seen instances where this notice has served any purpose. Most times when you give the 60 days’ notice, there is not even a single response from the Attorney General. The 60 days’ notice elapses, you file a suit, you serve the Attorney General, but nothing is done. You can even reach the hearing stage, and the Attorney General has not put in the defence, and definitely proceeding in the absence of the Attorney General is terrible; you will not get anything. Under those circumstances, why should we maintain these 60 days? Since the rationale that was intended to be served by the notice is even not there.  

To be in line with our constitutional provisions and with the principles of natural justice, which demand that justice should not be delayed, I want to propose that we do away with the 60 days and make it 30 days. If we are to carry hon. Karuhanga's amendment of 45 days, I intend to move an amendment to the effect that within those 45 days, a party or a litigant can go to court and get an interim remedy. 

Today, without giving 60 days’ notice, you cannot get a remedy. You cannot go to any court; you just sit down and wait until you see the evil being completed.

I would insist on moving another amendment -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, it seems you want to introduce another amendment to amend hon. Karuhanga's amendment, why do you not consult with him while we pronounce ourselves on Clause 2?

Clause 2.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 2 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now we go to hon. Karuhanga's amendment, which in effect, is to add another Clause to the Bill, that is Clause 3. Hon. Karuhanga is really talking about statutory notice. He would like it to be reduced from the 60 days, which is currently the case, to 45 days. He abandoned his approach to his earlier amendment, and he has now promoted another amendment, after consulting the Chairman and the Minister. I do not know whether they will not confirm hon. Karuhanga's amendment, but before that, we will consider what the hon. Member for Rushenyi has.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to make something very clear to my Colleagues who are proposing 30 days.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is only one Colleague. Why do you not consult with him?

MR. KARUHANGA: They are two, and the other Members who are not speaking may also be persuaded. But the point, which I want to bring up, was that my original amendment was 30 days, but out of compromise, it went to 45 days. I did this after very serious considerations, and having struck an arrangement with the Minister in charge of the Bill, who has power to withdraw this Motion any time he wants. If he is not persuaded with 30 days, and we reject 45, then he can withdraw the Bill and then we are stuck. 

All that means, if we go for recess, as I hear we are supposed to on 28th, then we come back for the Budget on 16th, then we will have the President's Speech to discuss, then the Budget discussions in November, we shall just talk about next year. And those of us who are in this business know that that is fatal. So, let us get the little we have got from the hon. Minister, 45 days plus the two years, instead of ruining everything. If the Minister says that he is prepared to accept 30 days, I will be very happy then, but if he is not prepared to accept 30 days, then we should vote accordingly.  

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Bart Katureebe): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support hon. Karuhanga's amendment, and in supporting it, I just want to make a few clarifications.  

I agree with the concerns expressed by both hon. Karuhanga and hon. Rukutana about delayed justice and injustice that may be occasioned to litigants against Government. We have to strike a compromise between the public good and also the interests of the individual; and here I speak as someone whose duty it is to defend Government.

If we are already having problems getting instructions from Government departments in 60 days, how will it be when we reduce this to 30 days? It means you will have cases being filed against Government that the Attorney General will not have had occasion to know about, and therefore, will not have occasion to defend Government and the public good; and that is not in the interest of the country.  

Those of us who have to defend Government have to get instructions, we have to get facts, so that we are able to put up reasonable written statements of defence in court, as indeed hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana knows. Otherwise, we are left with technical defences, which are more cumbersome and lead to delays and delays and more delays.

So, it is really in the interest of justice that we strike this compromise, to enable Government departments to give us instructions to write written statements of defence that amount to defence in court, so that justice is dispensed as quickly as possible. Therefore, I urge hon. Members to accept this in that context.

The Government is so big. A Policeman may have assaulted someone in Bundibugyo, but if you sit in Fort Portal and file a suit against the Attorney General in 30 days, the Attorney General will not even have got the information on what took place, to be able to file a proper written statement of defence. That is the rationale behind the need for notice. Therefore, I only beg hon. Members to accept this compromise of 45 days and we try to live within that. I can tell the House that so far we have improved; there is tremendous improvement in Government response to cases in court.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I am very indebted to the language of the Learned Attorney General, and his mastery exposition of the situation.

I would like to also say that the time required by Government, to seek information relating to potential claims against Government, is necessary. Indeed, if information comes to the Attorney General, showing that the claims being stated against Government are facts; they are true, then the Government will not go to court. That is a case the Government can settle out of court; and that again is in the interest of the potential plaintiff.  

Secondly, it is not true that each time someone sues the Government, the Government wins the case. Again, if facts are such that the Attorney General finds out that the potential plaintiff’s facts are wrong, that person pays damages and costs in the end, if he or she loses the case. Therefore, Sir, the reason for asking for time to consult, time to get the facts, time to ascertain the process of the potential action, I would really say, is in the interest, not only of the public, but also of the potential client. Therefore, I am prepared, as hon. Karuhanga has said, to proceed with 45 days because 45 days are necessary for the Government to ascertain the facts on which potential claim is based.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question on the amendment.                 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 3 as amended, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr.Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2000” and passed it with a minor amendment.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)
                         
BILLS
THIRD READING

THE CIVIL PROCEDURE AND LIMITATION (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Civil Procedure Limitation (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2000 be read the Third Time. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CIVIL PROCEDURE LIMITATION (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2000

THE SPEAKER: That concludes the proceedings with regards to that Bill, which is now passed into law.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE BUDGET BILL, 2000

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Chairman of the Committee on the National Economy, the hon. Musumba.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isanga): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Budget Bill, 2000” be read the Second Time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?  Proceed.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isanga): Mr. Speaker, the Committee on the National Economy did originate a Bill entitled ‘The Budget Bill’. The purpose of this was to streamline and regulate the budgetary procedure so as to make the budgeting process more efficient and systematic.  

This, it is believed, would cure some of the weaknesses in the budgeting process and would help to ensure that as many people, as many stakeholders as possible are involved in the budgeting process. We have already made our submission before the relevant Committee, and we did agree, with the relevant Committee, that we refine the Bill further. We are now ready to proceed.  

I urge the Members to support this Bill. The leader of Government business did say, when we read this the First time, that Government has no objection to the introduction of a Budget Bill by a private Member. It was also stated, categorically, that we had, for the past three years, tried to persuade Government to originate the Bill, but Government, amidst its many and busy schedules, was not able to originate the Bill in time. Therefore, a Bill has been originated from the Committee. We are ready to proceed. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You have moved a motion that the Bill be read a Second Time, so that is why you were addressing the House. I give an opportunity to the chairperson.

MAJ. OTOA: Mr. Speaker, this is a very important Bill, -(Interjections)- I do not want to raise the issue of quorum, I am raising an issue of procedure. I do not see the stakeholders on the Front Bench; there is no Minister from the Ministry of Planning –(Interjections)- Please protect me, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Have you finished?  

MAJ. OTOA: No, he is trying to assure me that there is a Minister.

THE SPEAKER: But you have made your point; you are wondering whether the debate on this Bill can proceed without Ministers?

MAJ. OTOA: How do we know that they have harmonised their position with the Minister?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is the Budget Bill, and you know its background very well. The hon. chairperson for the Committee on the National Economy, in his exposé, alluded to the fact that originally this was supposed to be a Bill from the other side, but because of some problems, it crossed the Floor. All the same, it is here, and I think it requires the attention of the line Minister. But I cannot speak for either party, I can merely find out from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the Leader of Government. He is here, he might wish to guide us on this important matter, namely the absence of the Ministers, and then we shall decide on how to proceed.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr. Nsibambi Apolo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also agree that the Minister of Finance should have been here, but as I have said several times, we are problem and disaster prepared. Under the circumstances, we request you to proceed.  We shall take charge of the critical issues.

MS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Prime Minister for his affirmative confidence in taking charge. Normally, when such business is being transacted, the line Ministry does have a technical team present here to record and advise. Could we be assured that the technical team from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here to give the technical back up? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: First of all, I cannot tell, from where I am seated, whether there are any technical people around, but that is not my problem. My problem is with the people who are supposed to sit here and transact business. Hon. Members, the people who are here, including the Prime Minister, who is Leader of Government business, have said they will take charge; what else do you want?  

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Speaker, I heard you asking about the technicians being inquired of by the hon. Member from Rukungiri. My fast checking ascertains that none of the technical staff that the hon. Member is inquiring about are present here.

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, the Leader of Government business, and none other than your good self, have clarified to this House that the Government side is ready to take the Bill in its stride. This is a Private Members’ Bill from the Back Bench. Is it in order for Members to start speculating who the technical people from the Ministry are, where they are, whether they should be here, or how they look like? Is it in order, Sir?  Can we not proceed?  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the statement has been made on behalf of Government; they are ready to proceed with or without the Minister of Finance, with or without the technical team, and I think we will proceed -(Mr. Okumu Ringa rose_). Okumu Ringa, you are a Member of the Committee; I am so advised. 

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, it is true that I am a member of this Committee, and it is also true that my maiden speech in this House, four years ago, on 3rd July 1996, criticised the manner in which budgets are prepared in Government. The Prime Minister is very modest, and I do respect him. The Front Bench is also being very modest, but the Bill before us is a technical Bill, hinging on issues of finance.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu Ringa, I have already ruled on that.  We are proceeding. The Prime Minister is here, and he has talked on behalf of Government. You will make your point during the debate.  

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms. Kiraso Beatrice): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

The Budget Bill, 2000 was read for the First Time on the 15th February this year, and it was committed to the Committee on Finance, in accordance with Rule 99(5) of our Rules of Procedure. This report is hereby presented to this House as per Rule 99(6) of our Rules of Procedure.  

There has been a lot of concern, among Members of Parliament, on the passive participation of Parliament in the budgeting process. The concern was further strengthened after a workshop on public budgeting, organised for Members of Parliament by the State University of New York, in June last year. 

In other countries, Parliament plays a more vigorous role in this important public function. In the United States of America, Sweden, Australia, Canada, to mention but a few, there is a budget committee, which participates in the budgeting process before the final budget is presented.    

The Committee noted that this arrangement allows for various ideas, through people's own representatives, to be reflected in the national budget. The Committee wishes to commend the hon. Chairperson and the Committee on the National Economy for having taken this initiative to present this as a Private Members’ Bill. 

The Bill provides for the setting up of a budget committee and establishing a well facilitated budget office. Members will agree that this Parliament only comes in to approve what has been discussed and agreed upon by the Executive without consultations with the various stakeholders in the economy.  This House spends a lot of time trying to understand, debate and make recommendations on different sector budget, which recommendations always come too late. The Executive never implements most of the recommendations of Parliament, and there is nothing Parliament could do.  

In addition to the above, the quality and quantity of budget information received from Ministries is sometimes not up to the expected standard. Given this background, the proposed budget office will play a central role in the formulation of the national fiscal policy. This will enable the Government to efficiently collect and allocate resources to meet national objectives, with a lot of information available from the various stakeholders.  

The Committee held consultations with the Committee on National Economy, whose chairman, hon. Musumba, is the mover of this Motion. The Minister of Finance, in spite of several invitations to discuss this, could not find time to meet with the Committee over this Bill. I am aware that this Bill should be looked at by the Ministry of Finance, but I am also aware that there is very little this Parliament can do to force the Minister to do his work.  They have got invitations; I had got letters –(Interruption)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, this being a very important Bill, and the chairperson being very open and eloquent in informing the House that the Minister and the technical staff in the Ministry of Finance have not even bothered to look at the importance of this Bill, is it in order for this House to proceed when we do not even have quorum? Maybe if they were here they would provide adequate quorum. Under Rule 17 of our Rules of Procedure, the House lacks quorum for us to proceed with this very important business.  

THE SPEAKER: Let us get you clear; make yourself clear, you have the Floor and nobody will intimidate you. Are you moving a point of order, with regard to the manner in which the Chairperson is presenting the report? Hon. Okumu Ringa, you are not listening. I am recalling your point of order, and I am therefore asking you to make yourself very clear. Are you raising a point of order on the basis of the manner in which the Chairperson was eloquently presenting her report or is your point of order on the issue of quorum? Can you clarify before I make my ruling?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, whatever I said was a pre-amble, but the issue at stake is that according to Rule 17 of our Rules of Procedure, the House lacks quorum to proceed with business. Is it in order for us to proceed in this manner? I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes. 

(The proceedings were suspended for 15 minutes)

(On resumption_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we do not have quorum, I will adjourn the House until tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.31 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27th April, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)
