Thursday, 21st April, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair)

The Council was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate all of you upon completing the CA elections very successfully. (Applause)  I also want to welcome the new hon. Members who recently joined the House.  I congratulate them upon their successful elections to the House. (Applause)  I am now welcoming you all to continue with our normal business.  I am back in big force.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

MR. SAM NJUBA Nominated Member):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Constituent Assembly Amendment Bill, 1994, be read a First Time.  

MOTION 

(Debate Continued)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira): Mr. Chairman, I would like to once more welcome you back to your Chair and to conduct business of the august House.  I would like to dwell just in a few areas of the report of the Public Accounts Committee, often time recommendations are made and we find that they are not either implemented or are always ignored.  

I would like to draw the attention of the House through you, Mr. Chairman, to page 226, where they are recommending that, no officer, this is 59(iv)), should be advanced more funds before accounting for the previous one and where it is to be given it would be in minimal figures.  

I was looking at the spending in the Prisons Department and I found that there was on page 191, where a total sum of Shs. 7,876,897 was spent outside the approval or without any directive from the accounting officer, and the reason given was that this was to cover up emergencies in the upcountry stations.  

But what amuses me most here is that when this fund is being approved for the emergencies and it is recede, the up-country that recede under the emergency taken too long to respond to the emergency.  They receive the money and then they do not even want to account for, and there are some recommendation here in the same page of that page 226 is that there have been administrative measures, administrative means should be applied to trace all the defaulters with outstanding advances.  Failure of which, use of CID should be applied.  

When you go back to the same page, that is page 191, Dr. Katala of the Prisons Department - Ministry of Internal Affairs, absconded with some funds and the recommendation was that such a fellow should be traced either by CID or whatever means possible.  But I may now content myself by saying that he might not have been traced.  It is a matter of absconding whether you have got any debt you ran away with it.  It does not end there, and I was also looking at Police, where an officer was given on page 189, some money was a Commander of a Training Wing possibly in Masindi.  Then this man dies, which is normal, but he is dead with money -(Laughter)- to the tune of Shs. 13 million.  I think it is an officer who died but his office did not die, and the recommendation, which is a plea from the accounting officer, is that this be considered - this Shs. 13 million be considered but dead.  

We can begin to see that we are trusting individuals - we are trusting people other than the offices that they own with the Public Fund so that it becomes very difficult because if you need this money we are dead, but if this money we are given for use in this station, what should have followed is that there should have been record left for the officer who is going to take over to follow and he therefore be answerable but as we see, it is considered maybe because this was the recommendation of the officer-in-charge to the Public Accounts Committee whose recommendation again they are now making which I find difficult to accept.

On page 228, I am afraid the Public Accounts committee over stepped its work when it said, which I do concur with them that the animals which we have bought from Tanzania cost a lot more than if they were bought from any other place.  In their recommendation, they are recommending that maybe when further advices are made for the same, this should go for possessing bulls or oxen for work in Soroti District.  I do not know what philosophy they used.  The animals we had rustled and are being rustled from Kumi, from Soroti, from Lira, from Pallisa.  So, for them to make that political recommendation -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House that there is no more cattle-rustling going on around the bordering districts of Karamoja.

AN. HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member that what we are considering then was the restocking the exercise for Soroti.  That was what was in the Papers of Government.  So, we were handling Soroti District as per what was in the Auditor General’s Report.  

RE. ONGORA ATWAI:  I wish it were recorded so.  Because the word ‘particularly’ in Soroti District means there were some other districts also under consideration.  But with all this, I would like to say that the last recommendation that I want to re-emphasise is the co-ownership of vehicles.  To me, it seems these hon. Ministers were rewarded for having been appointed Ministers because I have never seen the majority of them use the co-ownership vehicle.  Each time I see them, I see them in either UC, UB or Project vehicles.  To co-own means - I also have a say in the same way that you may have a say.  So, if Government wants these vehicles for use, they should be used by Government as opposed to, thus, grounding it waiting for when you can retire and then thereafter use it.  I beg to report.

DR. BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to start by saying that I a bit disappointed because last week we in this House requested that Permanent Secretaries avail themselves in the Gallery or at Officer’s Desks there, when we are debating this Report.  But as of now, I do not see any Permanent Secretary around.  Last week there was also a big debate about the quality of accountancy we have in Government Service.  An impression was created in this House that our Public Service actually requires many accountants.  I wish to submit that we do not actually require accountancy, what we do require are good book-keepers.  Because when you look at Government Accounts, it is just income and expenditure.  You do not have problems and with assets and liabilities and what have you.  This can be handled by a book-keeper.  We require a few accountants in the Ministry of Finance Headquarters and Bank of Uganda.  Now, what we are requesting the Minister was, in our Public Accounts Committee, that he recruits trained book-keepers, that he recruits trainable material as accounts assistants not S.4 failures who are impossible to train.

Throughout the reports, one is struck by the irresponsibility of our Accounting Officers as far as their duties are concerned.  In fact, if the accounting officers were doing their work, Public Accounts Committee would have no job because the Auditor General publishes his Auditor General’s Report. If there is internal correspondence, he sends the queries to these Permanent Secretaries.  When they refuse to reply to them, then he produces them in the Auditor General’s Report, and even after then, a Permanent Secretary still has a chance to clear with the Auditor General before he comes to the Public Accounts Committee.  But these people neglect even the Auditor General’s Report, they neglect the earlier queries, and they come to the Public Accounts Committee prepared to answer the queries, which have been outstanding for years.  

For example, now we are handling the1989/90 Financial Year.  But a Permanent Secretary will today, come to us totally un-prepared, as happened yesterday with the Ministry of Defence; it is in the Papers.  So, unless this irresponsibility of Accounting Officers is seriously tackled, I do not see an end to the problem of Financial irresponsibility and financial irregularities i Government.  

I would, therefore, like to suggest that is might be a good idea to consider removing the permanency of Permanent Secretaries.  Let Permanent Secretaries be appointed on short contracts, and let that contract be renewed on good performance, and if that one on contract fails to perform, then he should be dismissed immediately and replaced.  

Throughout the PAC meetings, we have also noted what I would call a general attitude of the Uganda Public Servant.  The Uganda Public Servant has an attitude which I would define as a person - he has that attitude that makes him feel or and behave as if this country or the people of this country owe him a living, and because of that attitude, and because they wish to live like the oil sheikhs, like the old Mahajas of India in this poor Uganda; this attitude forces virtually a Public Servant who gets in the position where he handled public funds, to embezzle them.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the rest of the House, that what the hon. Member is suggesting may not be enough in itself.  I have seen the NRM coming in and we now have some peace in the country.  I would urge the NRM to go out and get some of these thieves in the form of accounting officers into the Courts of Law.  That would be the only solution of going far to get these people.  But when they steal, they steal in millions of shillings and then they go on bribing everybody in the system as a result cases really do not come up in Court of Law.  

So, I want to inform the hon. Member that, that is not the only situation.  But I urge our Government, NRM, as one of the Ten Points, of fighting corruption, to come out in strong way and the people of this country will continue to support NRM over that point.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Thank you, for your information.  I was continuing to say that the Public is also to blame because the public does scone corruption.  We have had instances where, for example, somebody, an Education Officer was dismissed from Mukono after embezzling public funds and when we were looking for him, he turned up as an elected RCV Secretary for Education and Mobilisation.  So, it would appear that the public encourages or also that the attitude of the public encourages these people to embezzle funds since when they become rich they buy their way out and their village mates feel proud of them.  

I am, therefore, suggesting that time has come to review the educational system in this country.  Because it would appear that our educational system all along has been turning out just soft lifers who do not wish to do an honesty job for honest wages.  But definitely the results of a changed educational policy will take a long time.  

Meanwhile what government should do is to handle these embezzlers roughly.  I propose that we strengthen the investigation machinery, we strengthen the prosecution machinery and if we still continue to see the Courts of Law failing us, and then probably create some special courts to handle this cancer that is eating up our country.

The Chairman of the Public Accounts committee has highlighted the failings of the Treasury on page (8) of the report he recently read to this House.  Up to date, the Treasury is actually ill-mannered but we do not agree - I do not agree with those people who say that this country does not have the people to man that treasury.  Since we are restructuring the ministries and looking at the establishment and what have you, I think it is time that the establishment and the people holding the important jobs in the treasury were seriously looked at.

Finally, I wish also to comment on the way this country handles project funds.  We found out from our Public Accounts interviews that most Permanent Secretaries do not actually know what goes on as far as foreign funded projects are concerned.  All those millions of dollars we see in the capital budget every year are left in the hands of project experts with accounts in Commercial Banks and for sure, nobody knows the fate of that money.  

Frequently, the accounting officers themselves have confessed to us - like in the case of the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government, who told us that he does not know anything about the funds of the GDZ Feeder Road Maintenance Project and yet we always vote about 1,000,000,000/= every year for that project.  So, I feel concerned and would recommend that a new policy be worked out for management of these funds.  

Finally, I wish to request government they seriously look at the five reports produced by the Public Accounts Committee and effect the recommendations therein.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

BRIG. KYALIGONZA (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I welcome you back from your sick leave.  I would like also to add my observation regarding this report.  As you may note, a number of issues have been raised by hon. members in this House lamenting on the rate of corruption that it is taking place in our ministries and institutions.  

As you may realise the Public Accounts Committee is in itself lamenting on the corrupt accounting system especially in government.  Of course, the accounting system of the government is slightly different from the ordinary accounting but some of the obvious instructions which are given to the accounting officers are not adhered to, and at the same time, I sometimes get surprised by some hon. Members and especially the ministers, when they come to this House and start defending their own positions when they are sometimes criticised of failures in performance of their ministries.  The whole President of a country who is supposed to be naturally respected even when he makes a comment - there should be some follow-up but for instance he proposes that some Deputy Ministers should become the Chairmen of -(Interruption)

MR. ELYAU:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that it is in this country we appear as if we do not respect the Head of State.  For example, last month the President said in Gulu that cost sharing should be suspended in hospitals but if you told this to local people in an area like Soroti, they say, they will not even write.  You can imagine our people cannot listen to the Head of State. (Laughter)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  I thank you very much for that emphasis but, Mr. Chairman, it is very absurd really in as far as our Ministers are concerned when a Ministry or a department is blamed, the onus goes to the Minister who is supposed to be a manager of that Ministry, to prove that there is efficiency or inefficiency in that particular Ministry, but you find -(Interruption)

MR. NTIMBA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. member on the Floor that only last week - less than a week ago, when I was making my contribution on this debate, I also strongly suggested that Ministers should have their presence in this House - especially those whose Ministries there were adverse reports made by the Public Accounts Committee.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Naturally, you can see what is happening but, Mr. Chairman, it is not only in the ministries but even the Accounting Officers are equally to blame because if a Deputy Minister for instance is supposed to be the Chairman of the Financial Committee of that Ministry, the Permanent Secretaries sometimes participate in causing the Minister himself to fail because one of the ministers here the other day when he was contributing, he expressed it - he said, we were frustrated and I began to wonder who is the boss of the Ministry - is the Permanent Secretary or the Minister, if you start lamenting before this House that we were frustrated, that we were not able to perform, we are not able even to appoint the Chairmen of these Financial Committees, then we are also assisting these fellows to go on with their corruption and where there is liberalism in some of the management and Ministries and departments, you find no work is done.  

Then when it comes to job security, also corruption is encouraged.  Why am I talking of job security?  All these Permanent Secretaries and accounting officers, when they are before the Public Accounts Committee you find some people are permanently acting and these fellows when they act, they are not sure whether they are supposed to manage that office especially in the treasury.  All these Commissioners are acting and when it comes to that, you find they are encouraged to steal naturally because who knows tomorrow somebody else will be brought in.  

So, when it comes to that, hon. Didi here proposed that our laws should be improved by putting the onus on the culprit to prove this innocence but as you see and you know, our laws are very defective - when you bring that one some of these fellows who have the money especially when they have embezzled it, they are able to go around using our own laws and sometimes law firms to say this is an interference in my Human Rights because sometimes somebody may be against you and he says, you are a thing, you are arrested and if the onus is put on the culprit, then people will be victimised.  

Whereas this one might be correct but I feel sometimes it is necessary, because in the Public Accounts Committee where I am a member, we have been sometimes amazed as hon. Byaruhanga was putting it that some Members especially the Permanent Secretaries and their groups when they come - they appear before Public Accounts Committee - they present no case and when they present it, they are not prepared.  We talk of post-mortems, they are not actually active cases that we investigate and talk about.  We find we talk about 88,89.  A person who embezzled money sometimes has long left the Ministry and when he is required to appear or when we ask and propose to the Investigation Machinery to look for this person, they will always come back and say, Mr. Chairman, we have tried to look for the person but in vain and that also confuses us, especially we who are probing some of these cases.  

If a person can disappear in this country where we have got the now supposedly to be the most efficient Police Force, you will find it is very absurd really to fail to discover a person in this country as if he has gone say, in self exile (Economic Self-Exile)- but again hen we talk about the regulations, the Ministry of Public Service has put it that any Permanent Secretary who suspects his own official to have committed an offence, he is supposed to be suspended and the investigated but in our case here, sometimes they just transfer.  They transfer a person after embezzling so much money to another Ministry.  

As hon. Byaruhanga was putting it, some people when he is dismissed he will be given another job.  Sometimes a political job or becomes an RCV Chairman.  So, regarding that one you find, for instance, even our own investigation machinery is involved both in the embezzlement and encouraging the embezzlers because even if they arrested somebody and brought him to police, the following day the person is released on police bond and at the end of the day, the file disappears and they make a report, and always a police report is assumed final.  They will say, we have investigated and found no enough evidence and that is all.  So, this one is really making this country poorer and poorer by -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for us really to seriously debate this subject when the Accounting Officers including Ministers are not there or is it a matter of minimising this Parliament and hence the Public Accounts Committee reports are completely ignored.  This is a very serious matter and in the National interest.  Is it therefore, in order for us to continue talking about this subject because it is in the national interest, Mr. Chairman? (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Chairman is here, so we can continue as well.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform hon. Brig. Kyaligonza on two points that he has raised and which I thought would be of interest to him.  One, he was wondering whether the Ministers should continue to show frustration in front of us ministers are frustrated by their Permanent Secretaries, they told us.  This means that the Ministers have either - those Ministers who are frustrated, though there may be some who are very happy, but for those who have shown this frustration to the Public Account Committee, it shows that they have either read the law or if they have read the law, they have not understood it.  

The Constitution - I forget the Article - but I think it should be Article 19 or 25, one of those of 1967 - gives the power to Ministers to supervise their Ministries as far as money is concerned and the Permanent Secretaries have turned it round and interpreted their role as having more powers than the Ministers in supervising the funds.  So, ministers who show this embarrassment are not justified to stand before us or your Committee and talk about the embarrassment they face.  They are totally irresponsible for the failure in their office.  

The second bit is for us - this being the first time for this House when it opened to discuss Public Accounts Committee report openly.  This is why Ministers are not here, Permanent Secretaries are not here, because this is not part of our history.  We are just opening a new chapter and so people are not used that such a thing can ever happen.  

So, they think that it is not important but the point of fact, whether you lament, whether we cry, we pass Resolutions like the ones I have seen drawn by hon. Sibo and hon. Zack Kaheru, the point is that this is an eye opener to this House that, one, when we pass our budgets and when our budgets are being drawn had neglected one important area, namely the area of justice, of Police or investigation in this CID and of people who can assist the Public Accounts Committee, because we have never voted money to that sector and the amount of money we have been voting in the sector for lawyers, for justice people, for the Judiciary, for the police is not worth the jobs, in fact, this country is very lucky that we have not been robbed clean by embezzlers -(Interruption)- yes, the amount of money.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  I thank you very much for that long information, but as you may realise, Mr. Chairman, it is true the investigating machineries are not properly funded by Ministry of Finance, and you may find, for instance, the Public Accounts Committee, noted with concern that, for instance, the PAC squad which is the investigating machinery of Police, is only given Shs. 50,000 a month to run around and look for some of these embezzlers.  So, you can see Shs. 50,000/= when it involves going to Kisoro coming back and he makes a report, that he has not been able to find the culprit, and that is the end of the story.  

So, really, as hon. Karuhanga is putting it, is it our duty sometimes to facilitate some of these departments, which give useful services to the country, and regarding the embezzlement it is absurd when - we sometimes come with figures.  Sometimes ministries and their accounting officers are unable to account for some of these figures.  The amount becomes so colossal that we even sometimes feel ashamed to bring it before this House.  Some ministries talk of billions of money that is not accountable, and they give reasons that either they were in operation or rain, you know, spoilt some documents and so on.  All these are just flimsy excuses, which are of course being condoned by these fellows.  

Now, with that, I propose that the Public Accounts Committee which has done a very useful job to unearth some of these embezzlers and corrupt fellows in Ministries, they should also be encouraged by action.  Some of these recommendations should also be followed.  Ministries, especially the Judiciary and the Police, should be assisted and be properly funded so as to facilitate their services.  With that, I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SSEKITOLEKO (Bugangaizi County, Kibale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Allow me to use this chance, first of all to welcome you from your leave.  

My main concern in this report, is mainly on uncompleted projects.  The report mentions quite rightly so in this report about - it points out quite a number of projects, which have remained half way done.  For instance, it mentions projects like Kigumba co-operative College and so on.  But there are so many projects in this country, which have remained unfinished, and this tendency has cost quite a lot of money to this country.  

Even in the centre of the city, we still see these projects unfinished.  For instance, we have a house there - I think over 20 stories Post Office Building.  The building we need it; we have no office accommodation in this country, the building is in the centre of the city, it has been there for over, maybe 15 years it is unfinished.  Recently, the UEB embarked on a project in Kakumiro to provide electricity between Kakumiro and Mubende. The poles all rotted and a lot of money was wasted.  

Now, there is that disease and that danger of starting projects and not being finished.  I really think that we should really address this problem.  If we do not have enough money to start the project, then we should leave it.  First of all, it raises a lot of hopes in the people who are concerned with that project, that probably they are going to get a school, or they are going to get electricity, or they are going to get this, then the thing ends up there, and in some cases also, it kills the initiative of some people, because some people in some areas put up some money to put up these schools and when you see a government starting such a venture, they give up.  

My other problem is of course also on corruption.  This is a disease which has come in our society and in my view it is only of late, seriously, but, of course, it has a lot of connection with bad governments, an the whole thing seems is not only existing in only government Institutions as people say.  But this thing is in all institutions of our life.  You go to schools and you find there is a lot of corruption tendencies, you go to Churches, you will find all sorts of corruption -(Interjection)- I will save them okay.  

Now, there is corruption all around.  We have these problems; now where do we begin?  But I think we should begin, of course, with the Government Institutions to make sure that they are put in a right direction, to make sure that the people we employ dearly confirm to Government ethics.  But before we -(Interruption)-

MR. KASAIJA:  Point of information.  May I inform the Speaker holding the Floor through you, Mr. Chairman, and the House that, to fight corruption, it must start with we leaders, if we leaders are not clean, then corruption cannot be fought.  We must set an example, leaders must be corruption free, and we must be clean.  We must not use money to buy votes -(Laughter)- that is all, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SSEKITOLEKO:  That is your own observation.  But, Mr. Chairman, I think also the danger to this problem is accountability.  It is taking us too long to enforce accountability of certain projects or it is taking us too long, and that is where the danger is coming.  We have no people to fill up, we have to check and even if those people are there, do they have really stamina, do they stand the problems, do they do it?  You see, you find that you send an auditor to go and check a certain district, because it has embezzled money, the first thing he does there, he is an auditor he has gone to check and find out how the money was embezzled, he goes and starts meeting the person who embezzled money and asks him whether he still has some shillings. 7,000,000/= remaining and so on, and then the whole thing ends there.  You see!  And, in fact, a lot of these cases or people who have embezzled money, than say cases of murder and so on.  You can hear of cases of murder and leave it, but chase a case of people who embezzled money left and right and in the end you do not hear of its results, what has happened, he has pocketed a part of it.  So, I think there is that lack of seriousness among out society.  

So, before we tackle these problems, we should first start with the people who are concerned with accountability, and who is checking these people? Indeed an hon. Member rightly said with the leaders; we are checking our leadership.  Because unless we do that, we are going to remain with this problem, and I can assure you if this problem of corruption remains with us, this society is going to be very difficult to live in.  It will be very difficult to live in, because everybody will try to make the ends meet, whoever has a chance will try to be corrupt somewhere and then life will be very difficult for us.  That is why there is corruption in schools, that is why the school fees is too high, that is why the hospital bills are high, that is why we have cases of murder on the way.  Because, I think this is all accounts to corruption in our society.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to thank the Members of the Public Accounts Committee for the good work well done.  I thank you.  

MRS. JOYCE MPANGA (Women Representative, Mubende):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to welcome you back in that Chair.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.

MRS. JOYCE MPANGA:  He has been temporarily absent.  Mr. Chairman, while you were away, we would have started discussing this pack and last week, quite a lot of people were talking about professionalism as an answer quite often we discussed symptoms without looking at the causes, and I think we will not come to the solution until we know and until we handle the causes that bring about this corruption.  Quite a number of people suggested that we take people and professional accountants as a solution, I do not think it will be a solution because those professional accountants, maybe, even wiser than the unprofessional accountants and you will not be able to see what has happened until very much longer.  

It is a pity that PAC begins to discover these long after the event.  It would be a good thing that they were seen while somebody can take an action immediately.  Quite a lot of people said, we have these problems because we are picking O’Level, A’Level people, and they were suggesting we take professionals who are much higher, forgetting that O’Level, A’Level is a terminal education point in this country and we have quite a lot of people who still need these jobs.  In other countries they do take O’and A’Level school leavers but what they do not do, they do not just unleash them to accounts before they are trained.  What happens in this country you take somebody from University you expect he is already made material to go and start working without training.  You take somebody with A’Level after one week, he is writing cheques and nobody is supervising them.  

We lost track of supervision because (a) the PSs some of them do not have the training themselves, they started higher up and did not learn the low jobs.  Then there is nobody designated to look after the trainees and see that they do not make mistakes.  Some of them are mistakes which they make without knowing, others of course, i is because they are collaborating with people who are much higher than themselves, and because they are the lower fish, they get caught and the bigger one still stays in the system to continue stealing and corrupting whoever is coming.  

So, I suggest that we look seriously as we restructure the civil service.  Salary alone is not the answer.  They get very low salaries, the PSs maybe honestly looking for his money elsewhere while these boys are busy taking the money from the accounts section, and he does not have time to look there.  

Secondly, some of them do not even trust anybody to sign a cheque.  So, their big job becomes signing cheques day in, day out, especially, if it’s a very big Ministry.  I think if we try to look at training these people, supervision and inspection right at the source and the Auditor’s Department working as it used to be and training PSs rotating them around, I do not think we should only get professional accountants as accounting officers.  

If you take a well-educated person rotate him in many jobs before you promote him, you will find he will be able to manage your accounts much better than if he was only brought up in one line of accounts, and when we do take O’Level, A’Level and I hope we shall continue to take them because we shall get an outcry from parents here, that they want their boys and girls to get jobs.  When we do take them, we should teach them a thorough job, we should give them a good salary, we should look at the bigger fishes also which are stealing so that we root them out, then we shall hope for a better oriented civil service.  

But, I do not think it is good to look at only those people as thieves, because they are quite a number of civil servants who have done an honest job to this country and who get offended when people brand the whole lot of them as bad.  It is the weak leadership that we should look at also, because if the leaders are collaborating, if say, for example you are a Minister, Deputy Minister somebody higher up and you ask a favour from a young person to give you something that should not be given to you, then next time you do not have the moral stand to correct him.  

So, I think we should look everywhere, and the public is not exonerated either; the public exonerates people and glorifies people who have stolen from this country.  If somebody makes money quickly, they just say, ‘ah, omusajja oyo akoze esente,’ not looking at how he has made it, and that way, even when you look at people like the case that was quoted by my Friend up there, when somebody is discontinued as a DEO for embezzlement, he becomes RCV Secretary for something; that of glorifying embezzlement.  

We had a similar case at one time somebody DEO sent out for embezzlement he becomes back as a Representative in a Ministry of Education higher up being head of an Institution over which you do not even have power to tell him do not sit at the same table with us.  You know, it is this kind of embarrassment; there was somebody like a recent case where someone whose degree is still held by Makerere because of embezzlement, he comes through in a different form.  You know all that, he now becomes a CA Member without anybody raising any eyebrows.  It is the public also – it has to take its own blame, and I think we would like to appeal to government, but we would also like to appeal to everybody in Uganda, if we do not like this corruption, we should not indulge in it and we should not encourage it.  Thank you very much.

MR. MORO (Koboko County, Arua):  Mr. Chairman, I would like to join my Colleagues in welcoming you back and you sit in your Chair, as you could see most of us were very happy and clapping that shows a very good sign that you are a very good Chairman.  So, I would like to thank you for that.  

I would also like to thank you for congratulating us because of successful completing our CA elections.  I am now waiting from you to congratulate and condole - to send a letter of condolence to those who were unsuccessful -(Laughter and Interruption)

MRS. MPANGA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. speaker holding the Floor, that we do not need the condolences, but if he thinks so, he should give us ‘amabugo’. 

MR. MORO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank her for that information, but I still plead that some people must receive letters of condolence because they have spent so much - they have spent all their money buying food, traveling and at the end, they were unsuccessful, they are now lamenting, others have now avoided going home to their areas of elections -(Interruption)

MRS. OKER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Speaker through you that we do not need a letter of condolence, because Mr. Squito in the paper said, ‘you should declare CA every year, and also get free booze from these corrupt men.’  Thank you.

MR. MORO:  Okay, Mr. Chairman, I would now like to come to this point of embezzlement and corruption.  I think it is very, very unfortunate.  I was thinking that perhaps we should not really continue talking about this issue. Otherwise we shall also be embezzlers ourselves, and also corrupt. Because, as I see things happen, it is unfortunate.  It may be a sort of civilisation, and it may be a sort of culture; I do not know; because in the past, nobody talked about embezzlement and corruption; everybody was very, very serious at his work, and everybody was very clean, waiting for the little reward at the end of the month, even if it was - by then it was Shs. 100/= or Shs. 200/= you were still satisfied with that amount of money.  

Today, it is very unfortunate; everywhere, people are talking about embezzlement and then corruption, which is so rampant, that I do not know whether we shall really get a solution for it.  In the past, we had got our organs like the Police and the administrators, who used to put these things in order.  I can still remember when I was young seeing a Police Landover which was called Tenda. Once you see Tenda going towards your home, nobody is bothered at all.  

As a result, you will find that corruption is everywhere, and as stated by some of the earlier speakers, we still appeal to our leaders, the ministers, the permanent secretaries and all people with responsible posts, those who deal with money should really pull up their socks and you see that there is a daily supervision of the funds, beginning from top up to the last person.  Because this thing is now very rampant and very common that unless these people in position of accounting do their job efficiently nothing will be done.  You will find that all the money we are collecting, people are paying taxes, we have create Revenue Authority, even all these organs are in place, you find that the Government is poorer than it was.  You will find these administrations are very poor, no proper job is being carried on, and as one of our Members was saying, you will find some projects were started and up to now, they are standing as they were, they are not completed.  Why?  Because the money was diverted to other ways.  You will find then rehabilitation in certain areas has not been carried out properly because of these funds were also diverted.  You will find areas where there was a famine, money is advanced to assist buying food for certain areas at the end, you find that if the people for whom the food is meant did not even receive it.  

It is really very shameful that we are here and particularly me, when I stand, that in my own district we also have a Parliament, that is the RCV, they have got their own Parliament, they are supposed to collect money, and that money is supposed to be used for the development of the district, that if you go to Arua district to day, you find all the people working on these roads, administration roads have been stopped and it is now almost two years when these people are not working.  Some of them have not even been paid their salaries, and you will find that even chiefs, people who are working have not been paid; you will find that in the hospitals, there are almost empty, and these are nursing AIDS are being retired, as if people were not paying taxes.  In schools, you find the same thing, even money which is supposed to be given, the 30 per cent which is supposed to be given back to their divisions, even the 10 per cent which is supposed to be paid for developing schools, this one has not reached to the people, it is again being eaten by people who were elected by the people to represent them.  

So, you can see that we are really in a very big problem, and I think I do not know whether these organs like the IGG and the Police and all others, can really do anything it appears, they cannot do anything.  Even Auditors cannot do anything; it appears they are corrupt.  Now, perhaps this share should be another revolution since the Courts cannot do their jobs, since RCs cannot do the jobs, why do you not revert?  I do not want information now my time is over. (Laughter)  

So, since our systems have now failed completely, they are executing what they are not supposed to do.  Why do we not suggest something?  Because, I see in some certain areas where people have developed certain dangerous medicine, they poison people, after poisoning since the courts do not try them properly, that is Mob Justice which whether you like it or not, sometimes you find because of Mob Justice other people fear doing certain things like poisoning.  

Now, I thought that is not actually allowed, I thought that is one in a blue moon, and sometimes very good, so that can deter the other people from such actions. 


Otherwise, I am telling you we shall be wasting our time here, it will be even what the PAC Members are saying in their report, is exactly what the Auditor General had already given in his report.  These people are repeating the same thing, we are also sitting here repeating the same thing, if we do not take any concrete steps -(Interruption)

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that much as he has gone on to elaborate, corruption is all over the country. I am anxiously waiting to hear from him, what does he think?  Why is there such massive corruption?  Because, unless we can define the course, mass executions or whatever you are advocating will not give us the results, I think we must find the cure - we are trying to treat a symptom, but we must find the actual disease why is there this corruption.

MR. MORO:  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, corruption starts right here in this House, why do I say that?  It is because, we pass laws which we know are not going to be implemented we as leaders of this country.  A case in point is this last CA elections, we are the ones who were giving out salt, sugar and nobody was doing anything, you could not take the Minister to court of law.  So, may I inform everybody that unless we look at our morals as leaders, this country of ours is in very big problem, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MORO:  Mr. Chairman, I thank him very much for that information, that is why I said even if we talk here, because we are almost repeating the same thing, which was said or debated by our Committee of PAC, I was saying exactly what the Auditor’s General’s report stated, nothing was done; and now the Members are re-enforcing it, and I think you can see from what he has said those people who dished more salt and more meat passed.  Most of them passed, so the poor ones who did not pass anything failed.  

So, while winding up, I was saying that our systems have failed, could we also try another system?  I was thinking that as somebody was saying, we do not need accountants, we need book-keepers, but I was thinking that we still need accountants and book-keepers.  I would suggest that since our system has failed and since all the Ugandans have failed, I was suggesting that we bring some of our friends, the Chinese whom people fear, because when the Chinese worked on our road, people fear to steal things, because they say, the Chinese have their magic to see through.  So, I am sure if the Chinese - if you could employ some Chinese to amend our account and to examine this, I am sure corruption could be stopped, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

MR. AKURE (Jie County, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have talked about corruption for quite a long time.  I would like to quote one example about civil servants we are talking about.  One time in 1990, I was on my official duties upcountry in the districts of Iganga, Jinja, Kamuli, Tororo and Mbale.  There came a young chap in the Ministry of Cooperatives - by then I was a Deputy Minister at that time, and he was paying out Cooperative Officers, and yet the policy in the Ministry was that the officers should come to the Ministry and collect their cheques.  

Now, when I was in Jinja, the boy was very busy dishing out cheques, and I went to Iganga the following day, and found the same man there. In Kamuli the same, then finally, I met him in Mbale and asked him what he was doing there?  The man said I am paying Cooperative Officers.  How?  The policy is they come and collect their cheques.  Now, on returning to the Ministry I called the PS, Mr. Ruteega by then, I said, I found one of your chaps was paying out salaries of the DCOs, and he had cheques amounting to Shs. 3.5 million; the man had got signatories of the PS and that of the Chief Accountant, me, I thought they knew why this man was moving out.  

Eventually, this man returned, and he was called to the office of the PS who asked him how he got all these cheques, and the man said, well, he got the balances from the Ministry.  Then this man was taken to CPS, put in cells, after about a week, I saw this man being released.  I started wondering; this is a thief who had stolen the money and he has been released on bail. 

I find these laws we are talking about are not helping us, we are just debating on these laws and passing them for no reason.  If a man was caught red-handed and admitted that he did it, he forged the signatures of all these authorities and he is left free, what are we talking about?  I do not see the logic really.  The laws must be implemented, or we are wasting time here, saying corruption, corruption, and in most cases we have left Permanent Secretaries; there are these small men also in between there who are doing a lot of this embezzlement; of course, now if they collaborate with their bosses, the system continues.  

Now, when NRM came to power, in its Ten-Point Programme, it was to deal with corruption once and for all.  I have waited from all that time nothing has been done, people have continued looking, people have continued embezzling government funds, no action is being taken.  Now, I do not know where we are driving at.  What will reduce this corruption?  I believe even -(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the speaker that not so long ago, His Excellency the president promised that sooner or later, he will go to the bush again to fight corruption, maybe that is the time when those were used to go into the bush with him will join him and start fighting corruption seriously.

MR. AKURE:  Mr. Chairman, I really fail to understand all these sorts of corruption -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House hon. Akure that, when he talks about the PAC Motion, we should really address ourselves, why there as inefficiencies indicated by the PAC that is to say, the funds passed by this hon. House are not utilized expressly in respect for what this hon. House passes that money for the government to utilize, for what?  For increasing rural welfare - or the welfare of the nation.  

So, when we talk about corruption, corruption - when we passed in 1991, the Leadership Code which was chosen by the Government according to its best knowledge, to put in pigeon hole - to put it in the Limbo, that there was no machinery with which to enforce the Leadership Code passed by this hon. House.  Now, secondly, understanding there is the 1987 Statute or Act 8 of 1970, governing 1980 for 1970, Act 8 in our laws of Uganda, the lawyers are there the Attorney General is there for us to ensure that the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Justice effectively sees that these laws for the best of the nation for the common welfare of the nation are totally enforced!  Nobody is above the law; when this hon. House makes the law, it is in total for totality of Justice and goodness of this country.  Because the laws are not enforced how, ‘mwana wani’, that is - where they got ‘mwana wani’. 

Secondly, the political system, third, nepotism, unless we put people on jobs by merit, yes, the hon. Attorney General is laughing at it, is a very serious matter.  The laws must be there to ensure and laws enforced and this government - inefficiency.  Where there is no law, we have no freedom.

MR. AKURE:  Thank you for the information, hon. Members.  Mr. Chairman, me, I see two ways, we have approved a budget for every Ministry here, now when are approved the Budgets you find most of the money goes to these projects and this is where a lot of money is getting lost.  The money gets lost from these projects because now people take advantage of now utilizing that money for their personal gain, at the end of the day, you will find that these projects are not completed.  They are never complete.  You will find a lot of money has gone there -(Interruption)

MR. GWAIVU:  Point of information.  The hon. Member holding the Floor has raised a very important point, in fact, most budgets over three years, there is a project in Kigumba of rehabilitating the town water supply, it has time and again appeared in our budgets every year, it is now the third year running this project not an inch has even been rehabilitated.  Money is always diverted and it cannot be followed properly, such things really rented the development and people remained with a lot of suspicion and they loose confidence in government.

MR. AKURE:  Not only in this respect where the money gets lost, also in some of these institutions you will find of money get lost each time.  If I can quote something, which I read on the press sometime, the Islamic University in Mbale, somebody donated some money for constructing the mosque.  Okay, the mosque was built, now when time came for the owner of this money to come and commission the mosques, he told those gentlemen, I think the money I gave is not worth this building and I think the man went just back he refused to commission the mosque. 

So, there is corruption in every place even now down in the village.  You hear Bishops quarrelling about administration in the churches, even now upcountry, there is a lot of corruption there but we are talking of Permanent Secretaries and ministries.  You go down to the districts, and you find there is a lot of corruption.  Now, some of this money could be helping to buy food for the dying Ugandans.  In few years in my district, I have just been communicating with my RC V.  He sent me a message of having lost 359 people who have died of hunger in Koboko sub-district.  

Now, if this money was mobilized, it would be enough to buy food for the starving Karimojong and other people in Lira, Luwero, Pallisa and where.  But the money is disappearing within individual and yet we have money; people say, the country is poor but where do we get this money which is being stolen if the country is poor?

Two, I think government should see how these civil servants can be paid.  Perhaps if they are paid well, they may reduce the rate of corruption.  This small money they get, in fact, it cannot pay fees in secondary school.  The PTA is too high and I think the Minister of Education should divide this method.  This PTA is causing a lot of problems to the poor parents in the village.  The PTA is too high, some schools there you pay 150,000/- but the poor person in the village where does he get that money?  It means, therefore, the children of the rich will be educated but of the poor they will never go to school.  

We have actually seen all these problems from time to time and I do not know how we shall get rid of corruption, what method can we deploy or revise in order to get rid of this embezzlement? (Interruption)

MR. GWAIVU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much and I wish to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  We may stay here hours and hours talking about corruption.  I think I became tempted to think that we can talk about but none of us is serious enough to fight corruption because, you remember it was last year, we were promised by no other than the President to have a special session on finding the causes of corruption so that corruption could be fought.  That thing came on and now this is April; it was last year.  Now, if we are not serious ourselves about fighting corruption, we can waste taxpayers’ money here hours and hours talking about corruption and corruption will never end.

Lastly, I want to remind the hon. Member on the Floor that, there is a Biblical story about the woman who was caught in adultery -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, proceed please.

MR. AKURE:  Mr. Chairman, finally I would like to request the office of the Auditor General to ensure that there people who go down to districts they read to the books, a lot of money is being embezzled there and they are only concentrating to these Ministers not knowing too much gets lost down in the districts because they are actually supposed to move so that they see what is happening in every place, not only concentrating themselves here in Kampala and yet we make a lot of complaint daily.  What do we do with this?  I do not know, and I would say that that office of the Auditor General should go down to the grassroots so that they keep on checking these fellows in up-country.  If it is here only, the money will continue getting lost; taxes collected are eaten by a few individuals.  

Imagine now in my district, for the last six years, people are not paid.  Now, one time when the President came to Kotido he asked if we could divide the statistics.  We collected the data and we found that it was Shs.117 million which was to be paid to Kotido District Administration workers.  Up to now, these people are starving, and some of them have absconded the jobs because there is nothing to eat. So, I think government must find the solution to stop this.  If not, we shall continue, the corruption will be on and on until sometime to come.  I do not know.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, would it not be in order for the Clerk to ring the bell so that hon. Members who might be in the lobbies come back so that a quorum is raised, especially at a time when we are still debating a very important national issue?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, ring the bell.  Continue please.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO (Nominated Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On behalf of my Committee, I wish to thank all the Members of this House who have contributed.  While thanking them, I wish to make the following observations, one, the Secretariat of this Committee, officially communicated to all accounting officers to be present and I am disappointed that none has turned up because actually this report, all the reports were concerning the spending of public funds by the accounting officers. (Interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that the accounting officers responded to his request to come here.  The day they came here, we did not debate and we debated something completely different.  They were not reminded to come here today. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA:  Well, I thank the Member for the information but since he is not one of the accounting officers, he could not get the remind but I am sure they were reminded.

Likewise, when we are debating the spending of public funds, I think every Minister would be interested and they would have been here but then when we see that they are few who have managed to come up.  As a Chairman of this Committee I get disappointed. (Interruption)

MR. SIBO:  Point of information. I want to inform the hon. member on the Floor that in fact, he should not be agonizing over the absence of the Ministers, it is not the first time and it is not going to be the last time.  What I get worried about is that most of them or a number of them have actually fought the CA race and have won and they are going to the CA and I do not know how they will be able to handle their work and the CA.  If they continue like this, I believe they will not have done a good service to their electorate.  If on the other hand they go there and they successfully debate the Constitution, we shall consider that they have had the contempt of this House.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.  

MR. MWANDHA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, in view of the very serious observations that have been made by no other than our own Chairman of the PAC regarding the absence, in spite of reminder of the Accounting Officers and regarding of the Cabinet Ministers and considering the very serious observations that have been made in the Public Accounts Report are we serious as a House and are we in order to go ahead and let the Chairman wind up on this debate and even this House adopt the report when the people who should be listening to the Chairman are not right in this House, in spite of the fact that they knew and they should have been here?  Is it in order for us to continue in this way and this House should be given the respect it deserves if we continue like this, is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for us to continue?

THE CHAIRMAN:  The report is for the House and not for the Minister alone, therefore, we can go ahead.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to use this opportunity to inform hon. members in this House that this Paper is for the NRC Members and not for just Ministers.  A few minutes ago, you ordered that a bell be rung, that means even hon. Members of this House who are not Ministers were not present.

Secondly, last February I came here to present the White Paper on Education.  I was present and hon. Dr. Tiberondwa my brother-in-law was also present -(Laughter)- but we failed to raise a quorum as Members of this House.

Thirdly, this House resolved to put Members of NRC on parastatal boards with the view to curbing corruption.  The information available is that the situation is not any better.  My own information here, Sir, is that we should take this matter as a collective national responsibility and come forward with proposals as to how to curb it.  First of all to find the causes and the magnitude but statements in general terms and always heaping blames on ministers when we ourselves have just arrived in the House after an absence of three weeks, will not solve our problems.  And in government there is where they call collective responsibility.  When I am here and I take minutes I can assure you that I will inform all my Colleagues, we are quite a mouthful here on what is taking place.  The main point here is not to look for scapegoats but also to take our own responsibility and I think, if I may conclude what hon. Gwaivu was saying, Jesus asked, ‘he who has never done it, throw a stone.’  

I think, let us first really take this matter collectively; this is my information to the House, rather than shifting blame and always blaming ministers.  We won with the confidence of the population and obviously the other Member of this House who have been also elected to the CA.  I do not know how they perform the two duties and also Members of this House who are ministers, some are not ministers who run, so I think really this business is always trying to swift blame to ministers is escapist and should be really improved upon.  Thank you Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I accept your ruling but I want to put it on record that while debating such reports the Auditor General should have been present because the Auditor General is answerable to this House.  Likewise, he was invited, I do not see him here maybe he will get the communication later.

I am grateful that at long last, the five reports have been debated but I wish to draw the attention of this House that it is not only the reports of the Public Accounts Committee which have been tabled and have taken long.  We had a Select Committee which broke into the Bank Palibas, I understand the report came out and it has been somewhere in one of these shelves, that the Bank Palibas report has re-surfaced in the Public Accounts in the Auditor General’s accounts which were currently considering but then we cannot move.  We have been requested by the accounting officers that we should consider that Bank Palibas report here because all the answers are there but the queries are still with us.  I think we shall avail ourselves time to consider that report as well.  Because we spent a lot of money and I understand the members of Committee traveled all over Europe looking for that information.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, while I do appreciate the limitations by the Chairman of Public Accounts Committee, I would like to remind him and to remind this House that there are more important documents, which have never been implemented.  The Leadership Code was passed and signed by the President in April last year and it has never been implemented and I think to me that is probably the biggest route of our corruption which the Leadership Code Statute was intended to cure.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, may be the spirit in which I will inform, through you to the Mover may be that we even in the House learnt that the PAC did not seriously limit essential imperative to sign unanimously documentarily its report that they were serious enough as to arouse the intellectuals and the House how serious they were on this matter for in a paper dated the 14th October 1993, which is tabled before this House now being debated upon, only two - according to mine here - that is the Chairman, the Mover and hon. John Ntimba signed.  The rest of them - they were eight of them, the rest of them blank and this is shame because -(Laughter and Interjection)- yes, because it is said in the NRM unless you have a self intellectual collective alignment or collecting yourself you get nowhere.  So, in this respect, this House consisting of intellectuals, the cream of the brains in Uganda.  There is a need to sign a report of this august House would be done on such a Committee. 

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform hon. Obwangor and the House that we are considering, these are the reports not that one.  You see, we had five reports, which were tabled and duly signed.  This is my own speech to the House.  Now, I think with that long standing here, you would have differentiated the reports; the reports we are referring to were for 1986/87, 1987/88; 1988/89 and the Special Audit Reports, which we tabled and are duly signed.  If you did not read them, it is very unfortunate.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Now, with all due respect these are addressed to the House, to us here and purportedly to bluff us, the House that is intellectual and it is common wisdom.  So, if it is tabled to the House that is why I requested in all due respect to the House that they should not have done that, the thing is public.  So -(Interruption)

MR. SERUNJOGI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, even this book itself is not signed; you can see on the last sheet where there are recommendations, it is not signed.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Wasswa Nkalubo please wind up.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I think most Members have contributed the Members of the Committee and none of them has expressed abstention or disowned these reports.  This Committee and the Members have highlighted the shortcomings in the way we have handled the public funds.  The Committee has come out with recommendations.  One, it has recommended that all government departments and Ministries should have qualified accountants.  Some Members have said if it is necessary you may have a book-keeper but hon. Members, we are approving billions and billions of shillings.  If you have a book-keeper in a Ministry, what are you going to have in a district where you are decentralising?  Maybe you would say a cashier would be enough.  

I request this House to accept that recommendation that we have qualified accountants for the Ministry otherwise what is the purpose of recruiting, training accountants if a book-keeper can do the same job?

This Committee has recommended to the House that we separate and have an Internal Audit system with internal auditors who are directly answerable to the Secretary to the Treasury instead of having what we call examining officers.  I think this House will accept that recommendation.

The same Committee has recommended that where we have units, which generate funds, they should be well-funded so that they can stand on their own.  I think this House has no objection.  Then, it was the observation of this Committee that some of these auditors who are attached to ministries over stay and in turn, they become resident auditors so that they are no longer auditors but they are part and parcel of the ministries.  It was recommended that they should be rotated, say, they should stay in a Ministry for a maximum of two years, that they do not become part and parcel of a system of corruption in that Ministry.  That matter has been brought to the attention of the Auditor General and there has been a shift, there was some transfers at the beginning of this financial year that some of these auditors have been shifted to other ministries and I think this would be enforced.

Another point which came to the attention of the Committee that has been drawn up, is this question of tenders.  This Committee has recommended that where a person wins a tender but then before he can implement it, he comes out for revision that tender should be re-tendered because in most cases some people underbid, they get inside information and quote others and soon before even they start, they say because of the inflation, they revise upwards and we have seen that such revisions are higher that the highest bidders so it has been recommended that in such a case where the revision is higher than the highest bidder, the work should be re-tendered.  

We have seen also that we have cases where the government has entered into contract without the knowledge of the Attorney General.  It is recommended by this Committee that all contracts with big sums of money should be rendered to the Attorney General, proper contracts drawn up especially with these external loans and big internal contracts not only for the Government ministries even for local governments because it becomes time when they call upon the Attorney General to defend such contracts once they flop, when he does not have any data at all.  So, this Committee recommends it and we are requesting this House that you endorse that recommendation that all contracts should have the blessing or should be drawn by the Attorney General but not the individual ministries.

It has been observed that most of these suppliers who deal with the Ministries are just brief case men and some time they are advanced money to disappear in thin air.  When you ask the Accounting Officer what happened, he says, ‘well, I cannot trace the man.’  From now onwards it is recommended that only well established business institutions should deal with the government not brief case men who come in and disappear and cannot be traced.

There was a question that came up.  Formerly, the Auditor General was auditing the Bank of Uganda, but recently it was found out that the Bank of Uganda can choose who should audit it because of some misunderstanding.  Having gone through the documents, this Committee recommended to this House that the auditing of the Bank of Uganda should be done by the Auditor General so that we are very sure of how much has come in, how much is outstanding, otherwise, these auditors, I do not underrate them, the private auditors can only give you a report which you want so long as you pay them off.  

It was further recommended, and we saw as a Committee that there is a habit of transferring officers without making them make proper handing over reports.  We have seen where officers are retrenched without accounting for public funds.  This Committee recommended it to this House that before any officer is retrenched, proper handing over should be done.  If he has anything due to the country, we should deduct whatever he owes us so that he can go with whatever is left as his package.

Another problem which was found by the Committee was that the Government is importing so many different brands of vehicles in the country which you find - you find today you find a Sunday, another day you will find another one from Yugoslavia and some of these spares are missing.  It is high time that we recommend to the ministries that we standardise our importation of vehicles so that when we are importing spears, we know where to repair such vehicles.  You see the excuse we get is that some of these are donations but some of these donations in the long run prove very expensive because we have to look for spares from the same suppliers and the spares may be more expensive than the original cost of the gift.

This Committee recommends to the full House that we look at the laws regarding the embezzlement.  I remember the Attorney General had come out with a draft Bill whereby it was recommended that if somebody embezzled any thing above Shs.1 million, he should not just go scot-free like the law we passed regarding these cheques, he should go to the High Court to get a bail.  Now, I do not know what he feared, that Draft Bill has never been tabled here, and it is now a year.  I think he will have the guts that he can bring that Draft Bill and we debate it because we think that unless we can tighten our belts, there is nowhere we shall go because those now embezzling, the amount being embezzled is not about Shs. 5 or 10 million, it is now around Shs. 100 million.  So, they know how they can go about the whole thing.

The Committee further recommended that where there is a case, a genuine case of embezzlement, the Government should take steps to recover this money from the embezzlers because some of these people have tangible assets where we can fall back.  The other point which was raised in this report has been that this monopoly given to Transocean to clear government property.  I think it is high time we encouraged all other clearing agents.  When we went to Transocean, we found a lot of items, commodities belonging to the government which have over-stayed there and Transocean, because of that monopoly has used that attitude of saying, what can the government do?  Now, in order not to hold all other ministries at a ransom, it is recommended that we liberalise, to let other clearing agents to come in and participate in the clearance of government imports so that Transocean competes like any other company.

We looked at other issues, the Members have the copies of this report, they have the copies of 1986/87; 1987/88; 1988/89 reports and they have Special Audit Reports done by the Auditor General for the Teaching Service Commission and then for the DANIDA Funds which had been granted to the Constitutional Commission, these reports were tabled.  Now, I move that these reports be adopted an then the recommendations implemented by the Government.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to).

(Reports adopted).

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Resolution has been passed and with that, we have come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.


(The Council rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 26th April, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

