Tuesday, 23rd April 1996.

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliamentary House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON DISCIPLINE AND MEMBERS’ WELFARE (Mr Ssekandi): Madam Chairperson, permit me, as we had earlier on discussed and agreed upon to make a small statement to the hon. NRC Members regarding the chronic lack of quorum in this august House which is hitherto denying us the opportunity to handle items of national importance.  Madam Chairperson the time that hon. Members have been together here has given those of us, Members of the Committee of Discipline the opportunity to interact with them and at certain times to warn or take disciplinary measures.  My interest of making this statement today is due to the unbecoming chronic lack of quorum.  Part of our terms of reference Rule 71(b), sub-Rule 1, requires that we consider any matter of discipline refer to it by the Chairman of the Council as you did so this noon time and report its finding to the Council.  May I, through you, Madam Chairperson, report that the Committee feels embarrassed by persistent lack of quorum forcing you to adjourn proceedings sometimes by 30 minutes?  This, Madam Chairperson, tantamount to gross negligence by those of us who are sustained on the taxpayers’ meagre resources.  

We are elected, Madam Chairperson, to come to Kampala, to register our presence and deliberate on pertinent issues affecting our nation and to stay in the House until the end of the day’s work.  It pains hon. Members of the Committee of Discipline to see some hon. Members come in at five minutes to 5.00 p.m., register their attendance, come in and sit for the remaining three minutes and leave with the same package as those who reported promptly.  This, Madam Chairperson, is outrageous and is a near criminal act. 

Our sub-Rule 3, is very clear.  It states that where a Member is unable to attend, he shall inform the Chairman in writing.  Madam Chairperson, I am sorry to report that not many hon. Members have taken this option to save hon. Getruda Njuba now hospitalised, and yet as I talk now, there are those who have absconded or have deserted their responsibilities that is entrusted to them by the electorates by not attending all the meetings.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of order.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor to allege that only one Member in this august House has complied with Rule of informing the Chair when they are going to be absent, when many of us have done so in writing to the Chairperson when other duties have called.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: As of this week I only have the notice from Mrs Njuba.  So, he is in order.

MR SSEKANDI: Paradoxically, some of these, who do not attend are the same people, Madam Chairperson, who are seeking for re-election to this august House to continue denying the electorates their representation.  It is more lamentable that hon. Ministers who by Rule, are to attend Council meetings, many of them rarely do so.  The Rule requires that where a Minister is not able to attend and his State Minister is out, he should request another Minister to represent that Ministry’s interest in the Council Meetings.  The purpose of this Statement, Madam Chairperson, is to reprimand hon. Members to be prompt and transact business with seriousness that this business may require of them. If they are to avoid being blacklisted and called upon to account for their absence in this Council which the Committee is in the process of doing so.  I beg to warn. 
 
MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, whilst I would like to associate myself with the sentiments expressed by the hon. Member, I would like to have it again on record that there are two reasons.  Madam Chairperson, one of the reasons for the lack of quorum is that unlike all other Parliament, I mean this is not the first Parliament in world.  There are Parliaments which we have studies; where we learnt Parliamentary procedures.  Madam Chairperson, we have picked our quorum abnormally high.  Madam Chairperson, to be more precise, in the House of Commons of 659 Members of Parliament, the quorum is 20, but I understand it has now been moved to 40.  The quorum in the House of Lords is five.  Now if we have put the quorum so high and we wait - those of us who in the Constituent Assembly went to the extent of constitutionalising such absurd provision.  Really that one is ridiculous, you cannot put quorum for Parliament because if it is not there, you can change from time to time.  

So, Madam Chairperson, I am saying that if, when we should have a quorum, say tomorrow in the view of the fact that many Members are going out.  Madam Chairperson, in view of this undeniable, but unfortunate fact of our political lies, would it really not be in order for this House to sit when there is a quorum and amend the Rule which requires our quorum to be 90 or whatever, and bring it within a reasonable time so that those of us who still feel our responsibility to our electorates when we come here to attend are not frustrated by the absence by those who feel they should be either in their Constituencies or in the pavilion or in the tent.  Thank you very much.

MR ELYAU: Madam Chairperson, I also feel disturbed mostly because in, unlike other Parliament I have seen although I was not here to sit as a Member of Parliament, this House should be having a system where there is a Leader of Government Business who makes sure that things are done properly.  But already you see Government is a failure.  How can you accuse Members when there is no Government at all in the Benches?  This is one weakness because this is a Parliament without two sides.  So, I think some second thought should be done so that we correct and do not spoil our name.  Otherwise, Madam Chairperson, we are responsible to our people.  We should not be taken as class boys. So, I am urging Members that let us be responsible to our Constituencies.  Thank you.

MOTION

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Kavuma): Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, when we adjourned last time, I had presented to this House substantially matters relating to the Rules and Forms for which the approval of this hon. House is required in accordance with the Constitution and the Electoral Laws.  

Madam Chairperson, I had informed hon. Members and you, Madam Chairperson, that although the document looked bulky, matters contained therein were very simple, usual and familiar to all of us who have been legislating for this country for years that we have been in this hon. House.  This, Madam Chairperson, was because a lot of what should have constituted Rules were embodied in the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Statute 1996 which was passed by this hon. House, not very, very long ago.  Madam Chairperson, as Members must have discovered, maybe the only set of Rules that required prior study by the hon. Members were those included in the Annexure dealing with special interest groups, spelling out the regulations for their elections.  Madam Chairperson, Statutory Instrument on the document I circulated was simple and was only numerating the areas of legal authority under which the regulations and forms are being proposed. The next was a simple and usual very familiar oath of office to be taken by a Member of the Electoral Commission.  The next was a nomination Paper which is not new to many of us since the bigger part of it was used during the CA elections.  

The next Madam Chairperson and hon. Members was a simple form of appointment of official agents of candidates which, as indicated had been prepared in accordance with the appropriate Laws governing the area.  

Next, Madam Chairperson, was the statement under oath by person to be nominated as a Parliamentary candidate.  Again this is strictly based on Provisions in the Constitution and the Electoral Law.  There was nothing substantially new.  It is only intended to show that a proposing candidate or aspiring candidate complies with the requirements of our Constitution and the Law.  The bit about consent to nomination as a candidate, which is on Page 7, again, Madam Chairperson is a requirement of our Law and it must therefore be completed and executed by the aspiring candidate.

Next was the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Statute 1996, where we deal with an oath taken by a person who comes to cast his vote but finds that his or her name and number have already been used by some other person, either through an error.  The purpose was that since the Constitution and our Law gives a right to every person on the voter’s register to vote, it would be unfair for a person who comes and finds that his name has been used by some other person without his or her knowledge or consent to be turned aware from the polling centre and be denied the opportunity to exercise his constitutional right.

So, this form will assist in that this person will, after satisfying the election officers as to his identity will be allowed to cast his vote.  But further still, if he gave false information, or if it was found that he had a hand in causing the situation which is now pretending to cure, then this oath will work against him and the state through its criminal Law can bring him to book for punishment.  That is the sole purpose and it is an important purpose in this entire propose.  

Madam Chairperson, the next one was the proxy authority to vote -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I wish to seek clarification from the hon. Minister on two important points while supporting his Motion.

First if someone comes along and finds that his or her name has been used and they allow to vote, at the end of voting, all the votes including the one who pretended to be that person to be counted and what are the consequences of that?  At the end you are counting all those votes including that of the person who was sworn in.  At the end, what is the totality of the votes from that polling station?

The second question is that as far as I know presiding officers at the polling stations do not have the power to administer oaths.  So, who will administer the oath for this person who has come and said his or her name had been used?  If the Minister could clarify those two points, Madam Chairperson.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I would like the Minister to clarify whether the total votes as per polling station would amount to the total numbers of voters.  For instance, in my own polling station we are 636 people.  Now, if they total all the votes for all the candidates and those who will have not voted, will the total in the end be 636 or not?  In my area they are saying that this is one of the ways to get the elections rigged, and if you compare the March 1994, total number of voters and the current one, you find that there is a million votes nearly included.  So, how will that be rectified in order to arrive the total numbers of people who are registered to be 636?

MR KAVUMA: Madam Chairperson, I thank the hon. Members for raising these questions for clarification.  Hon. Prof. Kanyeihamba is asking about what would be the effect of this vote cast, maybe in error fraudulently.  

This situation is going to be forming part of the entire electoral exercise, and as Members will recall, a Report in the Law - a mechanism to resolve problems that come to surface at all these stages including at voting.  So, if there is an anomaly, the Law should be invoked, the candidates’ agents will be there, everybody concerned will be there and then if the matter can be resolved through guidelines and these rules, it could be resolved at counting time or tallying time.  

Failing that, Madam Chairperson, as everybody knows in this Country, the ultimate authority is vested and justifiably too, into our Court System and very soon this House is going to be debating matters concerning the streamlining of our Court System in order to particularly cater for the situation where we have to come to grips with the positions in the New Constitution as they affected the Judicial and Court Systems.
  
Secondly, Madam Chairperson, on the question of whether -(Interruption)

PROF. WANGUSA: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to draw the attention of the hon. Minister to certain information from the County of Bubulo in Mbale and to seek clarification as to whether this information might impinge on the nature of this form.  Madam Chairperson, Members may have read, yesterday in the Monitor News Paper, on Page 5, that ‘a Minister of Government was dishing out certain monies in Bubulo County - East and West’, and I come from the West.  Madam Chairperson, this could be gossip, but I have indeed only arrived this afternoon from Mbale and I have met with this Journalist, I have met with many people from my Constituency who say that of course the hon. Minister, if he did this has committed the sin of letting his right arm know what his left arm was doing, if he is dishing out UShs 80,000 per muluka.  But what I want to draw the attention to, Madam Chairperson, is that the hon. Minister of State for that area of the country was also dishing out three exercise books per LC I.  So, this persons; three of them, per LC.1, are going from house to house and asking for people’s names and voters numbers.  This is true I was consulting this morning, talking to people who have been visited.  Now, my question - by way of clarification, is what is the purpose of this kind of exercise?  Does it have the blessing of the Minister’s Office?

MR KAVUMA: Madam Chairperson, I have not read the Monitor story, I must say.  The hon. Member says, it could have been gossip, but he says he has been there.  He has met again the source of the article which does not make much difference.  But I would want to say that matter pertaining to elections are governed by Law.  If anybody infringes on any of the provisions we have passed in the Law, then the appropriate authority to address is first, the Electoral Commission whom we have charged with responsibility to conduct and manage this exercise, or if you feel so worried about it, the other avenues which I have mentioned just a moment ago, including the Courts are open and available and accessible by all the citizens of this country.  

Madam Chairperson, hon. Prof. Kanyeihamba wanted to know whether presiding officers would be authorised to administer oaths.  Madam Chairperson, the Commission is very, very aware of this situation that not in every village you may have a Commissioner for oaths, you may not have Magistrate, a High Court Judge.  So, arrangements are in place, once the approval is given to use the appropriate Law which is already on our Statute Book to appoint persons who are eligible to administer these oaths throughout the Country.  We are not to legislate or forgetful, unmindful of that phenomenon.  

So, Madam Chairperson, I had moved on to Page 9 where we are dealing with proxy authority to vote.  All I want to say, Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, is that this is a form derives its authority from -(Interjections)- I was saying this authority form is based on what we passed in the Law.  It is intended to facilitate those voters who maybe on duty in what we generally called ‘Disciplined Professions’ or to be more exact, who may be Members of the UPDF on duty in areas other than where they were supposed to vote normally Members of our Police Force and Members of our Prisons Force.  

Madam Chairperson, the purpose is just to facilitate those who want to be able to appoint somebody to vote on their behalf.  We have taken stringent measures to ensure that there will be no abuse on this form.  I am mindful of the worries and fears that were expressed when we debated but finally passed this Provision and the Commission is very, very alert to the desires of the population as expressed during the time of debate through this hon. House and each of these forms is going to be handled with maximum care so that it serves no other purpose other than allowing a man or woman who by nature of this duty finds him or herself outside his normal station where he would be voting to exercise his constitutional right to cast his or her vote.  I may also remind Members through you Madam Chairperson, that this is a duty imposed by the Constitution on the state that the state shall facilitate all eligible voters who are on the voters register to be able to cast their votes.   We are not doing anything than that, Madam Chairperson.
Next is the Oath of a -(Interruption)

MR KABUGO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to know whether this Form authorising the proxy authority could as well apply to people who are in hospitals.  There maybe some people who are already registered, others are now being displaced.  We are just looking for people of the North, and now Kisoro is also falling in the same category.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, this stage is made under Section 67, sub-section 2.  Under that section which I have looked at myself, it is only applicable to the people stated in the section.  It says, ‘the Commission may take such steps as maybe required to enable soldiers, Police Officers and Prison Officers to vote if necessary by proxy’.  This cannot be applied to patients.  Thank you.

MR KAVUMA: Madam Chairperson, I thank the hon. Member for Busujju.

 MR ASIKU: Point of clarification.  I am sorry to take the House back because it is a very important clarification I had forwarded but was not taken.  This question which is incorporated in the Law where somebody appears with voter’s card and he says, I am so and so, and that person is allowed to vote.  Then the right man appears again on the stage, he takes oath, he says he is the right man and he is given a chance to vote, where we shall not know whether the real voters are 600 or those with claims taking oath have now totalled to 700.  What I am seeking is, who is this person who appears to have the right paper and he votes in the first place, yet he has not got his or her name and the numbers in the register did not correspond.  Who is this man?  Where does he come from?  I want this clarification.  Thank you.

DR BESIGYE: Madam Chairperson, I am rather confused about the procedure we are following.  I thought that the hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs was presenting Regulations by way of a Motion for us to approve.  That he would proceed and present his Motion upon which a question would be put and we debate.  But now, while he is presenting, it seems we are engaged in debate.  I do not know whether people can move amendments at this stage when he is presenting his Motion or whether he should not complete his Motion and the question is put and whoever has an amendment can move it at that stage.  I seek clarification.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I had already asked the Minister to present and asked Members to wait until he has finished and then they contribute.  But it seems they are extremely anxious to be heard.  So Members, let the Minister finish his presentation, you will debate the Motion.

MR KAVUMA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson, with regard to the clarification sought by hon. Asiku, I am afraid the question was not postponed or the clarification was not postponed because this was a matter that came before this hon. House at the time we were debating the Statute.  We debated it for days and we passed it.  All we are doing now is to implement what we passed and this House went ahead and said that whatever we have passed there, there will be prescribed forms to implement it.  Hon. Members, I do not know whether hon. Asiku is now proposing that we, through these regulations, amend the Law because if he does I will professionally advise him that that one is impossible and it will be out of order.  So, I would request him to go by the decision we took where he also fully participated and we complete these matter, which are really matters of implementing the Law we passed.  

I was thanking hon. Member for Busujju for clarifying to hon. Kabugo from Nakaseke.  He should recall that this is a matter that was provided in the Law, and I only want to repeat it to hon. Kabugo that if you looked at the bottom of Page 9, this information is precisely summarised for the benefit of him and others who may not have carried their Statute.  So, we are not asking anybody else - not the sick, and the rest.  We are only dealing with Members of the armed forces.  UPDF, the Police and the Prisons. 

Madam Chairman, the next Form was a declaration of results.  Very straight forward and normal.  Once there is an election, election results must be declared.

Next is the return for transmission of results.  Those results must be transmitted to the appropriated authority which ultimately is the Electoral Commission, because as you know, we did decide and legislated that results shall be declared on the sport.  But since there are going to be so many voting centres throughout the Country, then this Form must be completed at every place where these results have been recorded and transmitted to the Electoral Commission.

The next, Madam Chairperson, on Page 13, is another straightforward Form which is to be used by 500 or more of Members of the Constituency who may feel aggrieved with the results as to who was elected as a member of that Constituency.  Hon. Members and Madam Chairperson, will recall that again this was an issue that was very lively treated in this House, and we did agree that election business is currently under our Law and Policies; a matter that I could call, ‘a joint venture affair’ both the electorate and the candidate have a stake; have an interest in it.  

Therefore, we did wisely provide that even if the candidate who was cheated or who felt aggrieved by the results, shied away or decided for results best known to him or her, not to pursue the matter, then at least the Electorate should have an opportunity to take it up with the appropriate authority so that they are not left without any remedy.  So, this form is just intended to guide those people who may want to invoke this Provision in the Statute to do so with a minimum of inconvenience.  

Madam Chairperson, the next was the Presidential Elections Forms Regulations - a very brief one.  All that it seeks to do is again in accordance with the Law we passed here, to apply whatever regulations or forms may be found necessary with appropriate modification to the Presidential Elections, although they are substantially provided for under the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Statute.  

Next is the Special Interest Groups Regulations, 1996.  Madam Chairperson, in this set of Regulations, we deal with the election of the representatives of Uganda People’s Defence Forces.  We also deal with election of representatives of the Youth.  I did indicate, Madam Chairperson, that a lot of what we put here is borrowed from the existing Law on the Youth Councils and a lot of very exhaustive consultations were made in all these special groups so that what comes out is the result of collective input from both the appropriate special group, the policy framers and the technical people in the various departments concerned.  Madam Chairperson, the workers are treated in the similar manner.  The Provision is in conformity with the Constitution and the Law we passed to enable the workers, through their organised media, to have elections for their representatives in Parliament elected in accordance with the Law.  

Persons with disability, Madam Chairperson, again after thorough consultations though the organs dealing with matters relating to persons with disability and other relevant authorities, we have come out with the proposal we have in this document.  We are creating an Electoral College in whose composition we have made sure that gender and disability are balanced; is taken into account and it is intended also to facilitate the provision we put in the Law that among the five representatives of the persons with disabilities at least one of them must be a woman.  

Madam Chairperson, part 6 deals with what we called, miscellaneous provisions on miscellaneous rules.  This, for instance in seven, is just to enable the Commission to be able to carry out its functions properly in accordance with the Statute and its regulations.  In eight, we are saying these elections should be held not later than the fifth of July 1996, considering that we must have a new elected Government in accordance with our Constitution by the 7th of July 1996.

Madam Chairperson, I must allay the fears of those who may think that this date of the 5th is unwise, in that it is too near the 7th, that what we are doing is to fix the latest time.  But the Commission is working day and night and according to the tentative programme of these elections, these elections are going to be conducted much earlier than the 5th.  

Madam Chairperson, the last bit is about notification of the results to the Commission which is the Body entrusted with the responsibility of over seeing the entire election exercise throughout the Country.  

Madam Chairperson, the last Form, is that Form to be completed to transmit the results to the Electoral Commission.  

In conclusion, Madam Chairperson, I want to repeat that these Regulations are very simple and straightforward.  They are presented after thorough work has been done both professionally and after exhaustive consultations with every organ interested or concerned in the matter and I would strongly recommend this hon. House to approve them with a minimum of delay.

Madam Chairperson, as I indicated, some of these Forms and regulations will apply to the Presidential elections which are just around the corner as we debate for approval of these Regulations.  I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

DR MAGEZI: Madam Chairperson, I thank you very much.  Madam Chairperson, we do make Laws in this House.  Some times we never have a chance to access the Statutes when they are out of Government Printer.  Some of these Laws, when you read them in the course of time, you find that some decisions were taken which are difficult to explain to the Electorate.  Now, one of them I find is Article 65, on Page 52, which concerns the oath of identity of a person whose name and vote number has already been used by another person.  I find this so difficult to justify.  After the elaborate procedure, voters went for registration.  The Register was compiled, the Voter was given voter’s card and the voter’s Register was displayed and it was taken back for -(Interruption)

MS NAMUGENYI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson, this NRC rejected the idea of one coming and vote on the same number and name.  I do not know how it came in the Statute.  

MR GWAIVU: Point of information. Madam Chairperson, I wish to associate myself with the views being expressed by Dr Magezi, that in the circumstances of the information provided to this House this afternoon by hon. Prof. Wangusa, of illegal registers which are being written.  Madam Chairperson, I had wanted even to inform you that in my very Constituency, Kagoma, we have people who are moving around with note-books and writing down people’s numbers as it is happening in Bubulo, Mbale.  It may then imply that the problem maybe national.  Now, in the circumstances, we are likely to have queer people voting for real people and then real people turning up to swear that we are the genuine people.  This will be terrible rigging.  Madam Chairperson, this is very very serious issue, because we may not have a free and fair election if we go ahead to allow this Article 65, in our Statute.  We are going to have a lot of mess.  

MR KAVUMA: Madam Chairperson, I want to clarify to this hon. House that all the Electoral process is going to be governed by the official voters register compiled and updated until recently, and right now the Commission is purifying that Register in accordance with what information has come from the people, fields.  There is no other register that is going to be used for this election.  I will say, Madam Chairperson that I have sought votes before and I intend to do so again this time.  But every candidate has a way of organising his election campaigns.  Personally, I wanted to know at one stage during the last election campaigns, what was the fair percentage support I had in my Constituency.  I went ahead and conducted opinion polls.  I asked my team to go and ascertain those whom they thought would vote for me.  That was nothing legal and that thing never came to any Commission.  It was for my consumption and for my organisation of the elections.  

Now, if a candidate wants to use a system in order to organise his campaign, as long as he is doing it within the Law we passed here, this alarmist statement should not be brought at this late hour here.  We should be firm and continue with the Law as we passed it here and just provide the Forms and Rules that are intended to implement what we did.  Lastly, Madam Chairperson, if a Member wants to move an amendment to the Statute, this is not the procedure to follow.  There is a procedure where an amendment to an existing Statute can be effected by this hon. House.  There is nothing like that on the Floor.  All we are debating are matters of subsidiary legislation based on the provisions of the Constitution and the Law.  I beg Madam Chairperson, that we do not really waste a lot of time on matters about which we cannot do anything now.  The Law is on our Statute Book.  We should go ahead and do what the nation expecters have asked us to do by approving the Rules that are going to implement the Law we passed here.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I would urge to separate the responsibilities of the Interim Electoral Commission from those of the NRC.  Let us concentrate on what is our Schedule.

DR MAGEZI: Madam Chairperson, the point really I was trying to put forward is that we as an august House, should take the blame if we pass Laws which we cannot defend to our electorate.  The only identity a person now must have, is a voter’s card.  Once you have a voter’s card, with a number on it, you can go and have ten Magezis, it does not even limit that there can only be one person who can go and swear.  The presiding officer is aware that that name actually has already been used.  What happens to the person who has used it?  You cannot even know who he has voted for. But collective responsibility dictates that what the Minister is doing is the right procedure because we have already empowered him by Article 65.  He is doing exactly what he is supposed to do which we passed here.  If we want to say that we did not pass it, then God bless us all.  But I am admitting to me and I will be able to say, we errored there.  

Madam Chairperson, on the matter of proxy, maybe I may need to understand what really proxy means.  But I would imagine proxy means that the person who is going to act on my behalf must know the choice of my person I am voting for.  If you are going to be my proxy I tell you that I am going to vote for Kaguta, so please even if I cannot go, but make sure you vote for Kaguta.  Now, the provision here does not state whether the person appointing somebody can declare to that person to make sure that this one confirms to what he has told him to vote for.  Otherwise, because of mistrust in our society, there is a lot of suspicion that there maybe this could be misused and you could get a situation where you could get a person getting all these forms signed by somebody and say, you just append your signature here and the rest we shall look after it.  Those forms could end up to disregard the choice of the people who are actually wishing to vote for different candidates.  The Minister could look into it to find the way.  It will no longer be a secret ballot.

Madam Chairperson, whatever is appearing here is in consonant with what was passed by this august House as a Law.  So, there is no provision now for amending this Statute, and therefore, we must just go ahead and approve these forms.  It is too late.  Maybe the next time we shall really take time to study the Bills before they are presented in the House so that we do not make such dangerous mistakes.  I thank you.

MR EJALU: Madam Chairperson, I support the resolution.  In supporting the resolution, I would like to say few things.  First I would like to refer to an Article in a News Paper of last week in which a diplomat said that there must be total peace in Uganda before the elections.  He was saying this as he was giving UShs 600m to the Electoral Commission.  I must say, I was taken aback because our Friends who were helping us with elections are triplising the seriousness with which Uganda is taking its exercise.  Even for the cost of UShs 600m, I think our Friend should take our resolve to democratise this Country seriously.  Of course we want peace in Uganda as a whole, in fact in the whole world.  But we all know that in countries near and far, where elections are taking place, there are most serious conflicts going on.  We know that we have had good elections for example, in the United Kingdom, despite the war in Northern Island since 1916.  We know that today there is a very serious campaign in the Western World for the Presidential elections in Russia notwithstanding the war in -(Interruption)- we know what is happening in Israel; there is an international war there, but elections are going on.  So, I really would like to use this Motion to appeal to our Friends to take us seriously.  Having said that maybe I should draw the attention to I think what is going to be the most urgent need immediately after the elections and after peace.  That they should come forward and assist us in sweeping the mines and personnel which are being spread in Northern Uganda by the enemies of the people of Uganda.  Having said so, I would like to go to the business at hand, and specifically to part 6 of the Resolution, and Regulation No.7.  I would like to point out to the Minister that the Parliamentary Elections Special Interest Groups Regulations, 1996.  

So, maybe just a similar matter on Regulation No.6 where it says that ‘in electing Members of the Electoral College under Regulation No.6’ I think that 6 is meant to be 5.  Now coming to Regulation No.7, the Provision is that ‘the Commission may, after consultation with National Executive Committee or Council or similar body of the Special Interest Group, appoint Returning Officers, ...’.  

The point I want would like to point out to the Minister is this, that the Commission has been given a statutory duty to appoint Returning officers.  The Electoral Colleges referred to, the Executive Committee and so on, are in fact the Electorate.  Why should the Commission consult them at all?  Otherwise, it is tantamount to say, the Commission should consult the entire Electorate in the case of Constituency MPs.

Secondly on the same resolution, the last bit I would suggest should be struck off which starts with “such functions as the commission may direct”. The returning officers are appointed to carry out the functions as spelt out in the statute. The commission has no business creating other functions outside the statute.  So, I would suggest to the Minister to look into this matter and may be amend that thing to exclude the consultation part and also the other part which gives them extra power. Lastly, on regulation No.9, it says as soon as each of the special interest groups has had its elections conducted, the National Executive committee or council or similar body of each special interest group shall notify the commission. I am saying why? A returning officer has been appointed who has already conducted elections. Why should the committee of the electorate again be the one to notify the Commission?  It should be the returning officer. I beg to submit.  I hope an amendment will not necessary because I think the Minister will take note and correct this.  Thank you.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I stand to support the resolution moved by the Minister. But I want immediately to concur with the hon. Member who has just sat down, hon. Ejalu that I had in fact moved an amendment on section 7 on the election of special groups and I was going to suggest- I hope the Minister will accept in conformity with what hon. Ejalu has said that the Commission shall appoint; in other words to read everything else, so it reads, the commission shall appoint returning officers and presiding officers and other election officers as shall appear to the Commission reasonably necessary for the purpose of conducting the election of the representative of that special interest group full stop; and then I also agree with him on 9 that as soon as each of the special interest groups has had its election conducted, the returning officer or the presiding shall notify the authority concerned.  So those are the movements that I was going to move, and I am glad that hon. Ejalu moved them first, and I hope the Minister will accept them without any further debate.

 Having said that, I am happy with the provisions relating to the forms and regulations- relating to the conduct of elections. I think that, the issue of appointing commissioners for oath or people who are capable of giving oath should be spelt out in the regulation, it should not just be left to the secretion of the commission or to say, it should be silent but the commission will do so.  It must be specifically mentioned in these regulations.  So, I advise the hon. Minister to ensure that it is inserted in the appropriate position because if it is not, then it can always be either abused or anybody can always challenge the regulations.

Coming to the Parliamentary elections of special interests, I note that in Clause 2 that is the election of the Uganda Peoples Defence forces, they are to be elected by the Uganda People Defence Council, I have no problem with that.  But when it comes to saying in such manner and by such procedure as shall be determined by the Council, it is in my opinion that is not in conformity with the constitution. The constitution specifically provides that the manner and the procedure under which this special group shall be elected, shall be determined by Parliament. In other words, by the NRC.  Therefore, it is necessary in these regulations to spell out the manner and procedure which shall govern the election of representatives of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces. It is not enough to leave the procedure to the council itself.  But Madam Chairperson, as you know a delegate has no power to delegate. That means that the Constitution has delegated the power to this parliament or to this National Resistance Council to determine the manner and procedure by which these representatives shall be elected; and we cannot delegate that responsibility to the Army council. 

So, I believe that it will be necessary for the Minister in consultation perhaps with Council to come out immediately with the manner, it must be spelt out and the procedure must be spelt out.  That we shall conform with the provisions of the constitution.  For the same reason, Madam Chairperson, if we move to page 2 part 4 that is 4 (d), it says 7 delegates selected by every NOTU affiliated Union.  I do not know what they mean by selection and who is to do that.  If the Minister means that they are to be elected by every NOTU affiliation Union that I can agree with. But to say selected, I do not know who does the selecting, and what precisely selection means.  But somebody from NOTU wants to give me information.

MR MUKASA MUDRIKATI: Point of information.  My information is that, it is not in this paragraph the Minister saying. It is what the constitution says of the National Organisation of Trade Unions. In fact at the opening paragraph, the regulation says, the election should follow their constitution of the organisation, and it is the delegates’ conference of that organisation which will select.  Now, down below, for the information of the hon. Member, is the composition of what we call the delegates’ conference.  It is all members  of the secretariat and the permanent members to the central governance council, we have one permanent member who represents each affiliate to that body. 

Now, we have to the Chairmen general secretaries of the respective affiliates and treasurers of each affiliated union at attending that conference; and finally, the 7 delegates from each affiliate now making a total of 11 delegates from each union.  Now, these people of course, the constitution of NOTU is silent as how they are selected.  But it is presumed that, they are selected by their respective organs.  Because each union has got a different constitution. The NOTU constitution could not dictate as how these people are selected to the delegates’ conference of NOTU.  Therefore, it is not the hon. Minister dictating, it is the NOTU constitution which sets this formula.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: I thank the hon. Member for that contribution which has no relation to what I was seeking clarification about.  Nevertheless I thank him.  My own view is that, whether they are elected from below or whatever, the word should be elected not selected. Because selected has a different connotation, and I hope the hon. Member really appreciates my point.

Having said that, as I say for me, I think we should pass these regulations as soon as we can so that the Minister can put them in implementation.  Those were the issues that I had a point on, but I want to finally comment on an issue which seems to have brought controversy unnecessarily.  That is someone voting then another one coming and claiming to want to vote that my name.  Madam Chairperson, according to the constitution and the statutes were put in place, you can only identify a voter by one sign and that is alone, his voting Number.  All the voters in Uganda shall have separate voting numbers; and, therefore, any person coming to vote can only be admitted if they show their voting card with their Number.  Anybody else is -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  I am grateful for the hon. Member for giving way. That may be so, but the commission has said, and I saw it on TV that before you vote, you will come and you will shout and say, I am Abu Mayanja, and this is my card and these are my numbers, and they must be three (3). Now, supposing somebody comes-supposing this gentleman comes and says, I am Abu Mayanja. Then he produces a card which corresponds with my name but people know that he is not Abu Mayanja. Then the mere fact that he has got the voter’s card and the name there, he will allow him to vote.

MR GASATURA: Further to that, Madam Chairperson, it is not clear from the instruction of the Interim Electoral Commission when they say shout your name, it is not clear to how many decibels of shouting, and should such decibels be below expectation, I do not know whether it would be sufficient for anybody to deny a citizen of Uganda properly registered to vote. Moreover, the commission has itself committed several errors and those who have just returned from the country side know how many people found that their cards and numbers in the cards no longer corresponded to the numbers in the register; this obviously has caused and will cause further confusion.  I expect what the Interim Electoral Commission intended in good faith was that, when hon. Kanyeihamba stands up and says, I am George Kanyeihamba the professor you know. Everybody will say of course we know you and then he can proceed.  Then comes his niece who is terribly embarrassed at the age of 18 to be seen in public later on speak says, Joyce. Who Joyce, and you can try you know all of us being Africans we know the kind of people in our villages that cannot accept to shout. In any case, in Kakyama Mayanja’s area it is bad manners for women to shout.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Therefore, if people want to contribute they will have to catch your eye, Madam Chairperson. 

I thank the hon. Members for giving me information, and indeed some of the information given has clarified some of the points I was going to make.  But let is be made clear that in reference to the law, and to fairness only one voting card should be permitted per name.  That is the point I want to emphasize.  So the question of one having voted in one name or with own card, and then some confusion being caused and another one is allowed to vote in the same number should not be allowed at all.  I think that would confuse even- will bring more confusion. What the presiding officer should do, if Kanyeihamba has come along presented the proper card against his name, and shouted I am Kanyeihamba, the card is proper, and nobody is objecting to say, this Kanyeihamba should be a woman but is a man or whatever, then he should be allowed to vote from his card.  Should anyone turn up and say, I am the Kanyeihamba, and his card- whoever has voted before was either forged or whatever, then the presiding officer should record that fact that somebody came after someone had voted and said I am so and so; and should be the matter of investigation.  That Kanyeihamba had voted before with his proper card, but someone else came later and wanted to vote and we recording this fact.  But both of them should not be allowed to vote in the same name.  Because that would be confusing the counting at the end of the day, it will confuse everybody. This would be my suggestion. Madam Chairperson.

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Chairperson, first and fore most I want to congratulate you up on the appointment to that Chair.  I stand to support the resolution moved by the Minister with some few comments. The first comment is on representatives of the Youths.  When we look at the National Youths Conference, the Minister has talked of the composition and he has left out the district youths delegates.  I would like to get some clarification why these people have been left out; and secondly it has been expressed by majority of Youths, especially, from eastern Region that at least candidature for the Youths would be open to everybody.  Because there were some youths who were not yet 18 years and they feel they want to give a service to this country. So, I do not know how the Minister is going to cater for such people. 

Also, on voting by proxy when I look at the provision in the regulations, the Minister has specified what category of people will vote according to what he has put in the provisions. But I have been approached by so many students, especially those from higher institutions.  It so happens that they have just come back for their term and it might be not easy for them to go back to their rural areas to vote. So I do not know what arrangements the Minister has for such students or for such people. Thirdly, on workers representation, Madam Chairperson, I think to be fair the Minister would have provided that at least of the three representatives one of them is at least a lady to balance. Lastly, on election of women even if it is not in the resolutions. It so happens that, there are some women who are secretaries for women in the LC system and at the same time they are holding posts in the women council, and yet in the constitution it has been provided that one man one vote or one woman one vote. So, how is that issue going to be handled. So the Minister can advise accordingly. Thank you very much.

DR KIZZA BESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First of all I would like to congratulate you like my Colleagues on assuming the rare power in this House.  I would also like to thank the Minister for presentation of these regulations.  I realize that they are three instruments.  They are three instruments which I think the Minister would like us to approve. One for prescription of forms, the other one for Presidential elections and the other one for special interest groups; and I think each one should be approved up on its own Motion, so that we deal with one dispose of it, we deal with another dispose of it.  They are three instruments- three sets of regulations.  I personally have no absolutely no problem with the prescription of forms and with the President elections again forms. The point which I think has been sufficiently debated, and on which I associate myself with the views of hon. Kanyeihamba, I think it is not too late to persuade the Minister to move a Bill for an amendment of this statute to rectify what clearly seems as a lacuna; and if he finds it difficult I hope eminent Lawyers like hon. Kanyeihamba indeed may move using our regulations to effect the necessary adjustments within the law. My concern is on the special groups regulations. 

I fully agree with hon. Kanyeihamba that in Part II, I do not see the justification whatsoever of this House avoiding to prescribe the procedure and the manner of elections of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces. Indeed as a requirement by the constitution. This is clearly spelt out in article 78 Clause 4 of the constitution which says that Parliament shall prescribe the manner, and I do not think we should avoid the responsibility; and I would have expected that if it is consultations that are necessary with these bodies, consultations could have been carried out, and the exact procedure spelt out.  Because we a re dealing with elections of Parliament.  This Parliament of Uganda; and it is necessary that all persons in Uganda know how all Members of Parliament are going to come here by statutory instruments.  

Not by a procedure prescribed somewhere in - so I really think that for that important reason, the Minister may consider withholding these particular regulations and making the necessary prescriptions as required of him by the constitution. Secondly, I think that it is also necessary at least for us to who are not conversant with all these statutes, and the statutes I must inform him are not easy to come by.  Even when you go to the printer, sometimes have failed to find any statute even at the first Parliamentary Council, and they have to give me two weeks to go and hunt for a statute. So, these statutes are not easy to come by. I think it is therefore, in the interest of us in this House that, where you refer to these provisions of the statute, you extract the relevant provisions and implant them into these regulations.

MR ONGOM: Point of information.  Thank you hon. Member for giving way for this information.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to add also that, these days even scripts of our contribution in this House are not being given to us to check whether they have been correctly printed; and we do not even know whether what is now in the statutes are actually the correct things that we passed here. So that it is even wrong, for us to be referred to statutes which we have not checked whether they are correctly done.  This is a serious omission, there is a serious problem which I think this house must face immediately. Thank you.

DR KIZZA BESIGYE: I thank the hon. Member for that information. As a matter of fact, I am sure Members know that we were required to pay money to get a copy of the statute for these Parliamentary elections statute, and the Presidential elections statute. We had to buy these copies and I am not surprised that some of our Members have not yet got them. I think it should be the work of this council to avail us copies of these statutes which we have passed ourselves, if not for anything else, at least to check that what we passed is what is spelt out in these statutes.  So, what I was saying was that, I do not feel happy with this presentation that the representatives of the Youths in Parliament shall be elected by the National Youths Conference which shall be held as provided in section 8 of the Youths statute. I would like the relevant provisions that provide the procedure for election to be clearly spelt out even if they do not mention the statute in which they were extracted.  What we are talking about is the procedure for election for these members into Parliament; and they should extract therefore the relevant provisions, and put them here in these regulations.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  The particular section the hon. Member is referring to says that, the Member who qualifies to be elected will be a member of the National Youths Council which is already tantamount to rigging.  Because all the Ugandan Youths of above 18 years who have qualified should have been declared the candidature.  But that section restricts the candidature to only the 56 members of the National Youths council.

DR KIZZA BESIGYE: So, Madam Chairperson, I think that goes to enhance the point that I am saying that should draw the relevant provisions in these statutes and constitutions and reflect them in these regulations in details.  So that if we are going for elections, I want regulations which are going to guide me. I do not want to pick a regulation which is going to refer to a constitution of NOTU.  Now, a Constitution of NOTU - NOTU is an organization even.  The Constitution of NOTU I do not know whether it is part of the statute.  I think it is just an organisation.  If I am not a member of NOTU may be I will never even lay my hand on the Constitution of NOTU. They should simply extract what is relevant in those provisions and reflect them here.

I would also like to fully concur with what was expressed earlier by hon. Ateker Ejalu that certainly it should be the commission which will appoint returning officers.  You cannot talk about consultation with the executive committees and all this kind of thing.  Because actually this is a constitutional requirement, I think it is article 65 which provides that, returning officers-no I think it is in the statute. Which provides that returning officers shall be appointed by the electoral commission with the advise of the Public Service Commission.  Now, we are mixing up all these matters bringing in the executive of the disabled people to advise the electoral commission on how to appoint the returning officer and so on and so forth. I think that when the Minister represents this, which I hope he will find appropriate to withdraw, he will take the proposed amendment by hon. Kanyeihamba into account.  I do not find the necessity for regulation 8 in these statutory instruments which says that the special interest groups under these regulations shall hold elections for their representatives before the 5th day of July, 1996. It is a constitutional requirement that all elections, especially, since you adopted the instance that Parliament will be incomplete until all persons who constitute it have been elected, then it follows that, all persons should have been elected by the 8th of July. 

Now, to spell out the election deadlines. We did not spell this one out for Parliament, we did not spell it out for the President, I do not know why we should encumber anybody with the deadline in case- the electoral commission certainly with a deadline within the law. I think it should be left to the electoral commission they know their mandate, they know the deadline and they should be able to organise all these elections within the prescribed time. Even if it was on the 7th of July I would have absolutely no problem, especially since with these bodies, I do not think there are provisions for re-run and all kind of thing.  So, unless the Minister explains to me, I do -(Interruption)    

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  Moreover, Madam Chairperson, if one of these people dies, or for whatever reason be unable to continue as a Member of Parliament, then it may be necessary for a replacement to be elected after the 5th of July. Do we come and make other regulations? These regulations should be there to be used from time to time as a need arises.

DR KIZZA BESIGYE: Madam Chairperson, I was simply saying that this in my own view serves no purpose, and on the other hand imposes unnecessary restrictions to the electoral commission or to the electoral process as a whole.  

Lastly, I would also like to associate myself with hon. Ateker Ejalu in what he submitted concerning regulation 9. That the person who communicates the results of the elections should certainly be the returning officer and not the National Executive committee or council or similar body of the special interest group.  It should be the work of the returning officer who has superintended over the elections to now communicate that the elections were freely and fairly carried out and these are the results. Rather than the party which was itself directorate doing so to the Electoral Commission. In any case, the returning officer is the officer responsible to the electoral commission. I thank you Madam Chairperson.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Thank you very much. Now the purpose of these regulations is to ensure that we have free and fair elections; and that our process of democratisation is carried out openly, transparently and fairly, and will seem to be so done. It is for this reason that I would like to preface my remarks by the condemnation of certain activities that are taking place in the country as of now which in fact tend to detract from the election process from being free or fair.  I refer specifically to the events of hooliganism in some parts of Uganda which have made it impossible for candidates meetings to be held by people throwing stones and that kind of- really undemocratic and uncivilized behaviour.  We must condemn-because it appears apparently that the electoral commission is powerless.  These matters have been brought to the attention of the interim electoral commission, it says, returning officer please, police please, by this time the police are there, the returning officers are there, these activities take place in their very presence.  

So, I am worried; and as candidate Yoweri Museveni said, we should not provide an alibi for those who fail to say that I would have succeeded if so and so had not happened.  So, although when I raised this matter in the House previously, some Members had the   guts to say that those  people who were throwing stones were exercising  their  democratic rights.  I think really this is a matter  and a practice which all Ugandans should condemn and which this House must condemn  or handle anonymously. (Applause)

MR GASATURA: Point of information. Madam Chairperson, I want to inform the House and particularly hon. Mayanja Kakyama that we should not be like the hon. Minister who went to some place and attacked the few people who had come to meet him saying you people of whatever place, why don’t you like to come to meetings.  At the end, they said, but Sir, you abused those who came.  Whereas there are a number of hooligans who have acted in a manner that must be condemned, Madam Chairperson, and the whole House and Nation has seen large, large numbers as never seen before, we must surely appreciate the calm with which the great majority of Ugandans have taken this election.  Many of us were for example at the day of nomination at Conference Centre where even the PPU failed to check those who were to enter into the Conference Centre.  Numbers were extremely large, they hardly reported any where between 50, 70, 80,000,and our police  has not yet reached 20,000.

 Finally, another information, Madam Chairperson.  This House debating security situation in the North was together un patriotic and condemned the acts in the North. I remember that time saying myself and several others, that we are sure all our Colleagues Members of this House would condemn such acts. Yet when that Member reached Lira and Gulu he condoned it and said he would talk to Kony instead.

MR KIDEGE: Point of order. Is it in order for the hon. Member who  has been holding this Floor to equate the war situation in the North to mere hooliganism? Is it true that the hooligans are behaving like Kony? I do not think it is true.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think the Member was equating that serious matter with hooliganism.  But he was calling upon the House to condemn them as they have condemned the Kony activities.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Further information.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I thank hon. Abu Mayanja for giving way for this information.  I wish to inform the House that many of us do condemn hooliganism which stop candidates from making their views known to the electorate; and I want the House to be informed that one candidate, that is Yoweri Kaguta Museveni,when he was in Rubanda and Kabale, last week did in un no conditional terms, condemn anyone whether they are supporters of his or not, who stops other candidates, people like Paul Ssemwogerere and Mohammed Mayanja from speaking freely and audibly so that every one can be heard.  This is one candidate which this House have on record that Museveni did condemn any hooliganism, any people who disrupt meetings of his opponents so that they cannot be heard.  I think that ought to be made clear.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, first l all I congratulate you on occupying that very august seat. Is hon. Abu Mayanja in order to suggest to this House,and while he made the suggestion he was even looking at his old Friend George Kagonyera that Kagonyera in any way, suggested that stone throwing an acceptable way of expressing democratic views.  When in fact I said in this House was that, people express their democratic views by staying away.  As a matter of fact, Madam Chairperson, I saw much violence that I am proud to inform you and this House, that have not exercised any form of violence on anybody in my adult life.  I condemn violence in its entirety. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, is it in order for hon. Abu Mayanja to suggest that I condone violence as a method of demonstrating ones democratic views.  Is he in order, madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is out of order.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, I thank you for that very wise ruling.  Of course I did not in my remarks refer to any Member but if the heart speaks? (Laughter) 

Second point is that, I have been concerned and may be the Minister will find when it is-if he takes the advice of the trend of the House and goes back and redrafts regulations. But even if he does not redraft the regulations, I would like to ask him to assist the commission on a matter which has been raised by the National Candidates agents about the voters registers; and that is to say, that -you remember, Madam Chairperson, we were registered for the CA then people were given voters cards.  Then we were told to go and get other voters cards, and then those voters cards in many instances did not have Numbers at that particular time, then people had to go back and get Numbers to put on the cards and so on and so forth.  The question which has been raised by the interim commission is that only people whose names and Numbers are on the register and those names and Numbers correspond with names and Numbers on the voters cards, shall be allowed to vote. The point is that there are people who registered - Ugandan citizens who registered, it is not their fault they did not get the new voters cards. Some solution must be found to enable them to vote.

MR ONGOM: Point of order. Madam Chairperson,is it in order  when a Member is addressing very serious points to the Minister to take note and he is busy talking to somebody else when he is not paying attention?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Minister was consulting.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, I now want to look very briefly at these regulations and suggest some amendment - Oh Yaa! There was a third point, and this is raised by this statement under Oath by a person to be nominated as a Parliamentary candidate page 6. Paragraph 4 says, a person who has to be a Parliamentary candidate must state on Oath, give this information saying, I am a citizen of Uganda.  I am not below the age of 18, I am a registered voter.  Now, paragraph 4 says, I am not a traditional or cultural leader as defined in Clause 6 of article 246 of the constitution. Cultural leaders must not be in politics.  It therefore, very unfortunate that some Presidential candidates have been taking, parading members of the families of traditional rulers in their campaigns making them make speeches indicating their preferences and so on. Thereby really indirectly violating the Constitution.

MR SEKIZIYIVU: Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Members of the royal family are not traditional leaders. The two are different.  A traditional leader for example in Buganda is King Lonard Mutebi.  He has sisters and brothers who are free to participate in politics.  It is only the King who is prohibited from -(Interjections)- no, but the Constitution, Madam Chairperson, does not talk about relatives, it is only the leaders.

MR NEKYON: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform the House that office of the Kabaka is not a person.  So in the constitution when we talk about the Kabaka not being in politics, we mean the whole royalty. Because that office is supported by a range personalities.  So in all political science teaching, when you say the King is like this, then that applies to all the princes. Therefore, when you go say, to a country where is royalty in England, a Prince- because the King is a is restricted from politics, Prince Charles cannot say, I am a Prince and not a King and, therefore, I can practice politics that is unacceptable; and this applies with all the kingdoms I know of. In the light manner you cannot say that the Arch Bishop of Kampala cannot take part in politics and then you say, the Bishop of Masaka can take part in politics.

MR KAVUMA: (Interruption)- extend the interpretation of the office of the Kabaka to such large magnitudes when in fact the Constitution defines in precise terms who a traditional leader or cultural is, and I would read for the sake of refreshing the memories of all the hon. Members in the House. Madam Chairperson, sub-article 6 of article 246 defines a cultural leader and it say, for the purposes of this article, traditional leader or cultural leader means a King or a similar traditional leader or cultural leader by whatever name called, who derives allegiance from the fact of birth, or decent in accordance with the custom, tradition usage our consent of the people led by that traditional or cultural leader.  

This is a very, very limited and precise description of a cultural leader. For instance, in Buganda definitely the leader we are talking about here is the Kabaka of Buganda.  The others who are members of the family, who are his uncles, who are his sisters, those are not within the definition in this constitution. We are referring to a King and for other areas who do not have Kings but have cultural leaders who play that role as a King and these must be taken in that light, we are talking about those people who have occupied that office; and to the best of knowledge, I have not seen any candidate going around in any part of the country being followed-in Buganda at least, I have not seen King Ronald Mutebi following anybody or making certain rallies.

MR ABU MAYANJA Madam Chairperson, it is a pity.  We should really take these matters seriously. Supposing one of Kabaka’s close relatives now stood up on Ssemwogerere’s or Mayanja’s meeting and say, our family supports Mayanja or supports Ssemwogerere.  The hon. Members who are now shouting would not take it very lightly. But, however, -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA: Point of order. Is hon. Kakyama Mayanja who has been in this House for ages in order to use unparliamentary language referring to Members who are contributing as people who are shouting? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no he is not in order. It is unparliamentary.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move now to page 7 and say that- I hope the Minister will resume his coup and listen to me. Under section 40 sub-section 5 of the statute on page 36 of the statute. It says that a duplicate copy of the nomination paper certified by the returning officer shall be given to the candidate.  This form, therefore, requires having a space of certification.  But it is not there. I think it is perhaps an intended omission. There should be certification of these matters by the returning officer and a copy to the candidate and so on. If the Minister goes back and takes these forms and even perhaps brings something to amend the act, I am now on form (i) (b). It appears that these people- there are no penalty, they are trying to look at the statute. There is no penalty provided for a person who comes and votes. Maybe they have business of impersonation. But they should be some very severe staff for a person who comes and say, I am Abu Mayanja, votes, when in fact he is not.

Madam Chairperson voting by proxy is a matter which has been viewed with great anxiety.  Because nobody knows how many soldiers of voting age are in any barracks. Madam Chairperson, everybody knows that at one time in our recent history very many soldiers left Uganda and escaped to a neighbouring country. There is a Bill saying that people who ran away, people who are dead, people who have retired from the army, people who are now being recalled. All these people may be brought in and allowed to vote by means of a proxy paper. Therefore, it is absolutely essential that the greatest transparency should be exercised.  Barracks are places which are not ordinarily accessible to ordinary people. So, I would suggest that in order to ensure that a person who signs a proxy form authorising somebody else to go and vote in his name, is an actual existing person, not somebody existing in somebody’s brain; and for that to be clear, and transparent, I suggest that a better formula can be used.  But the formula I am suggesting to ensure this is that, on this form, there should be provision for the soldier or policeman or prisons officer who is even the proxy to produce this form in the presence of a candidate’s agents so that they sign it when he is there. They say this man is there, he has written a proxy and given it out and we have written on it. But if it is not done, people will assume that hundreds of thousands or tens of thousands -(Interjections)

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of clarification.  I would like to seek clarification from hon. Abu Mayanja.  I do recall that the creation of provision resulted from the possibilities of duty calling upon the ordinary voters otherwise who may be away for example in defence of the country conducting the elections.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to be clarified how in a situation which has taken away on duty a person who would have ordinarily voted where he registered, how it would be possible for all this detailed procedure to be followed. Secondly, I pick the impression that reference to people who were soldiers and have left, that situation developed before the CA registration.  I also believe that, that paper provides for the particulars of the Number, the serial Number of the voters.  Now if they do not have them where will they manufacture them from?  Because I am sure a voter will have a card which will have a Number but because he is a security person not in the station where he registered, that is why he will use the proxy method.  So, I would clarification from hon. Abu Mayanja how it will be possible to get somebody to comply with what he is suggesting.

MR GASATURA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Abu Mayanja again knows that, this deals specifically with officers and men who may be found in restricted or what is known as restricted areas. To ask agents of the candidate to go to such place, does not seem viable.  He might have swayed me when he talked about assuring or ensuring that the person who signs the form is a natural and living person. I was, however, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Captain be sincere, and make a submission.

MR GASATURA: My submission is that, this is a restricted area where it would not be viable for candidates’ agents to go. But on his insinuation about former soldiers who ran to a neighbouring country probably he means Sudan or Rwanda- I seem to remember again from his constituency an old man who said, if will not vote because I am a Murundi, neither should Abu Mayanja vote because he is a grandson of  a Murundi, and I do not remember any denial there too.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, we have now broken the rules, and we turn points of information into points of real contribution and debate.

MR OLUM: Point of information. Thank you Madam Chairperson. I would like to give this information which I think relates to what hon. Abu Mayanja is talking about.  I came from Gulu yesterday, and there are cases which have been reported regarding voters cards. So it has on operations in a place called Omenikuru in Aswa County, where voters’ cards have been collected from the wananchi.  This is something that has been reported and be verified, it has been reported to the returning officer in Gulu; and wananchi immediately ran to Gulu to find out why they have been collecting these voters cards. I think these are some of the issues that can happen if I am on operation I can collect the cards from the wanainchi and can vote by proxy.  I think this something that must be really checked and we must be clear about it. This not hearsay, but the returning officer in Gulu is aware of this; it has been reported by the wanainchi from that area. I think we stand a big danger regarding this kind of operation area where wanainchi have no say.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Madam Chairperson, perhaps, a better suggestion for dealing with this problem would be that the soldier would be required to declare in the form of an oath at the bottom of his form, that the information is correct;  that he is so and so and he is in that thing;  like the candidate, on the form of the candidate, the candidate has to swear that the information there is correct.  So, let the soldier also swear on the form that the information is correct. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Mayanja, please try to wind up.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank you very much, because I have got to go to other things, and I am really concerned now on the -(Interruption)

MR BWANIKA BBAALE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal which hon. Mayanja is putting forward to ask the agent for this soldier who is going to vote by proxy to sign before the agent may not be practical.  But there is an officer who is assigning this particular soldier duties elsewhere.  So, my suggestion is that he should make a proposal so that if this man wants to vote by proxy his commanding officer must countersign his form before he goes to the person whom this particular soldier wants to vote for him.  I think that is a better proposal than asking this particular soldier to look for an agent which is not practicable.  Thank you.

MR MWANDHA:  Madam Chairperson, I would like to request my hon. Friend, Abu Mayanja to consider making a proposal that this person who is appointing another to be his proxy should also surrender his voter’s card, so that the possibility of that voter’s card being again misused is removed by the voter’s card being attached to the proxy paper.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  As a matter of fact, I had assumed that that would be done because normally without the voter’s card you cannot vote; but I am grateful to hon. Member for Bugwere for that information.  Madam Chairperson, I want to talk now about the election of representatives of the armed forces, in addition to the proposals so ably made by hon. Lt Col Kiiza Besigye with which I entirely agree.  I would to say that there should, perhaps, in these regulations an attempt made to ensure that the whole Army is represented.  You know, know the Army has got big, medium people and other ranks; there should be some representation but that can only be done if the regulations are, actually, enacted here.  

Now, I go back to the representation of persons with disabilities.  Madam Chairperson, this has been shabbily done, it has not been at all well provided for.  Originally they had provided in this Statute that these people shall be elected by the National Association of the Disabled People or something like that, NUDIP; we objected, and the Minister said okay he will make regulations.  But when he has made regulation he has brought back NUDIP through the back door.  But even with loopholes, because it says in regulations 5, that the representative of persons with disabilities in Parliament shall be elected by an electoral college consisting of four persons elected from each district from the organised associations.  Who are the organised associations?  And groups, now who are the organised groups?  Under the structure of the national union of the disabled persons of Uganda.  Now, we do not know; the objection which was so ably put by hon. Lt Col Dr Kiiza Besigye, I cannot really -(Interruption)- the national union of disabled persons is not a body created by Parliament; we do not know anything about it.  We do not know whether it exists, we do not know whether it has got 20 people, or a hundred people, or twenty per cent population of Uganda; in other words we do not know whether it is a democratic body, and we cannot entrust the election of Member of Parliament to a body whose procedures are entirely private.  We call that a domestic, those are domestic provision which they can change any time.  So, the Minister, in my submission, has no alternative but to propose detailed methods of election, and I would suggest that these should be modeled on the method of electing women district representatives; in other words, they can be a college of - and I can also elect a disabled person just as I can elect a woman, so long as the person elected is a disabled, will be there in the area, and disabled will come to us and we will see who is more suitable.  

But there should be some way of determining that it is really not a method of getting some people - and when you say organised groups, Madam Chairman, I think you were old enough during the time of the so-called Moshi spirit, when they said organisations should go to Moshi to be represented, somebody created something called Musajja, two people - there was that organisation called Uganda Musajja Association.  So, if we pass this in this form they will get so many queer associations - this blindly - there are some respectable known association of disabled; the National Association of the Blind, but Madam Chairman, I think that the Minister really sit down and produce detailed regulations of creating an ascertainable body of electors for the election of five Members of Parliament -(Interruption)

MR NTIMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairman.  The information I want to give is that two years ago this very House passed a law, making provisions for members of the National Union of Disabled Persons in Uganda, NUDIP, to participate in electing delegates for CA.  Now we have by the same token passed this law; now we have passed the Constituent Assembly Statute, the hon. Member on the Floor happened to be the Minister of Justice, Attorney General et cetera, and I think, Constitutional Affairs fell under his portfolio, although there was a Minister of State in charge of this particular thing.  So, I do not know why the hon. Member, having been an Attorney General, and having witnessed the passing of NUDIPU’s participation in the election should now raise doubts as to whether NUDIP has a legal basis to participate in the elections and so forth, Mr Chairman.

MR MWANDHA:  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  The sentiments which have been expressed by hon. Abu Mayanja are the same sentiments which were expressed at that time when we were discussing the representation of disabled persons in Parliament.  Of course, at that time it was not possible to answer his concerns; but permit me if possible now to answer to the concerns of hon. Abmu Mayanja.  First of all, the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda has not been so lucky, like the youth, the workers and others to have a law going through this House, in order to establish it by law like the hon. Member would like it to be.  Therefore, we the disabled persons had to organise ourselves and the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda was established far back in 1987.  Madam Chairperson, it is a company limited by guarantee and registered, also with the NGO; its objective is really to speak for the disabled in Uganda, regardless of faith, regardless of tribe, regardless of religion, do speak for all the disabled persons, whether disabled by way of visual impairment or by way of physical handicap, or by way of any other type of disability; and internationally there are 24 classifications of disabilities, the major ones in Uganda are the physically handicapped, the blind, the dumb and deaf and the mentally retarded.  But there are a number of others which do exist not only here but also in other countries.  

So, Madam Chairperson, we are a registered organisation, which change leadership regularly through voting of delegates conference from all parts of Uganda, and I would like to tender the memorandum and articles of association of this body to you, Madam Chairperson, for the purpose of record according to our regulations.  

Madam Chairperson, I am giving information because I think the issues raised by hon. Abu Mayanja were so fundamental that they deserve full explanation of what the organisation is all about.  If you permit me, I can continue giving this information.  So, the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda is being supported by various organisation mainly NGOs and the government of Uganda; the Government of Uganda gives us about half a million, but we get funding from Oxfarm, from ADB, from DIS, these are various organisations from different parts of the word which fund various programmes of the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda.  Now, 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Mwandha, you are making a very long contribution.

MR MWANDHA:  Yes, Madam Chairperson, actually, if you are going to give me an opportunity I can stop there and also pass over some other documents which hon. Mayanja may also have opportunity to read at some stage, to give more information about NUDIP, these are other documents for the information of the House.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Mayanja, please wind up.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Madam Chairman, all that I was saying is that since it is a constitutional requirement that the disabled persons of Uganda must be represented to Parliament, the government is duty bound to bring a law to organise them in a manner in which they can be properly represented.  We had here representation of youths, I think, it was first stated in the Amendment to Legal Notice 1987, but it took a long time before the youth were represented, simply because there was no law for organising the youth for them to be represented to Parliament.  It is not that I object to the representation of the disabled in Parliament; why should I?  I am just saying the manner of their representation in Parliament should not be left as a matter of domestic arrangement, it should be prescribed by Parliament; in short, the Minister should bring a law for the organisation of disabled persons, or even giving recognition to NUDIP as an organisation for the purposes of the electoral process.  

Madam Chairperson, I had other things to say, but I think I have been here for tool long, I have been interrupted too much; I would like to say in conclusion that in view of what my Colleagues have said, the Minister would be well advised to take back the regulations, rewrite them, and even those which require legislative backing; he should not be ashamed, if we detected a mistake, before it is too late we must come and correct it.  It is possible to amend that Act in a day, if we are willing and we are all convinced about its necessity.  Madam, with those observations I support the making of the regulation subject to those observations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  The House stands adjourned until 2.30 p.m. tomorrow.

(The Council rose at 4.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 April 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)

  
            

