
Thursday, 28th April, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al- Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1994

(Debate Continues)

DR. FABIUS BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County, Kabarole):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support the Bill.  A lot has already been said about the shortcomings and what transpired in the last CA elections.  I do not wish to add to the list of shortcomings, but wish to call upon the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs to commission a study in the whole issue and ensure that things are rectified before we have another election or referenda.  Hon. Kagonyera yesterday but one said that the elections were free and fair to which most of us agree, but he also said that how the people arrived at deciding who to vote for, was anybody’s guess, and that is where the problem in this country lies.  

Our people are quite politically ignorant and very easy to mislead with lies and money.  We do not expect an Electoral Commission to rectify such a situation.  Because when there is an Electoral Commission or a Commissioner he is charged with ensuring that elections are held and held properly.  When he goes to educate the people, he will only educate them on what is technically necessary for them to vote.  

Therefore, somebody has got to do the job of political education of the masses and that is where hon. Members we should come in.  Because when I was confronted with a similar situation where the entire district administration machinery had been mobilised against me, where people were being sponsored where even Government Representatives were against me, I abandoned actual campaigning and went back and put more energy in my political mobilisation and educated the masses and managed to defeat my five opponents very decisively, and I can assure you, I do not think it is any longer possible for anybody to mislead Batagwenda now.  

So, I would wish to encourage hon. Members that we take this question of enlightening our people very seriously for future elections.  We may not wish to get involved in future elections but then, all of us desire peace and prosperity for this land and to have peace and prosperity in this land, people must vote maturely.

Turning to the Bill proper, this Section 5 that has some relationship with Section 11, the Amendment is proper, but it is a bit thorny.  Many Members are already weary and were disturbed by this question of extension, and therefore, we are frightened by any indication that the life of this Parliament may be extended.  So, to put our minds to rest, I would wish the Minister could may be put a time limit to when a referenda can be held and the time limit of when the Constitution should be promulgated and I suggest the 10th of January 1995, that we must be through with all referenda and we must be through with promulgation of the new Constitution so that the people of Uganda can vote and have a new Government by the 25th of January 1995.  

Turning to Section 9, this Amendment is very welcome because it was always my fear that many referenda may paralyse the population of this country.  Therefore, I like this Amendment because it encourages dialogue and consensus.  But at the same time, I agree with the voices that have said that these repeated votes could be interfered with and that people outside when there is a drastic change in the sinking of the people in the Assembly may think that the people have been bought.  

I, therefore, suggest that instead of having allowance for three votes we have one vote.  So that if there is a heated debate on a subject within the Assembly, the Chairman notes that there is definitely no consensus the House is divided.  Instead of voting on the subject immediately, the Members should be given leave for one week in which to consult among themselves and in which to consult their constituencies so that when they come back, they just vote once and if after the vote the matter is still contentious, then it goes for referenda.  With those few remarks, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support the Bill.

MR. OLUBA (Maracha County, Arua):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for this rare opportunity to speak. (Interruption)

MR. ONGOM:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, we are discussing a very important Bill indeed, and saying that it is very important, is it in order for the House to continue with the Bill when there is clearly no quorum in the House?

THE CHAIRMAN:  We form a quorum.

MR. ONGOM:  May be it would be better to ring the bell more so that – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Do we form a quorum?

HON. MEMBERS:  We ring the bell.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, we ring the bell; we ring the bell.  Ten minutes please.

(Bell rung and House realised quorum).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed then; proceed.

MR. OLUBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity to speak -(Interjection)- it is rare for me as an individual Member of this House - not for all of you.  Now, I rise to support the Bill.  I would like in the first place, to welcome you back in the Chair although you have been welcomed many times. I hope you are not tired of being welcomed.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.

MR. OLUBA:  I would also like, Mr. Chairman, to welcome new Members of the National Assembly especially, members of the workers who were sworn in recently.  The constitution which we are going to make and the constitution which we are working under now, gives power to the people and I believe with the workers’ representatives in this House, they will spearhead the people’s power, because they hope to tick this country economically and socially.  

I would like to reveal a few of the things which are also concerned with the CA, with the particular reference to North and North East, Mr. Chairman, some of us who participated as Members of this House in the CA, and who invariably failed must be taken to the litmus paper test for this Government to measure our performance in those two regions.  If this is not going to be taken seriously, those of us, including myself who campaigned on the Movement ticket will be done with and done with totally.  I sight several reasons for not only our failures or other Members of this House in all parts of Uganda.  

Reason number one, is weakness in the law which we are trying to look at now, and these reasons, when we were debating the CA Statute, we were being told to the Minister and the Minister invariably refused them and he told this House we are so doing because we refuse to go the to people.  

I am now glad he has come back with the very reasons which the House highlighted when we were passing the CA Statute, as being gapes in the Statute which means we are not blind to the laws we pass here. I would, therefore, associate myself with the Members who have contributed before me that the weaknesses in the CA were actually contributed to a major extent by the hon. Minister who is a Mover of the Bill.

Secondly, I do not rule out individual weakness in all the candidates who like me, also failed in the CA.  Individual weaknesses are there, but I would also like this House to know if it is true that some of us were thrown out because we did not develop.  How about the following Members who were thrown out?  I have observed a few people who have done a lot of development, who are outside this House or who are Members of this House who were also thrown out.  

Examples, I will sight like Ringa Okumu; who has developed this man would have outright Member of CA!  Why did they throw him out?  He used a lot of money, he has done a lot of development, but he was thrown out all the same.  Why did they throw out hon. Betty Bigombe?  This lady has sacrificed her life, has worked hardest but she was thrown out because of manipulation.  People were saying if you vote for this lady your noses, your lips, your ears, will not survive and that was manipulation, and some of us, the very gifts we used to mobilise the people, were turned against us.  When we told the people to work for self-reliance to build schools, to build dispensaries, that they would get roofing materials from government and the government never readily came to our aid, those words became issues for us to lose, because we have no roofing materials from government and these are the very people we mobilised, who turned against us.  That is normal in politics, but we should learn from it.  

Thirdly, Government policies also had a major role to play in throwing us out.  Take the policy of rehabilitation. The rehabilitation policy worked most effectively where there was infrastructure, that was destroyed during the wars we fought here, and the level at which those destroyed systems were rehabilitated, in these regions which I sighted. Rehabilitation leaves a lot to be desired.  It is better now as a Government, for us to wake up and rehabilitate those areas, which were not rehabilitated so that we do not leave the people crying for rehabilitation; when the rest of us are now developing.

I would sight secondly, the programme of NURP, especially in North and North East.  This programme has made the least impact and this has been a major spear in our lips when we failed.  It is better those who are responsible for the programme make sure that during the remaining period this programme works, if it does not work as much as the people expect, I do not know what to say on behalf of the Government at this present time.  I would also like to say allocation of natural resources was not adequately done.  

You will realise that when we had a seminar in 1989 in Makerere Main Hall, we did propose and it was accepted although later rigged that constituencies should be taken as planning units when the main budget for this country is being drawn, that remained in the Main Hall in Makerere.  People who associate themselves with the fact that national resources should be allocated to a few areas so that it makes an impact, and as a result, those of us who would not do service to our people have been rejected because of this policy.  

Also, insurgency did its route, insurgency in the North, charged the minds of the people.  In a few areas to look at the government negatively, and I hope time is on our side, we will go all out to mobilise the people to understand that Government was not responsible for the insurgency. If anything, in the insurgency areas, those who are participants in the insurgency are actually responsible for the insurgency.  

Finally, decentralisation.  Decentralisation policy includes my district Arua as a pilot project, as far as I see things on the ground. Decentralisation if anything has removed even the little service we used to get from our district and we are now told to wait, and told to wait I do not know for how long.  All out people who were doing maintenance those have been left in disarray and as a result during the candidates meeting, I was being asked question which were only fit to be answered by RC V and III which I had no time to answer in 20 minutes, and that was a big let down for me.  Because, the much I tried to answer in 20 minutes would not suffice because people there were bridges.  

So, now coming to the Bill, I would like to actually praise the hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, that he is actually the best Minister for transitional Uganda. (Laughter)  

Because I have looked the way this Minister perceives law and brings it here, even if there are loopholes and he is told, and he rejects it and then comes back again and I accept that those are the loopholes.  This is a Minister who appears to look at our current system perspectively and I think without him, we would have done very little.  I wonder what this law would do the Statute we made here did not do.  If the Statute could not net people who are supposed to fight corruption and play clean leadership in the CA, will it ever, with this Amendment, next general election?  Or is it about to net them? 

The degree of corruption which I saw in my constituency and the neighbouring constituencies, the degree of manipulation which I did see -(Laughter)- and no one was apprehended for all these manipulation and corruption when there was law in place, I am wondering whether we are actually making laws just to make ourselves smart as a country or just to fill the vacuum.  Let us if we pass this Amendment at all, implement the law; that is my appeal.  If we do not implement the law, why must we waste the public money here sitting that we are making law.  

As if this was not enough, I had some information which I regard to be very reliable on the fact that some of us were being supported from the Secretariat of NRM, I am not one of those people, but I have been a participant in this Government from 1986 and I am told there were one or two candidates supported in my constituency and other neighbouring constituencies.  

So, the Movement wanted to recruit new allies and in the process of recruiting new allies, they promoted corruption, because those allies had to receive money, the abandoned ones are to go and take their coffins, and if this trend of events continues, the democracy we are trying to build now should not be exclusive democracy.  If it is exclusive democracy, let us all pay attention to what is happening in neighbouring countries today.  I think we have survived this for because we have had to accommodate our enemies, we have had to accommodate those who disagree with us and if we are now going to resort, to exclude some people whose services we have used, just as a gentleman would abandon every good place of dish in a hotel because he is satisfied, we are not going to make a very good democracy in this country.  The women are already whispering that is just like abandoning the first wife because you have taken a new wife.  

I would like to say that, I support the spirit of having elections in this country, because having elections in the final analysis is a better straggle than having war, because if you have elections whether they are rigged or not rigged, let us have them, let us rig them, let us pass some people, let us come here, laugh together and suffer or enjoy whatever is there in this country.  Mr. Chairman, with these remarks, I support the Bill.  Thank you.

MR. WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate this rare opportunity of permitting me to express the views on the Amendment Bill.  The Badadiri greet you and welcome you back from Britain where they hope you recovered.  I want to go on record as one of those people who would like to get things done properly in our country.  I say this because; this Amendment Bill is not what I would really like in place.  I must say that I must be one of the rare people to say, I do not support this Bill for these reasons.

You will find that, usually under Rule 32, my Friend hon. Member who has just contributed, there is too much bribery in our country and we seem to think that everything is alright, but it is a matter of doing things without being caught.  As an example, I reported some of these bribes to the returning officer in Mbale, but he did practically nothing.  I want to say that, under Rule 32 Section 4(2), that was really the act of the day and I do not know where we are taking this country.  The reason, is that we all went to the poles and said that everybody is NRM, but I was surprised for somebody to say that NRM has worn majority of seats.  Before Ladies or Women’s elections, somebody predicted that it was going to be a victory for NRM.  So, where did we set the Rules of saying that this should be NRM and other people were complaining that it is not the NRM ticket?  

I want to put the record right, in saying that under Section 9 of the proposed Bill, when I have seen what has happened as far as bribery is concerned, if the first voting is not done in secrecy, those people who will have descanted to whatever will come before the Constituent Assembly, will be noted and I can see some kind of manipulation and going behind at night to say, you voted this way, why, why do not vote for us?  

So, therefore, if we want democracy and I can see the second voting whereby we go to vote and somebody will say, well, why did you not vote for me last time?’  So, unless the voting is going to be in secrecy in the CA, we are pre-empting things and, therefore, the Constitution which we intend to discuss, I can foresee corruption really at the beginning and, therefore, the Constitution itself may not be what we would wish it to be.  

Because, with this kind of going behind things, we would not be doing the right things and it may not stand for the test of times whereas we are all agreeable to that the Constitution should stand the test of times, but if we do this under-hand things like we have done under Section 4 of the Constituent Assembly, we are not going to get far, we are going to do things which may make even the Constitution not to be acceptable to our people.  NRM has done a very good job on security and, therefore, I would like the matter of deciding on two-thirds majority to be left to the Constituent Assembly itself rather than for this august House to pass that Amendment.  

Therefore, I would really pray to the Minister that he should really go back and cut out the two-thirds majority, because we are trying to get things being done in piecemeal and you know what we passed so far.  So, I pray that Amendment 9 of first voting, second voting should be deleted out of here, but otherwise, all the others may go ahead.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU (Kagoma County, Jinja):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to support the Amendment with reservations.  But before I give my observations, I want to make some general remarks.  One is that the democratisation process that is going on in the whole country will never be complete or successful if we have the degree, the high degree of illiteracy in the countryside.  Because, here we appreciate that of the voters we have had participating in the CA; those who are easy to manipulate were the illiterates.  And if we remain with this high illiteracy, the democracy will never be complete here.  

So, I think government should suddenly step up the efforts being made to at least try and make people literate, and then with a literate environment democracy can be put in place.  Because I witnessed cases whereby you have candidate number one is being supported by the voter, the poor woman comes and says, I want to vote for the last candidate, and because of illiteracy, the presiding officer turns the paper upside down, so that number one now is the last candidate, and the poor woman votes for number one.  So, this kind of problem can be put right, illiteracy is fought, that is one.

A second general point I want to make is that when the hon. ministers on the front bench are moving either their laws or amendments, I know the back-benchers listen very much and then make contributions, but it seems sometimes, our hon. Colleagues on the front benches never listen to our contributions.  Because if they do, some of things that we are repeating to are things which appeared in fact, some of these amendment, we contributed when we were here on the CA Statute, when we are contributing on the Referendum Bill, these contributions were here, and because some of our Members on front bench do not really listen to us, and they come back and make the same mistakes which were being advocated against.  

Back on the Amendment now; there are these three votes, you vote once, you break for a week, then you vote, then you break for a week, and then you vote.  Possibly the hon. Minister will clarify on this issue.  When we are voting like that, whom are you helping?  Are you helping the electorate, the voter of the hon. Mover of whoever - who are you helping?  Because here, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the idea of first voting and second voting is to have two-thirds majority, which may not be forthcoming.  I thank you.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for this information, but he has just been himself talking about corruption.  I can see a loophole here embedded in the whole process, because if the two thirds majority is not coming, then money will do its work and we are likely to see what money can do.  Now, there is the Amendment of Section 11 of the Amendment Bill, is amending Article 19(4) whereby even after the expiry of the term of the office of the CA because can continue.  

Now, my question is, are we not working for a leadership vacuum in this case?  The supreme organ of government is the legislature and I think according to programme we all know that the legislature is term of the office, this present NRC expires on 25th January, 1995, not later than that, okay?  

Now, supposing we follow this Amendment, are we not likely to find ourselves in situation where we have no Parliament but the Constituent Assembly is still continuing?  Will that not create problems?  I hope the hon. Minister will make clarification on this issue.  Then the second clarification I want the hon. Minister to make is on Section 10 of the Amendment Bill as an additional there is 17(a) being added on the original principle statute.  

Now, my question is, will a matter of local interest also be voted for by the whole Assembly or is it provided for as it is in the principle statute that it will be settled by negotiation and consultation because this is not clear in the Amendment.  I can see a problem here, whereby if Busoga wants a Federal system of government, that the whole Assembly may reject the idea whereas I think it was in order that this issue be dealt with at a local level not at the general assembly.  So, I think the hon. Minister should clarify on this one whether local issues will remain to be dealt with locally or they will dealt with by the whole delegation in the CA.  

The next clarification I want the hon. Minister to make is on Article 18, sub-section 3 of the principle statute.   In this Article, the President may before, during and after call a referendum.  But then we are watering it down the referendum issue in the amendment. Now, after watering down, are we amending this one or we are not?  So, I would request the hon. Minister to make this clarification so that we go in for debating something very clear.

Lastly, as I promised to be very brief, I think the hon. Minister will give us time to over-haul this whole, the CA Statute because the whole thing after the experiences of the CA elections needs being over hauled, this piecemeal Amendments are not pushing us very far.  We want democracy and the true democracy we want peace, we want freedom, we want development.  Now, we have to look at the whole law in its entirety and over-haul it, because we have really out practice, we have seen what is can do, we have seen the loopholes, so if we over-haul t, we may be in position to make a better law for future elections.  With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much.

MRS. MPANGA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the Minister Didi to be in this House not properly dressed? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are not in order hon. Didi. Please proceed, please.  Hon. Minister please, you are not in order, please.

MRS. MASABA WAFAANA (Women Representative, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I do support the Constituent Assembly Amendment Bill, 1994, however, permit me to welcome you back and to welcome all those Members who went for the CA Assembly Elections, those who were successful, I congratulate them and those who did not pass through, please take it that there is always a winner and a loser.  However, permit me to say a few words in connection with the CA elections.  

Democracy is good when everything is levelled.  Democracy is good when all children are treated equally.  Democracy is good when there are malpractice.  Democracy is good when we mean that we should have democracy for our country and save the many lives, which we have lost over the years of malpractice.  I say this because, I have found that in my district may be elsewhere also. The many elections or the general elections really interfered with the elections of the women.  

I would propose that for the future may be we should have the youth elections first, women next, then the general elections last.  Because I have observed that when the men took their share - the general elections took their share, the women elections were thoroughly interfered with the blocks.  So -(Interruption)

MR. MBURA-MUHINDO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that one of the reasons why they think the women were interfered with was because when constituency elections were taking place, the ladies took sides and many of them could have supported opponents of the men who were standing.  So when it came to their turn, they also refused it the right way. (Laughter)

MRS. WAFAANA MASABA:  Thank you for that information, but that was not the case in my district.  I am talking from the general principles of democracy especially, for the disadvantaged groups, the youth, the disabled and the women.  I would like to take clarification through you to the Minister responsible whether the RCs were still a legitimate body to elect the women representatives because according to the RC Statute, the RCs live for two years and they expire -(Interjection)- three, thank for that, and then the other one is the malpractice which I saw was giving out money at polling stations.  Yes, this one happened in my district and people wondered whether we who are in the government are really serious or not when we talk about corruption, and not interfering with the elections.  It was a sad affair in that, where people had appreciated the move we had made so far to getting a democratic system of government, such malpractice happened on the polling day when the electorate was seeing, and it was very unfortunate some top people were involved.

Now, while I support this one, the Constituent -(Interruption)

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, when I talked with the senior officer about that, somewhere, he said, if he had implemented the law to the later, there would have been no candidates in very many constituencies.  So, I just looked at him and kept quiet.  Thank you.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Mr. Chairman, the law of this country is very clear, when you are a citizen and you detect somebody is about or is in the process of committing an offence, you have a right to arrest that person.  So, now if the hon. Member is a citizen and has a right to report or arrest that person who is about to commit an offence, so you are abating and aiding crime.  

MRS WAFAANA MASABA:  Mr. Chairman, I reported to the returning officer who was in charge of the elections.  Not only did I stop there, but I was personally way laid in Mbale and faced with two gunmen when I was traveling to see my sick father.  That is why I say when we mean to do a good job, let us do a good job.  I was harassed, I had two women with me and a man, they told me leave the women at the road block, I said, I am responsible for women affairs, the husbands know that these women are with me.  I could not leave the women at the roadblock and in the process; these gunmen assumed I was armed.  So, they really terrorised me on Saturday the 23rd before the elections.  But I stood firm and told them if they are there to shoot me, let them shoot me.  I said they were free to shoot me, they tortured us and harassed us at that roadblock, they were two people in military attire, whether they were thugs or not, I do not know.  But eventually we were told to leave our belongings at the roadblock - Kikoye where a fire had been made, and at gunpoint, I was ordered to drive off.  So, when I drove off, thank God the policemen were very good. They rung to the site and found that these people had disappeared.  That is why I say, if we have to have good elections, I think the ground should be levelled for all.  

Coming to the Constituency Amendment Bill, 1994.  I support this one and also add my sentiments about the referendum where the referendum is going to be when it comes to the decision on the local issues like ‘ebyaffe’ for Mbale district and may be Federal Government and so on and so forth.  Because we notice in one of the - I with my people in Mbale district there was an article which appeared in the papers which said that the North and the North East have got voted this way and the other areas were that way.  

I thought that was a very unfortunate statement to be in the papers because people were moving towards democratization, they had appreciated the principles because it shows signs of recovery, signs of unity and signs of development but unfortunately, when that article appeared in the papers, it was a reset back to quite a good number of supporters.

MR. MUKISA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform my sister the hon. Member on the Floor that at times we should not blame the Press, very often we bring the problems ourselves, most of the candidates who are referred to actually declared their political lines.  So what is wrong when the papers point it out, at least, in Iganga district, they did openly said they belonged to a certain party, what is wrong with the papers pointing out what the candidates themselves said?  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. WAFAANA MASABA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, but I said according to the CA Statute, we were not supposed to campaign on partisan things.  Partisan lines.  If I remember the CA Statute faithfully -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  

MRS. WAFAANA MASABA:  Mr. Chairman, having gone through the concluded elections, people are wondering whether the referendum exercise will not also be manipulated like what we experienced during these elections.  That is all I have to say.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. BWANIKA BAALE (Katikamu County, Luwero):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, to have given me this opportunity to contribute.  I must first of all say that, I support the Amendment Bill of the Constituency Assembly.  I would also like to talk about a few incidents that I observed, which really contravened the CA Statute when the elections were taking place, especially in Katikamu North, which I happen to represent in the CA.  

I think the level of the civic education was inadequate in all respects, even just before the voting day on the 27th on Sunday people were wondering whether they would have six boxes because they were candidates or not.  I think this was a very big handicap to our electorate, and I think most of the people who voted were misguided, I think in future, we shall make all efforts and if at all we are having subsequent by elections, I think the Commissioner should ensure that the civic education is carried out adequately.  People should be invited to come and be given adequate civic education.

MR. OLUBO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you.  I would like to inform the hon. Member through you, that what he says is too - to some extent.  When civic educators were not being paid promptly, the fund - it was better to be campaign managers because that is where they earned more money.  So, what other longer time they would have been given as long as they were not being paid in time, they would prefer to do campaign managers’ job than civic education. (Laughter)

MRS. KALEMA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, to add to what Members have said, there was for instance, presiding officers and polling assistants.  Presiding officers during the candidates’ campaign were never paid for five weeks.  Maybe they were paid later on after the end of candidates’ meeting.  This was also a handicapped because it maybe the presiding officers not to be really committed to their work.    In my area, some of them would be reading newspaper throughout while the candidates were speaking.  

MR. KERMU:  Point of information. All the civic educators who were to work in the Constituency had not been paid by last Sunday.

MR. BWANIKA BAALE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Now turning to the presiding officers, some of them were good others were extremely very bad; I stick to the majority.  This one you discover it when it came to some printing on the ballot papers, you would go to one particular station and those thumb prints would be a particular candidate which meant that presiding officers were deliberately misleading or misguiding the electorate.

I would enforce the statement made by hon. Gwaivu that actually the high level of illiteracy also has a very big negative contribution to our democracy, and I think in our policies we should fight as much as possible to reduce this illiteracy because many of our voters were misguided.  

Secondly, I am wondering whether the presiding officers were not also entitled to vote because in my area you would find one presiding officer moved from a particular constituency to another one which meant that he was - in fact he never cast your vote, some of these who never cast their votes, which meant that their democratic rights were violated.  I think the presiding officers should be nominated or appointed from within their constituencies and they should be allowed to cast the votes at the station they are presiding at instead of making them lose votes.  

In Katikamu, we lost many of these who had been shifted from one station to another and from one constituency to another constituency.  And I think they were not very happy although they were paid some good money but I think that right which they were deprived of, was not I think properly catered for.  

Some of these guys were given too many powers.  This was very unfortunate.  They went to the extent of even chasing some of our agents to be put very far and even to the extent of telling them that they had no powers or they had no role to play at the polling stations.  I think the law should be amended to the extent that when somebody does not know the photograph of a candidate, the agents should be given the opportunity, for example, if I put agents at a station if this person comes and say, I want so and so, the presiding officer should ask the agent to come and assist because after all if this person declare that I want so and so, the vote is no longer confidential it is an open thing.  So, me I do not see any problem why the agent could not be called upon to assist this person to tick at the right box for the candidate of his choice.

Then in connection with the too much powers given to these people at the time of the counting of the votes, some people because of civic education. would write names in the box instead of ticking, and in some stations these guys were rejecting those as bad votes, which was very unfortunate, and at particular stations some of these guys the voters did not want to appear to be illiterate, so instead of writing a tick, the man would write a seven (7) and these votes would be rejected.  

I would like to recommend that I think some of these agents should be properly trained to help our people.  And then the degree of the fault votes for example, if you had five hundred votes - five hundred voters and out of them you had a hundred fault votes at a particular station that would give some indication that either the civic education was wrong or there was something wrong in that particular polling station; and I think if the percentage is so high, there should be opportunity to order a re-election, because if it has a high percentage of bad votes, then that is a reflection that there is something wrong at that particular polling station.  I would recommend that if we find a very high percentage of bad votes - rejected votes, then the presiding officer or the returning officer should be given powers to order a fresh election in that one.

Now, I turn to the women election.  In Katikamu North or Luwero district, after the elections the women came complaining that these people should have been elected by their fellow women and they were accusing men of having elected people who are not of their choice.  

I think in future if we are saying we are going to elect women, we should make sure that the highest percentage of voters if it is inevitable, should be women because we do not want the women to accuse us of having chosen wrong candidates for them.

MR. KAVUMA:  Point of information.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, the problem is raising maybe as a result of mobilising the population in his area, so that the people - the voters would understand that these women were not women representatives, they were not delegates for women, but they were district delegates but who had to be women.  So, in that case, both men and women had a right to vote. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, continue hon. Bbaale please.  Information from the hon. Madam please.

MRS. KAZUNGU:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that actually when we held these elections, which we are referring to as general elections, the majority of people who voted were women although they happen to have voted in men.  So, the issue of saying that women representatives should be elected by majority of women should not arise. (Applause)

MR. BWANIKA BAALE:  Thank you very much for that information you have given me, but I am telling you that, if you said you wanted more women here, then that thing should have been reflected in the voting.  This is what I am saying I have no problem, as long as you have more women voting, that idea of women having learned extra women in the House that one comes, but as long as you have many men voting particularly in the electoral college then you are losing the meaning.  

I am happy with the constituency amendment, but my worry is the risks that it may drug us to into extending our stay here.  Some of us when you are campaigning - some of the weapon you are using was that we extended our stay here.  I would like the Minister in his wisdom to make sure that when the CA is sitting, there is no chance of really making an additional extension because we are likely to have problems when we go back to ask for fresh elections.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. KIRYAPAWO (Women Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill with some comments and just like many Members have reflected the results of the CA elections, I also join them with these comments.  I think Government or some top people in Government, made it clear by encouraging the giving of money, because when you hear somebody saying when they give you, please take.  That one was clearly supporting, bribing the Electoral College and it was difficult for any Member who went through or who lost not to pay something to the voters and it is the same thing which I am seeing here, in this Amendment Bill Section 9, where we are saying when we refer to the referendum where we shall have to vote three times and the first time after voting, we give them as it is stated, at least, one week, when you say at least, let us be precise, because when you say at least, it means it can be more than a week.  And during that consultation, I am sure money is going to do a very big job as it did in the elections, and now that is the first voting -(Interruption)

MR. HENRY KYEMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I thank the hon. Lady for giving me the Floor.  It was made abundantly clear during the deliberation of the main Bill for the Constituent Assembly that the Members who are being elected to the Constituent Assembly are delegates not representatives who have got to keep in constant touch with the electorate.  This was a very big issue during recent election.  That many Members here need to consult the electorate as far as possible on major issue of the Constitution.  Anyone who came through certainly had to convince the electorate that he was going to consult them.  I find it rather odd.

Therefore, when an issue is being made, that consulting the electorate at every stage and when Government is facilitating that consultation, which should be an issue.  I think that it is not correct.  Thank you.

MRS. KIYRAPAWO:  I thank the hon. Minister of State for Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries but, it is the way I see it, I think the Minister should also see it in the same way.  When we say consultation, here in NRC we have been consulting and it is not provided in anywhere, but we know we have to consult and I am sure these delegates also are coming in knowing they have to consult.  We do not need to make a law, to give them that period and what the Minister is saying is theory but practically, what happens?  Definitely I am sure that during this consultation there is a lot which will be done, anyway, to use money.  Three times!  You can imagine.  The first voting, you give them at least a week, it could be two weeks, they consult and during that consultation, I am sure even the delegates were being consulted by somebody and that is the major part of it.  

As it has been said by some Members that some of us lost on the NRM ticket and that was the issue in Eastern and North.  Once you were NRC Member even you wondered for the women, the RC’s who voted for us, they also belong to the NRM system but they also had to think that when you are a Member of NRC, you are NRM.  

So, these people also during their consultation, they have come in as delegates who have been voted in either on which ever side, but once they come here and you give them that period of consultation, and they will also be consulted, I am sure, 1995 will be a different issue.  So, I think we should delete this consultation to give them that period of consulting.  I do not see why two thirds of the voters is not realised, then let us go to a referendum because we are even using the tax payers’ money for nothing to be sending people there to consult while they are being paid and the tax payer is not benefiting anything because some of them are already regretting with the people they have voted in as the wrong because money was doing the job.  

So, I am sure and I beg Government not co encourage corruption when we are talking about; corruption, corruption everyday -(Interruption)- you could find that, let us stick to the law, because when we passed here the Constituent Assembly Statute, we said elections must take place on one day.  But you find that in some constituencies, elections took place for two days even three days.  There were some polling stations where ballot boxes were sent without ballot papers.  Schools were used, some students remained at school and these students were used to vote for certain candidates.  Returning officers did not do any job.  They were also probably consulted and as such, you find that in one constituency, there were for example 96 polling stations, but on the Election Day, you found that they had put there more polling stations and this brought a very big confusion among the voters.  He goes to this polling station, her name or his name is not there, then, he moves around and eventually what the Commissioner said, that once you provide the certificates, you were allowed to vote.  I am sure if they went through the results, if they were registering the numbers on the certificates, they would find one number appearing about five times, even the ‘indelible ink’ was not ‘indelible ink.’ People voted more than once.  

So, when we talk about this consultation, people go and come back and then eventually the referendum.  I do not know what method we shall use when we say, we are going for a referendum because even there, then there are two fighting size either for Movements or for Multiparty and I am sure everybody is now - each side is being prepared to see how best he can go through.  I am sure, if we took a method of lining up during that period, it would be better.  The candidates Agents should stand in for the candidate and people line behind because photographs cannot work, when we talk about symbols, some people have a bias with them they think of the symbols of the past so somebody does not like the symbols.  So, these developed countries - something that works in America cannot work here in Uganda.  We must allow the conditions of our country.  

So, I do not see what is wrong with lining up behind somebody; an agent of a candidate that one will solve the problem even it will be cheaper if people just went behind the agent of a candidate and there is another section which talks about - it is the extension here in Section 11, - they are talking about Section 19 in the Principle Bill, you see when we are not sure, let us be firm on the period for the CA, because when we say, well, if the referendum is snot yet and the period has expired, then these people will come in, that one also was another black spot for us people here, because as we came in, I am sure most of us did not know how long we were going to stay here, and then it was two years because they thought the Drafting of the Constitution was not yet ready for us to debate so the result was to extend -(Interruption)- You oppose it, but then as we were informed that when we do what - even Government will be resolved, now, we extended our period, when we set this one, expiry date when a referendum is not yet over; that one the ordinary man and woman will know that the CA has also extended itself and they will know that this is a manoeuvre of NRM Government to vote in people and when they reach there, they extend their life in whatever body they are going to deliberate and with that, it gives a very bad picture to the people.  It spoils I always say, it is like when you prepare tea and just make a drop of paraffin in a tea pot of tea, the whole tea is spoilt just by a drop of paraffin.  

So, I am sure government should be precise. If it sees that the maximum seven months is not enough, let the Minister come up and say CA will take a year so that by the time they start, everybody knows that CA is going to take a period of one year.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr. Henry Kyemba):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important Bill.  Before doing so, I want to join those who have welcomed our new Members mainly from the Workers and the Youth to this august House.  I stand fully to support the Constituent Assembly Amendment Bill, 1994, and in doing that, I want to take this opportunity to pay special tribute to the NRM for providing people of this country with an opportunity to exercise their natural right in electing delegates to the Constituent Assembly.  

It is a fact that the Members of this hon. House are right in raising a number of short comings in the exercise that took place.  But I think, in fairness to all those concerned, I think we must admit that this is the first election where there was no state inspired rigging because both the losers and the winners are accusing each other of rigging.  

Indeed the fact that half the Members of this House seem to have lost their seats, is an indication that we passed a law without being unfair to any particular person.  We are passing a law in the hope that it was going to be exercised fairly and the fact that half of us in this House lost, it should be an indication that the decisions which were taken here, were taken without fear or favour for any particular individual.

It is true that a number of shortcomings that were observable during the election affected a few individuals; certainly the appointment of presiding officers in this exercise affected some because we did not anticipate that there would be a question where we find relatives of candidates presiding at certain polling stations.  Now, that we know that thing can happen, I think we shall be able to address it before the next exercise.  

Similarly, we know hat when we are trying to be too transparent about voting, we make the marking of the papers and voting observed by everybody.  Now, we realise that in trying to protect against rigging, we might have decided on a distance which might have enabled somebody to know where one he was marking.  

Now, we know, I suppose that we can make a screen when marking of the paper is taking place and make sure that the actual voting takes place when everyone is seeing.  That one will make it possible for us to know that somebody is actually putting in one ballot paper rather than several ballot papers as some people might have conspired that go and get so many ballot papers, do not throw it there, but I will throw them in for you.  

These are all issues which I am sure the Minister for Constitutional Affairs is prepared to look at and see how we can prevent any such multi-practices but I would certainly not agree with anyone who is putting the blame on the commissioner for Constituent Assembly and his staff whom in all probability did carry out the law that we passed in this House.  I do not want to share the view of some that when news that you do not like comes out on television, you should break the television set.  

Thirdly, we pass a law here, and it is up to us to correct it and make sure that we do the necessary remedies for any future multi-practices that is why the Minister is coming here to ask the Members of this august House to exercise their views and opinions on the best way of remedying the situation.  

With regard to this particular Amendment, I wanted to mention one or two things she has raised on the Floor of this House.  One, is about the method of consultation.  I want to repeat that we are working under a very tight timetable.  This House has got to leave this Chamber at the latest by the 25th of January, 1995, by which time we must have a Constitution in place and another House to replace this particular Chamber.  

So, I would appeal to my hon. Colleagues in this House, that while there maybe shortcomings in some of the operations of the Act, we must take certain, that we do things with sufficient speed to enable the Constituent Assembly to go through its important exercise.  When we talk about the time of the CA, we all know that we passed a law, which provides for the Constituent Assembly alone to promulgate the law.  Even if it does not finish its work, there is no way our House can come in to complete its work.  The work we set for the Constituent Assembly is reserved for that body and I think for the Minister to make provision just in case that they cannot finally put to raise some of the decisions necessary for a new Constitution.  I think that would be a good thing for the Minister to provide.  It is not extending the life of the NRC. 

These two bodies are different, and our life is not dependent on the CA except that we must be out of here by the 25th of January 1995.  But the CA, it is hoped should be able to complete its work again to allow the election exercise for people to stand up again and be elected to the National Assembly that will come in place.  

So, I would appeal to Members of this august House when they are debating this particular Bill, to allow the Minister to have the opportunity to deal with these things that are coming to the floor from time to time so that we can rectify the matters and move forward to the elections for the next Parliament.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support.       

MR. ADOKO NEKYON (Maruzi County, Arua):  Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity which you have given me to express my views on this small but very dangerous Bill.

It is only few months ago, that we passed the Statute governing the operations of the Constituent Assembly.  I would have expected that the Bill - the law we passed would have remained in force un amended and the CA started its meetings.  But this is the second Amendment, this goes to show either the Bill which was brought before the House was hurriedly prepared and then rushed to the House through various methods, otherwise, if we are going to have a law today and then we have two amendments within two, three months, this House would be bogged down, so I want to say that the purpose of this Amendment is clear.  Those who expect to get two thirds majority in the elections, must realise that they have failed to get the two thirds, so they are manipulating it now by reducing two thirds majority to three times voting.  This is the precise meaning of this Bill, and I want to condemn it in the strongest terms, this country must not be contacted through threats, through tricks, we must make laws in good faith.  We must make laws for the betterment of this country, but not because we think the Members of Parliament are fools, that can be taken for ride for even and ever.  

I have been through these elections and I am proud that I am going to speak as somebody who won the elections because, if I had lost, you would have said that I am speaking as a disgruntled person.  I want to say that in all my political life, since 1952 when I joined the first political party in Uganda, I have never, never seen manipulations in elections as I have seen this year; never.  I want to repeat; I have never in my political carrier seen as much political manipulation in elections as I have seen in this year.  I will explain.  

In 1980, we in DP said that elections were rigged, yes, there was rigging, but I am saying now, that the rigging was not as thoroughly organised as this one -(Laugher)- those who do not want to hear, hear, they may not want to hear, but the truth is in the villages, the truth is with people in the countryside.

AN. HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor through you, Sir, that in 1980, there was state inspired rigging of the General Elections that is why districts like Arua never voted.

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information.  I also like to inform the Speaker that in 1980, just for nomination alone, not everybody was nominated, many people were arrested and they never reached their nomination places and he could have been one of them.

MR. NEKYON:  He is trying to contrast, I think some Members are in hurry to inform me about things I am going to speak about, if only they could wait and hear what I am going to present, I will be very proud of them.

MR. KAYONDE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform hon. Nekyon, that during 1980 elections, he could not even approach his area where he was going to be registered.  His pick-up according to the papers was stopped half way and he could not get to his place.

MR. NEKYON:  The all Members should know less about what happened in 1980 that I did because I was participating in the election and I was the man who raised more voice against the manipulations and I went to exile for that purpose.  So, I am not saying that in 1980 there was no rigging. I did say there was rigging.  But I have said, there was less rigging than what I have seen today and I am going to explain.  Please allow me to explain.

Sir, we passed a Bill here, saying that nobody should mention the name of his party during the campaign and then nobody should hold a rally apart from the candidates meeting.  What did we see?  There were official candidates and non-government candidates.  Official candidates were allowed to hold rallies at night ahead of the candidates meetings, in those meetings, goats, sheep were slaughtered and money was distributed from Government offers.  How could a headmaster standing against me distribute more than 40 million, when Teachers in his own school have not been paid their salary?  Where did that money come from?  

I have seen with my eyes the following; I said, here before that the creation of the Districts was the first part of rigging.  Every district brought in one lady to the Constituent Assembly.  This is the fact and it is on our record now, and is going to take place.  But what happened in the women’s elections, this was the worst rigged election of all the elections in every area of the country; money was used more than ever in our history.  

if we wanted fair elections for the women, I said, with no objection, in my speech and check in the records.  What should have happened was that the women’s voting should have been done on the same day during the same procedure.  All you had to do was to give a lady a card for voting, then she goes and picks for the man as a general candidate and then give her another card containing a list of women candidates, so that she may tick for a woman and throw even in the same box as simple as that the women elections must take place later and all this was just part of manipulations.  Why did the women and men not vote on the same day using just a different card but using everything the same, the register being the same and everything being the same?  Why not?  The law was made specially for rigging.  I had opposed it, I opposed this on the Floor of this House but nobody could listen to me and we know how the Parliament is constituted. (Interruption)

MR. KAYONDE:  Point of order.   Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to ridicule this House that the laws that are passed by this House were intended for rigging elections when he is also an honourable Member and all this was debated here and passed by Members of Parliament? (Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please. Let him continue. 

MR. NEKYON:  I think the hon. Member should be patient.  If he keeps on provoking, I can say a lot of things. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  You are free to say anything you want to say.

MR. NEKYON:  Okay, I am cooling down.  Mr. Chairman, you know that DAs joined the campaign, government machinery was used, and government vehicles and motorcycles were used in the elections.  Government aircraft were used in the election against poor candidates who had no support even from their parties because parties were not allowed to sponsor any candidate.  These are facts.  So, when a country if being made so poor especially in the North and the North East, where we lost all our cattle, it is very easy to buy a poor person who has not got any food.  So, people now see the loss of cattle, the loss of wealth as a prelude to their being bought in the elections and this does not augur well for the country.  

A lot of inducement; RC members during the women’s elections were told that if they did well in their areas, they will become county chiefs, they will become muluka chiefs, they will become gombolola chiefs, if they voted well in their areas.  I do not know how many posts of gombolola chiefs are there, are vacant but this is the truth.  In my area a lot of crisis and no register displayed at all up to today, no voters register.  

So, we do not know who was to vote and who was not to vote.  Who was a citizen like my friends there or who was not a citizen.  We went to vote because I was told that the register would come before the voting but they never came.  Then something mysterious happened, names of 75 Basoga who registered in my Constituency disappeared from that area register where the register ever appeared, and the 75 names of Basoga disappeared.  They must have been transferred to Kamuli or to somewhere for use there.  Up to now, I still want an explanation of that occurrence; it is very important -(Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER:  You lost your Basoga. (Laughter)

MR. NEKYON:  Then we heard on the radio on the voting day that anybody who had a card could vote anywhere.  If that is not rigging, then what is it?  Even if somebody was printing these registration certificates, somebody was printing them for the purpose of manipulation otherwise, how can you refuse to print this voters register and then say anybody who had a card could go and vote.  Who was he?  Who knew that he could walk from here and there and vote and we realised later on actually that the ink was actually removable, it did not last even a day.  That explains the whole thing.  

Then above all, services were held purposely for election, I have a road which runs from Apac Town to join the tarmac at Loro, very bad road but a trunk road, it is used to be a Central Government  but it was transferred to Local Government, the Prime Minister Adyebo told people that nobody is going to make the road unless I am voted out and everybody was provoked.  

In fact, more votes came because people wanted to show that they cannot be bullied by refusing to repair a road.  These are facts.  And then just before the voting, a school which was to be built by the Northern Reconstruction Programme which has not taken off was transferred from my constituency to the hon. Prime Minister’s Constituency so as to remove votes from my box. (Laughter)   

Then the DA, Mr. Ocaya, went to a place called Ami to hold a rally two days before the voting and what did he tell the people, that he has got a letter from the President saying that, during his Northern tour the worst speech he heard or something like that, was from the NRC Member from Maruzi.  So, why people vote for that kind of person and the masses said, that you tell us the truth, does Museveni want Nekyon there or not?  He said, no, he does not want him.  So, people said, okay, we are going to send him because we are not Museveni.  So, I got more votes from that area. (Laughter) 

 Now, if we go as people, we say we are united, we are one country, we want the truth but when we go on the grounds, the practices are completely different.  What do we do?  People do not tell the truth; they are telling lies day and night and they are doing something different on the ground.  Are the rest expected to keep on signing and dancing on top of their heads?  No, Sir.  Then the worst came, I read in the papers the President told people in his house in Rwakitura that his man did very well against Nekyon, NRM man did very well against Nekyon he got 7,000 votes.  Who was his man?  We were all standing as individual candidates on our merits and my opponent went round telling people in all the candidates meeting that he was supporting multi-party, this was reported that he was a multi-party supporter but that he was a UPC.  

So, the 7,000 votes assumed was voted wrongly by fraud from hardcore UPC members who will not vote for a member of the Democratic Party not because that man was NRM, no.  They were deceived that that man was a UPC and supporting multi-party and hardcore who would not want to vote for a DP voted for him.  If there were to be a repeat tomorrow after that statement in Rwakitura, the vote would be different, would be completely different.  So, the President’s man did not do well against me -(Laughter)- no, he got 7,000 votes against 25,000 by manipulation, it is not fair, it is not correct, it is not right.

I want to conclude by saying, this Movement thing was wrong but I would have taken advantage except I had a problem with the burial of my uncle I had to run away and I came back late yesterday, so I cannot move an amendment but I wanted to move an Amendment concerning the Chairmanship of the CA.  I spoke about this during the debate.  We are having a very important body to make a Constitution for this country and the purpose of the Constitution making is that we should have a consensus.  Consensus means the wishes of the people of Uganda but with this manipulation, we now know that there are people who are going to represent areas but they are not supported by the people, they are supported by money.  So, the consensus has been lost completely.  

We are not going to have a Constitution by consensus because money has played round, cents have played their role and everything has gone in, the government machinery so the consensus has been lost.  The Chairman, I say should be elected by the Constituent Assembly.  Why?  Because the body is powerful, it is elected just like us, they have a right to sit and elect their Chairman.  Parliament has a right to sit and elect a Chairman, I have said this many times and I have said it is not because I am against you, but I have said it repeatedly that nobody should just walk in and sit in that Chair and preside, we should elect a Chairman of our own choice.  So, the CA should elect its own Chairman.  

Now, somebody moved an Amendment here quickly until I voted for it. It said the President should nominate five people and then the Assembly elects one of them but can you get and give me one good egg out of five rotten eggs.  If I give you five or ten eggs now, can you give me one good egg out of it?

AN HON. MEMBER:  No.

MR. NEKYON:  Thank you. (Laughter)

MR. MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am not going to spit fire, I am going to take a cool look at the Bill.  Mr. Chairman, we have just survived an election.  In its wake, it has left many wounds, some wounds are physical, some are spiritual, a lot are economic -(Interjection)- my neighbour says, some are historical.  Many of these are still painful; there are scars.  Quite a lot of them have been caused by the Statute that we are trying to amend.  

I still think that a Statute which is only eleven months old, to merit two reasonably sizeable amendments indicates that probably it was passed in a hurry.  It is not so dangerous when we pass statutes of this kind in a hurry, but when we come to a subject as enormous as the Constitution, hurry must be avoided.  Up to about two hours ago, I was toiling with the idea of tampering with Clause 5 of the Bill we are debating.  I intended to reward it suggesting that Section 8(2) of our Principle Statute be amended to read as follows:  or let me not be so exact but to read that CA should last a reasonable period. (Laughter)  

The word ‘reasonable’ might invoke many different thoughts, particularly to the minds which are not legally inclined, but for the minds which are so inclined, that word means literary what is reasonable.  However, I said that I was toeing with the idea.  

As the hon. members realise, I have not circulated an Amendment to that effect because, after I had moved from the idea of saying the period should be reasonable, I went to the idea of saying no, let us be specific and say no more than twelve months but then I remembered the be-leagued Legal Notice No. 1.  If we went to the twelve months, Legal Notice No.1. will have to return here and we will have to give it yet one more amendment which will mean some kind of an extension and the extension might be reviewed with so many different feelings.  

I recall the time we extended ourselves here and, it should be re-called that I opposed the extension not for the same reasons that Ziritwawula opposed it, he said, we had no right to do it, my reasons was different.  My reason was that I would not support it if the extension went beyond four years and I was basing that decision on the research that I had through a cross-section of the population.  The two ideas then I felt were not quite tenable.  I could not propose an Amendment that the CA lasts a reasonable period nor could I propose an Amendment that it lasts a period that should not exceed twelve months.  So, in this dilemma, I decided only to come here and tell the hon. Members what I think could happen if we hurried through the Constitution.  

One of the reasons why the period has to be kept restricted is that there is no money to pay the delegates.  Here you might recall that yesterday when my neighbour hon. Kawanga was debating, I said, that from the reasons he was putting forward, I was going to propose that the delegates to the Constituent Assembly should not be paid.  You might recall that there was a wild murmur throughout the whole House more in disagreement than in disbelief.  I gave that up also but then, I remained with curiosity.  After a Member of this Assembly, a delegate had spent well over 20 million shillings in campaigning - I was going to use unparliamentary language - how could he be worried about the pinheads that are going to be paid to the delegates?  Shs. 60,000 per month probably and this Shs. 30,000 housing allowance per day - Sheraton takes Shs. 150,000 per night without even any meals, the cheaper things like Fairway will take about Shs. 100,000 a day without any meals even a junky place like Speke Hotel will take as much as Shs. 80,000.  So what is Shs. 30,000? One has got to go down to Kisenyi to find a reasonable hotel that will accept some Shs. 10,000 and even give Shs. 20,000 for meals.  

So, I could not imagine that members who have designated to themselves and who spent millions to be elected would be worried about the pin heads that the Commissioner will be able to pay.  Then I thought of tampering with our Statute itself, Section No.26 which talks about what the delegates, the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, the Staff of the Commission, the Technical Staff and everybody else would be paid.  I looked at the Section, and it was very reasonable.  It never specifically said that so much as going to be paid to the delegates, no.  It said the Commissioner with the Minister of Finance, will decide what to pay to these people.  That leaves a good latitude for the two to come up with the figure.  They should not promise millions when they can only raise thousands and as I have said, there should actually be no reason why delegates should not sacrifice a little bit of their own money to support themselves.  I know of no delegate who will be in that Constituent Assembly who is unable to find where to lay his head in this town during the period of the Assembly will be in Session.  

I was also given a lighter warning by friends that if I went and made a suggestion which would be rather horrible, I might be accused that probably since I was not elected, I was intending to make life difficult for those who were.  So aware of that, I decided that that also was not a safe course, but what are the reasons that I do have to suggest that while we are talking about the making of a Constitution we should not be in a hurry. The very reason that we are now amending this Statute suggests that a lot was not foreseen, that not enough thought was put into the Principle Statute at the time when it went through I dare say the cabinet, when it went through NEC and when it went through this House.  Even some elementary things were not foreseen, the Schedule mentions how many political parties have to be represented, four?  It was not until last week that we discovered that that was an oversight, one of them should not have been there.  These are little mistakes which when compounded make us ask, are we really careful?  

So, while we are debating and thinking about the Constitution, I would like hurry to be avoided.  Poverty should not drive us to insanity.  The Constitution is the supreme law of the land.  Every matter of the fact if we do not get the best and get a bad one, chaos will result.  There will be conflicts, more tribal conflicts than probably we have had and with more tribal conflicts there will be more forces employed to fight the rebels - the bandits as they used to call us before we came into this House.  If that happens, then we will be spending in areas that are not productive and as we will be spending in areas that are not productive, poverty will be coming in even more strongly than when we are suffering from it at the moment.  

So, we have built here a straight jacket around ourselves the CA must last no more than seven months and when you count from the 5th of the next month and go 7 months, you will be very close to the end of the NRM Government.  When do we get time to organise elections?  That means that we must squeeze this period in such a way that seven months should not be all utilised so that there is some space left for the elections to take place.  So, while we are considering that, then you look at what the Bill is talking about.  A week to be spent into consultations, and another one into further consultations.  Yes another one into further consultations.  I think this is an unprofitable way of using the very limited time that we have.  However, I do not know whether the Minister still has a chance to think around this problem and find how to avoid the wastage involved in those three weeks.  Probably more than those three weeks. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Mzee Obwangor please.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor of the House, yesterday when I was addressing the House I indicated a national spirit and a national approach towards Constitutional making process.  Through you to the House in its wisdom, considering somewhat four years is a laborious work through which a Statutory Commission known as the Uganda Constitutional Commission went through this hard work for the benefit of the common good and welfare of Uganda and the necessity to make a national constitution for us to enjoy a maximum liberty through which we, this hon. House, as a leading, the supreme body politic in this country, it can influence the government and the country what we need is the patience, understanding and a spirit to make a national Constitution.

MR. MAYENGO:  I hope, Mr. Chairman, the House has been able to grasp the point.  When I used to work for the United Nations there was a language called Umese, which was never precise, and the hon. Obwangor sometimes employs part of this.  I was saying that the three weeks at least involved in these consultations might be harmful but I pity the Minister, I do not know exactly how he can go round it to make it less than three weeks.  I am not imputing what some other Members have been saying that those three weeks will be used to bribe Members.  Probably not being so used to this idea of bribing I am not able to see ahead of time that there will be a possibility of bribing. But those who are familiar with it probably know how it can be used for bribing.  Mr. Chairman, it is with these few sentiments that I support the Minister’s Bill.  Thank you very much.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  But try to be very brief please.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  Okay, when it comes to me, I have to be brief.  Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill and I support various contributors who have highlighted various issues, which emanated from the previous elections of the CA.  Although I was not declared a winning candidate, I Maumbe feel that I won the elections and I am not bitter.  I am not bitter because what happened in Mbale Constituency was really a circus.  It was a laughing stock and the riddle of the day.  In fact I enjoyed the elections themselves, I knew what happened, I did not cry but I laughed for Uganda, because the Commissioner is supposed to be the most impartial person as far as the elections were concerned but the commissioner had to take an interest in the district of Mbale himself as a commissioner and as Mr. Akabway had to come to Mbale to witness first of all the nomination, and before the nomination the Commissioner had to summon the winning candidate two months before the nomination to his office and flag him off to go to Mbale and win a seat for multi-party.  

This is a very serious issue you might think I am pondering on issue because I lost at the election and I am saying so because I have facts although people have said they were rigging, Government were rigging the rigging was not done by Government the rigging of elections as far as I am concerned in Mbale was by multi-party politicians.  President Museveni had no way to influence or to play his card.  The issues before us the whole country was, President Museveni cannot win the whole of Western, win the whole of Buganda we have to make sure that multi-party politics consolidate themselves in the Eastern and the Northern so that the multi-party have a bargaining ground in the Constituent Assembly elections and put President Museveni on the - that is why the Commissioner came to Mbale in a full swing, I saw him and I talked to him all the same o the day of nomination, Mr. Chairman, do you know what happened by a Statute any candidate is entire told by the statute to bring two people for the nomination -(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM:  Point of information.  While we were going around during the candidates meetings, I saw through peoples that the same Commissioner being accused of having going to Mbale also went to Ntungamo to lay down certain rules so that there was peace.  So, I think he probably went round throughout the country.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the Commissioner did not come to Ntungamo for more than three days, and we would think may be, he was also rigging for those who were against multi-parties.  Because he went round he even attended candidates meeting and the results are normal so could we adduce from the Commissioner point of view that when he went to the West he had to make sure that those who were against parties were the ones who won.  And when he went to the East, he looked for the multi-parties then if that is the thing of the Commission, he is either a balanced man or he is a man of contradictions.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  Mr. Chairman, could I deduce before this august House that the Commissioner is not a transmogrification that he cannot transform himself into a human being on the same day of nomination take part in business transaction in Mbale then at the same time be somewhere in the West.  

So, it is a fact that Commissioner was there 24 hours in Mbale we know, therefore, he could not have been in the West or in the Northern he might have been there some days previously of the nomination, but I am talking about with issue of the Commissioner being in Mbale on the same day of nomination.  So, on the same day of nomination -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  All candidates files up with their two people for nomination, I also came with my two people for nomination, I also came with my two people for nomination the commissioner instructed the returning officer Mr. Kabunga that for you to approve the nomination for Mr. Maumbe Mukwana, he had to produce 12 people to prove that he had support, I said, okay, I have 12 people and I was nominated anyway it was - okay, then, the following day, we went to Mbale Municipal Council where candidates had to introduce themselves to each other but it was a shock of the day that the returning officer plus the Commissioner had to use that occasion as a political platform to gear the winning candidate and to use that occasion to use it to mudsill me and -(Interruption)

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman is it in order for a man who is not in this House and he is not able to defend himself to be accused this way, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  No. Proceed please.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  Mr. Chairman, we are not in court, I am not accusing, I am not fabricating, I am giving you factual events, which took place.  I am saying that on the second day after the nomination, we went to the Municipal Council and in the Municipal Council there were various candidates from Mbale District what happened is that -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, may I inform through you the hon. Member holding the Floor now that he alleges that the Commissioner required him to produce an additional ten people to support him, but that is pre - what the statute wanted all of us had to have somebody to nominate you and second, and then ten people to support you altogether 12.  So, that allegation is not correct against the Commissioner that is what the law requires.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  That is true, what I am saying, not 12 physically -(Interruption)

MR. PINTO:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification from the hon. Member whether he is contributing to the Bill or making lamentations.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  Mr. Chairman, I think the issue before this House is the background that I am giving out. (Laughter)  What I am saying is that, that meeting that took place at the Town Council the winning candidate had to come up and accuse me in the presence of the Commissioner that I had plans on two occasions to kill him with soldiers. I did not have guns; it was a very serious accusation even some here could bear me witness.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Maumbe, it seems you are going too far, concentrate on the Bill.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  Okay, Mr. Chairman, what I am saying is that, the modus operand of the Commissioner, was to stage Uganda to have two platforms one of multi-party from Nimule up to Mbale and another one from Jinja downwards, of NRM.  This is what I am trying to advance, therefore, I could say, there was a hidden agenda the Government had no role at all as far as region is concerned.  President Museveni did not have any say; the Chairman did not have any say; but the Commissioner had overall powers to decide who should be elected in my Constituency Bungokho South.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s sitting. We adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.


(The Council rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 3rd May, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

