Thursday 26th April, 2001

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Again hon. Members, please pardon me for boring you with my appeal. When I look at my Table, I see a lot still pending, which I think we should finish before we go away.  Is it possible hon. Members to put in say from today, five Parliamentary days that we see what we can do within the five Parliamentary days; and then we call it a day, so that you can go and do what you want to do? So, we commit ourselves to giving in five more Parliamentary days.  Will that be inconvenient to you?  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do appreciate your appeal that, we should put in more time, because we were elected to be here anyway, to transact Parliamentary Business. 

Sometimes the problem we have is that, if a holiday falls for example on a Tuesday, and you are required to be around the following day, definitely, some Members may not be here. However, if the time is structured in such a way that, Members are appealed to, the way it was done last week with several Radio Announcements, I am sure we should be here to complete the remaining Business of the House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the five parliamentary days I have in mind are, if you skip the Tuesday, because that will be a Public holiday. But then we have a Wednesday, and Thursday, that is 2nd and 3rd; and then may be we put in some three days in the week preceding the Swearing in of the President. Then just before the Swearing in of the President, may be we can call it a day. We can go away for sometime, until when we will come back for the Address on the National Budget. 

So, is it the consensus that we can really put in those days, because we have – (Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: Agreed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, with due respect to you, I am rising on a point of procedure in protest over an item, which is not on this Order Paper.  Two days ago, you elaborately gave us the order of Business to follow, and I was contented generally; but I would like to wage some protest. 

I have had a pending motion. The Speaker, and the Clerk’s office have received it for sometime; and it is on the Sector of Environmental Health. I would like to know whether, I will be covered before we come to the end of the session?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I quite appreciate that may be you have that motion, and I have no reason to doubt your statement; but all depends on the Business we have, the urgency of the Business. But we very well know that the Government has business as a priority, over other Businesses.

I think the office of Speaker considering the urgency of the matter, that is how it has arranged. But we shall take into account your motion if time allows; we shall definitely deal with it.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE ANIMAL BREEDING BILL, 2001 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Dr. F. Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, the Animal Breeding Bill, 2001 be read a Second Time.

HON. MEMBERS:  Seconded

DR. F. BYARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, the mandate of the Directorate of Animal Resources in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is to support, promote, and guide all livestock, fisheries, Aquaculture and Seri-culture production; to enable the country achieve and maintain quantitative and qualitative self-efficiency in animal protein, animal by-products, honey, bees wax, propolis and silk products.  

The revision of the same Directorate is poverty eradication through, a profitable, competitive, dynamic and sustainable agriculture and agro-industrial sector.

The need to act now is re-enforced by the plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. This strategic framework, which was recently approved by the Government for the development of the agricultural sector, aims at fighting poverty through, the transformation of Subsistence Agriculture into Commercial Agriculture. As we are all aware, this Subsistence Agriculture, which our people practice today, is characterised by low production and productivity; and this is the cause of poverty in our rural areas.  

In both the Plant and Animal sectors, the starting point must be the provision of high yielding stocking and planting materials.  Because once you start with a wrong seed you will definitely, end up with a poor plant or a poor animal.  

My Ministry has since 1993, carried out various studies and has come up with various policies, plans and programmes for the improvement of the Animal Sector, which Animal Sector now contributes 17 per cent of our Agriculture GDP.  

These have included the Dairy Master Plan, with its associated Dairy Act; the Meat Master Plan, the Strategic Study for the Development of Small Ruminants and Rabbits, and the Policy for the Fisheries Sub-sector. 

All these studies point out the cardinal requirement of the development of an aggressive breeding policy, plan and programme aimed at the improvement of our local breeds of animals and fish through a scientifically guided selection; and the acquiring of exotic genetic stock, which are ideal for the Ugandan situation and markets.

Breeding could have been left to the farmers, if they had any knowledge or organisation to carry it out.  Unfortunately, attempts to improve our local stock were stopped in 1950.  The breeding and genetic improvement of exotic stock under the breeding society of East Africa, and the associated East African Study Book stopped in the 1960s. 

The only programme that has survived is the provision of semen for artificial insemination by the artificial breeding centre, which is owned by Government and it is located in Entebbe.  Private semen importers have also provided some semen. These only manage 20,000 inseminations per year, as compared to our national cattle population of six million. Therefore, the impact would be called “negligible”.    

Therefore, The Animal Breeding Bill, 2001 goes further than giving guidance, and creates the Animal Genetic Resource Centre, which will champion breeding on its own farms, co-operate with farmers in open nucleus breeding and offers supervision services and advisory services to the farmers. 

In future when farmers have created and run their own breed societies, and breeding associations, this centre will gradually devolve its functions to them. So, it is not a permanent phenomenon; it is a temporary stop gap measure in the presence of the vacuum that we have in that sector.

The centre is to take over the few Government farms, which the Ministry has retained for the above purpose. The said farms –(Interjection)- someone has said, where are they?  There is one at Njeru – the Njeru Stock Farm.  That will be for temperate animal breeding or exotic animals breeding.  Then the Rubona Stock Farm, which is in Kabarole District, which is also for temperate animals breeding. 

The Nshara and Ruhenjere Ranches, which will be for our indigenous cattle. We have Kasorwe in Kamuli, which we are also developing for cross breeding. Later, we may do some work in Aswa Ranch, when the security situation warrantees it for the small zebu of that area.

These farms are in fair shape, because they were recently, rehabilitated using a loan from the African Development Bank; and they are fairly stocked. The centre will also be engaged in the production and sale of genetic material, that is, semen and embryos from the current ABC. The centre will also sell breeding stock from the said farms, as well as training of technicians and farmers at a fee. 

So, the semen, the embryos, the cattle, the sheep, the goats, and pigs that will come from this centre will be passed on to the farmer at a fee. These activities will provide most of the income of the centre. Therefore, Members should not be frightened that the creation of the centre will put a big burden on the Consolidated Fund. 

The Bill broadly covers these areas.  The first three parts define the functions or duties of the officers of the Ministry in breeding; and also the standards required of all the players in the breeding industry.  The next five parts concern, the creation of the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre, which is like any other Government parastatal we have created in the past.
The rest of the Bill and the Schedules concern, detailed guidelines for all those concerned with regulating, handling and transacting in genetic materials.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I wish Members to whole-heartedly support this bill.  With the mad-cow disease and health concerns about the meat of animals fed on processed food stuffs, now being expressed in the developed world, our organically produced meat, and other animal products, will soon find a lucrative market in the developed world.  So, we can see the animal sector playing a bigger role in the national economy in future.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY & FISHERIES (Mr. Kanyike): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, on the Animal Breeding Bill, which is being read for a Second Time.  

On the 27th of March, 2001, the Animal Breeding Bill was read for the First Time, laid on the Table, and subsequently referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. In accordance with our Rules of Procedure, the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, examined the Bill, and now wishes to report to Parliament on policy matters as provided for under the Bill, and for the whole House to consider and debate and pass the Bill.

Considering the time the Committee was availed to consider the Bill, the Committee decided to handle the Bill and discussed the same under a workshop. For this purpose, a workshop was organised and a Committee invited the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; the Minister of State responsible for Animal Industry; the Officer in charge of the Animal Breeding Centre, and several other officials from the Ministry.  

In addition, other stakeholders, including Breeders, Non-Governmental Organisations, and Representatives of the Artificial Insemination Association also participated in the deliberations.  

The Committee appreciates the Minister's arrangement for the workshop, which made it possible to accomplish the Committee's deliberations on the Bill in a record time.  

The objects of the Bill are: to establish the National Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank; to provide for the promotion of sustainable animal and fisheries genetic improvement, regulation and control, marketing, import and export and quality assurance of animals and fisheries genetic materials; to provide guidelines, in the appropriate breeding strategies to the farmers, investors, researchers, extension workers and civic leaders:
    (1) On suitable breeds for various agro-ecological zones;  
    (2) alternative breeding programmes; 
    (3) management systems for conservation and sustainable use of indigenous genetic resources;
    (4) modern breeding technologies in Uganda; 
    (5) to repeal and replace the Branding of Stock Act (Cap 222); and 
    (6) to provide for other matters connected with the foregoing.

The Committee appreciated the establishment of the National Genetic Resource Centre, and Data Bank, because it was long over due. The Committee wishes to emphasise that the whole House of the Sixth Parliament through, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry & Fisheries has been involved in the production of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. 

The plan for Modernisation of Agriculture aims at transforming subsistence agriculture, thereby enabling Ugandans to focus on agriculture as a business.  For this to succeed farmers must be availed with improved seeds for planting and stocking materials.

The National Agricultural Research Organisation has done a lot on the side of crops. We have improved technologies in form of seeds and crop planting materials. What remains as far as crops are concerned is the improved dissemination, and transfer of these technologies to the farmers. The aspect of technology transfer is being handled under a different Bill, which is also before this House. 

However, Mr. Speaker, the Committee strongly feels that there is need to improve on the production of animal and fisheries stocking materials. The Committee wishes the Government through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry & Fisheries, to focus on the improvement of our local animals.  There is need to improve on the local breeds for better productivity in both meat and milk.  

The Committee urges further, the Government to give a clear focus on imported exotic cattle, the quality of semen and the reproductive technologies that are being imported into the country.

Ugandans must be seriously advised to take up fish farming, and to engage more in the rearing of small remnants in order to improve the national stock of protein, and to provide for export not only in the Great Lakes Region, but also in the international market. 

The Committee has observed that though there is so much talk about modernising agriculture, there is actually no agriculture anywhere on the ground as far as the country is concerned. Thanks to the Madhivani, Mehta, Mulwana, and a few others who have established agriculture undertakings. 

The Committee is happy that the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture has been formulated. This has been possible through the Committee, and the Government through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry & Fisheries with the assistance of our development personnel and other stakeholders. 

The Committee commends Cabinet for having accepted the plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. And also commends the Government, for having supported the launching on the 11th December 2000, by Her Excellency, The Vice President.  

The Committee wishes to thank Government through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry & Fisheries, for having decided to come up with the Animal Breeding Bill, 2001, which the Committee considers to be another concrete step in the right direction, towards the provision for Modernisation of Agriculture, Animal Industry & Fisheries. 

The necessary steps in the implementation of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture are, the provision for research, breeding, market availability to the farmers, improved seeds, planting and stocking materials. This will be followed by putting agriculture on the ground, which will provide for the modernisation of agriculture thereafter.  

The Committee sees this Bill as a very useful piece of legislation, which is farmer friendly. Hence, on behalf of the Committee I would like to recommend this Bill to Parliament, so that it is passed in support of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, for the potential of agriculture in this country.

I beg to report; and to move that this Report be adopted by the Whole House.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS. KABASHARIRA (Women Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I thank the chairman and the hon. Minister for their presentation.  I support the Bill with some few observations. The Bill seeks among other things, to improve the genetic materials. I also heard from the chairman and the Minister that, it is going to improve on the market for the animal products; and maybe fish and others. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to be clarified that yes, we want to improve, but we have been having animals; we have been having exotic breeds, which they are talking about. We have talked here time and again about the market of animal products, especially diary products. Up to now we have no answers both from the Government, and even from any other person who could be having an alternative. 

I do not know how this improvement is going to help the market, when a few dairy products that are in place have no market? It is so hurting to find that we are crying of poverty, when there are some people who have got their diary animals, they produce milk, but they pour that milk because there is no market.  It is so hurting that they pour that milk down, when there are some parts of the same country where people are malnourished, because they do not drink milk.  How is this one going to help us?  

You are going to bring in more good breeds, like we told farmers some time back. We told our farmers that you improve on the breeds; for instance, in our place - the Ankole cows, we told farmers that, they are not producing good milk; that it will be important to have a small land, utilise it well by putting one cow that can give you milk. 

Those who do not have land at all were told to practice zero grazing; and they are doing it. But they have nowhere to sell that milk.  Some animals have died, because zero grazing actually, needs someone who is rich and capable. But those poor people thought that, they would get money out of milk, and look after their animals, because they are very expensive to look after; but in the end they have lost. 

You tried to help them to fight poverty, and may be get milk, but the whole process has ended up being a poverty making. So, I want to be clarified on this, diary master plan, and how this law is going to help. The Minister talked of a diary master plan that it is in place.  If it is there really, even our Diary Corporation that we have - I remember I was here and we created an authority, some of us resisted that you were giving money, when the Diary Corporation is dying.  

I have never seen on the ground, what that diary authority did.  We approved I think about Shs.500 million, I do not remember very well. I need to be clarified on that. The diary authority has never done anything; people pour milk, and they have nowhere to sell their meat.  

What is this one you are going to improve? Why don’t you first look at what you have, before you bring in something new?  As I said that I will support it whole heatedly, if only they could assure me that, it is not a law we shall talk about here, put it in the archives, when people are not helped. 

Some of us feel hurt, because we come from areas where people depend on milk, and we feel that the Government just neglected us; may be they want to make us poor, because we have the animals, and they produce milk. We used to export milk to Rwanda, but Rwanda stopped us; we thought the Government would come in, because some of us - hon. Bamwanga will testify - who come from the nearby, we had negotiated as Members of Parliament at that level to talk to them, then somehow the Government said no, our milk is bad.  

If our milk is bad, what has Government done to make it good, so that it can be exported and our people get money?  We feel hurt. So, if this law is to be made, let it be there to help our people, not just law to be put in the archives.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.RWAKOOJO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Minister, and the Committee for this Bill, which I am reluctant to support, unless some things are cleared. I am reluctant, because it is like we are starting from where we should be ending. 

It is true that agriculture is the backbone of our economy; and when you are talking about that, you are talking about production, processing or manufacturing, and marketing. But when you look at these vis-a- vis agriculture, you do not see the co-ordination. 

Hon. Kabasharira has talked about milk; policies are set and we advocate for them, and farmers follow what we tell them. In the process they cut down their banana plantations in preference to diary cattle.  We sell our local breeds, our beautiful local breeds, and buy exotic cows. They produce milk, we spend a lot on them, they produce the products they produce, and we cannot market them! 

The marketing element is not provided for. Right now a litre of milk in my area costs between Shs. 50 – 100. This does not make sense!  The people who buy that milk sometimes tell you that Oh! ‘ today is your turn you sell your 20 litres, tomorrow it’s someone else’s turn’.  So, the reason I am saying that this is kink backward - (Interruption).

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank my colleague hon. Rwakoojo. A litre of pure milk in Kashari goes for, Shs. 40; and farmers are lucky when they get that in cash. They are just promised that, when we get money we shall pay- and they have to give in, because they have no alternative.  Thank you.

MR. RWAKOOJO: That emphasises what I was saying.  So, if you are talking about improving our stocks, why spend that money?  My thinking is that, may be we should first do basic investment in what we intend to do. What is the point of breeding a milk-producing cow without water?  What is the purpose of that, how are we going to handle it after the rainy season?  

Right now we are okay, it is raining, but tomorrow during the dry season where there is no single dam, what are you going to do with that improved animal that you have? My thinking is that, we should first put basic things first on the ground. Let us have water, improve pasture, and let us have disease control, and then we can go into improved breeds. Before that, I think this is just a law that is going to look good in our books, and at the end of the day there is nothing beneficial. 

We have to put our money where our mouths are. The Minister was talking about the diary master plan. What have we actually done for that, how much money have we put in?  Then there is the meat master plan!  Really, what are we doing to improve on our meat?  The other day there was a consultant in Makerere who said that, we neither have beef cows nor diary cows in Uganda. Yes, that the long horned ones, and the short horned, are neither good for meat nor for milk.  

So, what are we trying to improve on?  Do we know for instance, what good qualities we have in our local breeds?  What is good about an Ankole cow or a Zebu cow?  If we do not know that now, then how are we going to breed? Especially, if we do not have the basics. 

Sometime back we were told that, the ranches in Bunyoro Kyembitsi - and I do not know the other one - were meant for breeding. Now the next day privatisation was selling them off! So, what are we doing, are we trying to improve our stocks or we are selling everything, so that everything is run privately? Because unless we know what we have, and unless we invest in what we have, we cannot improve; we cannot progress, and we cannot have better agricultural products.

The Minister talked about the fisheries sector. We failed to sell fish, because we could not invest in pit latrines! I think passing good laws is wonderful, and having them in the books is even better. But I think we should first clean our house, and we should know what we have, what we want to improve, and where we want to go, and then invest them. 

Some of these are long-term investments, like improving pasture is not a one-day thing. It is a long-term commitment. Provision of water to all farmers is also a long-term commitment. We should put our money where our mouths are, so that when we are trying to improve the breeds, we know what we want. Do we want Uganda to be a diary cattle country, or do we want it to be a beef cattle country? 

If you went to Wisconsin in United States, you would know that you have gone to a diary country. Some parts of southern African continent are meant for beef, and when you go there, you are looking for beef cows, and you would get them. 

But what good qualities are in our goats, and our sheep for instance?  There must be something good that we are trying to preserve. I think we need that basic information. We need some basic research on the crops we have and on the animals we have, before we improve or eliminate them.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ERESU ELYANU (Kaberamaido county, Soroti): Mr. Speaker, once upon a time in the Teso region, there used to be cattle; but today that is history. Once upon a time in the Teso region, we used to trade in cattle; and we also used to drink milk.  Today that is also history.  

The point I want to put across is that, when you look at the object of the Bill, it misses one cardinal point.  This cardinal point is that, it says that it is going to improve the quality and so on. But where is it going to improve the quality of the animals or the quality of the milk?  Is it in those areas where the cattle are or it is going to take into account the potentialities of other areas of Uganda?  So for that reason, I have not yet got the picture, and I would like the hon. Minister to give me the picture in his mind, and of the Government with respect to this Bill.  

Secondly, the Bill talks of importation of genetic semen or whatever.  Import from where?  We are having problems today. It is reported that, there are diseases everywhere in the world, which kill cattle and they can also attack human beings, and kill them as well.  We are hearing that some countries, are even killing their animals, because of diseases. 

Where are the checks that the Minister has in mind to ensure that our animals - if we do this kind of importation of the genetic materials to improve our quality, we do not make mistakes? 

Thirdly, I come to the question of manpower. We are facing a problem of manpower in this country. On one hand, people are not recruited to handle certain cases, like in the improvement, and development of agricultural sector, due to the ban in Public Service. Even the manpower that is there, we notice that these people do not actually go to the field.  The little that we have in Soroti and Kaberamaido for that matter in terms of cattle, nobody in the veterinary department, has ever visited these animals at all.

Are we not just making another big monument in terms of a Bill, which will just be stuck somewhere in the files or in the archives of the sixth Parliament? To show that the sixth Parliament passed a Bill to improve this, and that and it died there. 

Lastly, I think in this country we sometimes under estimate things. I think the most important thing now, is to create mechanisms by which farmers in their small ways can improve, other than thinking of big things, like saying artificial breeding centres, what and what; when we do not have the capacity to distribute semen to reach the ordinary farmer.

This Bill does not adequately answer that question.  For that matter, unless things are clarified in proper perspective especially for those areas, which once upon a time had animals, then this Bill does not serve their purpose very well.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa West, Kabale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to support the Bill, but with a few reservations. I am wondering what purpose this Bill is supposed to serve, when in the first place what we already have has not been consumed; and it has not been sold. 

I am talking in terms of agricultural products. It is always wrong to pay lip service to the agricultural sector, by passing laws that will not be of use to the Ugandan population. We all agree that more than 80 percent of our GDP is computed from agriculture, and that 90 per cent of our population is engaged in agricultural production for their existence. However, the Government has always shown little in terms of providing money by way of the Budget, to improve on the agricultural production.

A few Friends have talked about how we have failed even to market the little milk that we produce. Is the concern of this Bill the quality, the quantity or the marketability of what we produce?  

Recently a study was carried out in Kabale, and it was found out that, 60 per cent of the pregnant women who were examined were found anaemic, because of bad feeding.  70 per cent of the school going primary children were found stunted, because of poor feeding. There is a lot of milk being produced in the countryside, but some areas of the country do not have access to this milk. 

You find that milk in Mbarara is being poured. People who are having exotic cows have a problem of looking after them. You find that on average an exotic cow costs, Shs.1 million, and to look after those cows in terms of feeding, in terms of drugs is so expensive that the common man does not even benefit from being told that, he should abandon his or her local cows. 

As we talk now, some farmers are getting rid of the exotic cows to introduce local cows, because of being very expensive to maintain, and they are failing to sell their milk. Somebody gave an example that in Mbarara, one litre of milk is costs Shs.50 or 40/.

I happen to come from the border with Rwanda; at one time milk in Uganda was going between shs.100 per litre and shs.200. The Rwandese were coming to Katuna, in Kabale, to Ntungamo, to Mbarara, and were buying milk at between Shs.200, and shs.300. They were taking it to Rwanda, and selling it at Shs.1000 per litre!  My people when they were using, what we call the friendly border trade exchange; they would export the milk to Rwanda, and would get about shs.800. But since Rwanda banned the milk exports from Uganda, our milk now is being poured. 

You will remember Members, at one time during Amin’s time, Ugandans cut down coffee trees and instead planted banana plantations, because they were getting better money from bananas than coffee!  In Congo, just across Goma, our friends who are coming here, and drinking our milk, they are buying milk in their own area at about shs.1000 per litre!  

As we talk now, Congo and Rwanda are importing milk from Belgium, from Denmark – what has the Government done to take advantage of our comparative advantage; our milk is organically produced; our beef is organically produced – we have not even taken advantage of the mad-cow disease!  Whenever frost hit Brazil, we Ugandans should be celebrating by taking advantage of the fact that, the mad-cow disease has denied the Europeans meat and milk.  

What we should talk about now is to add value on what we are producing!  For me I produce 4000 litres of milk every month, but when I get shs.100 per litre, I cry, because I put in twice as much money in keeping, and maintaining these animals. If you are going to bring an equipment that is going to add value, that is going to buy all the milk that farmers produce, then we will find a market. 

I have just returned from Tripoli - you can see how emaciated I look - I was drinking Camel’s milk, I was eating Camel’s meat, and I was even eating mutton.  I was missing my cow’s milk; I was missing my goat’s meat; and I was missing my cow’s meat. People there are even drinking goat’s milk!  

Now, if you are going to improve technology by saying we want to introduce goats in Uganda for milk purposes, a Mukiga will laugh at you, because the milk for cows is there. The Muhima will laugh at you, because the milk for cows is being poured, and you are saying we are improving technology.  I am saying this, because I am talking for the wanainchi; if you are trying to pass this Bill for me and you as Members of Parliament, it will not help the wanainchi who are now suffering.  

I was one time asking the Ministry of Education to introduce the milk component in the UPE programme, because a lot of milk is being wasted, and our children are starving! Somebody who is starving cannot concentrate.  You may build schools, you may build classroom; you may give them desks to sit on, but somebody who is hungry will not concentrate. 

So, why can’t the Ministry of Education introduce a small component of, at least, a quarter of a litre of milk per day, or once a week to these children so that we can also be able to sell our milk to the schools. 

I do not think it will help us, as Ugandans to import improved semen – the so-called improved semen in other countries they have refused, because of fearing the mad-cow disease!  One time we were laughing at Her Excellency the Vice President, that if a sire can really serve 100 cows, and you get good quality heifers. Why do you want to import semen simply because, you want to be sophisticated and you do not want to have a bull serving 200 cows. 

We should look at realistic issues, and address what concerns us most; and be able to look for the market for our product rather than increasing the quantity, when we are not going to be able to market this milk; when we are not even able to consume the same milk; when some of the Ugandans are not able to consume milk.  

You must first of all, look at the milk consumption per capita, and then you begin talking that you want to improve the quality and quantity.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac):  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Anything to do with direct investment in agriculture is very tempting to welcome, like this one.  But we seem to have been caught in the fever of the jargon ‘modernization.’ It is a good idea to talk of modernization, but I am not quite sure that 99 per cent of our farmers are sufficiently modern to absorb the process, and the product of modernization.  This is where we are. Let us not go ahead of the people, for whom our plan is targeting. If we surpass their capacity to absorb modernization, modernization will become very primitive in itself.  

I will give an example, His Excellency the President, gave us exotic cows in Lango, one cow per constituency. They died one week after they were received. I do not know how many of them are still surviving!  At the moment we have very serious problems with veterinary services in the community. We have these scouts or whatever they are; they are even reluctant to visit the patients for which they studied very seriously.  

A good number of them now find it better to be in Parliament, than to serve the things for which they qualified.  But even those lower ones who cannot come to Parliament, and who are pretending to be out in the field to serve the farmers, are not doing it well!  You go to a veterinary scout you see nothing, particularly, once the former Minister brought this question of mixing cows, and grass – you know, putting the veterinary people with agriculture, and taking them to Entebbe by a lorry, the whole entire veterinary services and profession has degenerated.

I think this is a very serious matter. We are producing many veterinary professionals, but their services in the community are hardly there!  So, I think, let us really first try to help the situation in which we are, before we go too far. 

Finally, what is the purpose of maintaining the Entebbe centre?  What sort of special focus is going to be given to this centre? We had the birds’ nuisance to the aircraft in Entebbe. This was one of the sites investigated for generating birds; and I really do not see why, when we have so many sites upcountry – I have heard Aswa ranch was mentioned in passing, but we have Maruzi; we have the one at Kafu and so on. Why do we not take these facilities upcountry so that the community can also learn what is going on there, and learn by examples?

Why are you stacking this facility at Entebbe?  For whom, for the fish!  I think it is high time we phased out this facility at Entebbe, and take it in a place where it is most suitable. Because if you over invest in this site at Entebbe, ultimately, you will be forced to dismantle it, and that will be wastage of resources. 

So, I am appealing to the Ministry - unless really I can be convinced that there is serious need for maintaining the Entebbe site; unless it is for the purpose of semen, which are going to be brought by air, and they need to be fixed there very quickly, then maybe I will appreciate, but otherwise, the birds’ nuisance could be intensified by even increasing the activity of animal production, and work in that site.  I thank you.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support this motion, and the report of the Committee. Basically on the principle that we are passing a law, which will form the basis upon which we can improve on our poor animal breeding methods at the moment; so that this law will become the foundation, and the framework within which we shall modernise animal breeding, and improve on this sector of the economy.  

When you look at this country, certain regions are historically animal breeding and rearing regions.  Unfortunately, over many years, those regions have not developed adequate infrastructure, which would attract the other regions of the country, which have been predominantly agricultural, to also come up to bring in animal breeding as additional source of economic activity. This is sad, indeed. 

I would have loved to see Ankole area, Teso area, Karamoja area, well endowed with basic infrastructure, to support the animal breeding. Indeed, using the principle of comparative advantage in production of goods and services. We would definitely, not hear a cry from farmers in Ankole that, their milk products are being sold at a give-away price. This is very sad, indeed.

I am saying so, because today in Nebbi where we have not been predominantly cattle keepers, milk is a rare commodity.  You go in one of those local restaurants, at times you would crave to have tea with milk, because they would tell you that there is no milk.  Even at times there would be no powdered milk, and yet Nebbi is part of Uganda. This is sad indeed.  

So, it is against this background that I support this Bill; so that we are able to develop a legal framework within which, we can indeed improve on this sector.  More importantly, when you look at the aspect of one of the objects, being to establish a National Animal Genetic Resource Centre, and a data bank. This should have been there already.  I believe it is already in place; and that, this Bill is simply to operationalise it, and actualise it. However, in case it is already established, then we have managed it badly. We need to improve on the management of that resource centre.  

Secondly, this Bill will help us to curb on the possibility of creating genetic ailments, such as in Europe today - we hear of mad cow disease, which has been devastating. We hope that this centre will help in the process of protecting the livestock sector.  

The third point, Mr. Speaker, is the fishery sector.  Those areas of this country, which have abundant water resources, such as the Lake Victoria region has been, at least, adequately exploited in terms of fisheries.  However, the Lake Albert region and Lake Kyoga region have been left to primitive fisheries, and primitive fishing, which has not done much good to the population.  

I hope that this Bill, when passed, will improve on the fisheries sector. For example, on page 15 of the Bill, where the role of the Commissioner, Fisheries Resources has been clearly spelt out, this area is crucial. This is under Clause 12, sub-clause 3 whereby “the Commissioner, Fisheries Resources shall have the following responsibilities; 
    (a) overall policy guidance on fish products
    (b) training of staff and farmers
    (c) monitoring of fish production activities.” 

I am focusing on monitoring of fish production activities.  This sector has not been adequately managed under the current policy framework of the Ministry. For example, two years ago, our lakes were polluted by fishermen who were using poison for fishing.  At one time we thought Lake Albert was already a dead lake, because when, one would fly over the lake, one would see a lot of dead aquatic products. Yet that was a result of poisoning the aquatic lives. So, the management of our lakes must also be emphasised in this Bill.  

My last point, Mr. Speaker, is that whereas we pass laws, there should be a Directorate of Government, not necessarily IGG, to monitor all the laws we pass. Do we just pass them for the purpose of passing time in this House?  Do we have a department of Government to monitor the implementation of all these laws?  This is where I would have proposed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that, we have a department of management, and policy Audit department; wherever you put it, whether in the President’s office, the Prime Minister’s office is a different matter, so long as we are able to know that this law that has been passed, is being implemented.

We pass laws here, some sections are implemented, and others are just shelved. Do we popularise the laws we pass?  We pass so many laws. Sometimes people even do not know that certain laws are in the statute books. So, these are issues we could look at. 

I would like to thank, the Chairperson of this Committee, and the Minister for bringing this law. At Committee stage, I will propose certain drastic amendments to make it suitable for our time.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKIROR (Kasilo County, Soroti: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Committee Chairman for a job well done.  Mr. Speaker, it has been my conviction, and belief that it seems there is a problem in this Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry, and Fisheries. As we may recall that some years ago in this country, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, used to be the most prestigious Ministry in this country; it also used to be the most organised, and forward looking Ministry in this country. 

However, somebody conspired to undo all this.  I do not know who conceived the idea of merging the two Ministries, that of Agriculture and Animal Industry and Fisheries. Whoever thought of this idea, has actually brought a problem to this Ministry. I want to urge the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to get organised and start serious planning.  We are having a lot of problems in this Ministry, and it is because the Ministry is very much disorganised. 

There used to be very good structures up to the grass root level, which used to make this Ministry perform.  In the past you would not hear of a complaint from the farmers that, there were no extension workers, and that there were no field staff, simply because there were structures. When they emerged these Ministries, all the structures were disorganised, and most of the field staff were retrenched - they are not there.  Most of the veterinary scouts, who used to do the mobilisation, were retrenched  - they are not there. 

 So, Mr. Speaker, I am urging the Minister to organise this Ministry; I am urging the Minister to put structures as they were there before, so that this Ministry once more will become a very prestigious Ministry; so that this professional will become once more a prestigious one.  

The Veterinarians used to be very respected people, and they were people of high social class in the community; but today they have become drunkards, they have lost direction, they have been demoralised by the re- organisation in the Ministry.

You find this issue of so called unified agricultural extension work whereby, an Agricultural Officer is supposed to be the District Agricultural Co-ordinator, to co-ordinate all the three activities - that is; fisheries, veterinary and agriculture.  What is there?  What happens is that the co-ordinator promotes his own interest; that is in case is an agriculturalist, he promotes only agriculture. And those people in veterinary definitely, are left out. They are being frustrated, and intimidated.  

The Ministry has been with a habit of bringing Bills to this House, and once those Bills are passed, that is the end the Minister sits behind.  Not very many years ago, we passed another Bill of Diary Development Authority; we all had high hopes in that Bill, we knew that at least, we were going to have a way forward. But today it seems the opposite is happening; instead of promoting the marketing of our products, these people are again licensing people to import milk. Is that why we are making these laws? Is that why we are passing these Bills, so that we promote other people’s interests, and we forget our own farmers? 

I think these people need to get serious. This Ministry has been having problems, and has been having adhoc arrangements. I am happy that they have been able to come up with this kind of Bill, which will address the issues related to breeding. Because when I was still in the Committee of Agriculture, the Minister used to come to the Committee each time with a different thing. For example One year he would say that they have a plan to distribute improved crops to all the peasants in the villages; but it would pass with nothing done. 

Another year he would come and say no, ‘this year we have planned to give out bulls’; that one would also pass with no bulls given out. So, what is actually happening in the Ministry today? Is really the Minister trying to do anything good for Ugandans? Is he really trying to do anything for the farmers of this country? Does the Minister believe that, he will be able to improve on this Ministry; does he really have hope in this Ministry? I think something ought to be done. 

Hon. Okulo Epak was saying that it seems we have a problem; everybody is talking about modernisation of agriculture, but where are we starting from?  What is the level of our farmers, and what is their capacity to absorb this idea we are singing about? So, hon. Minister, I request you to go back and try to assess your performance.

Lastly, we have a problem in this country; we have been able to wave taxes on other things, which we think will be able to improve the lives of Ugandans.  Unfortunately, we have not been able to do that with the drugs, and farm implements, which in my view would be the first incentive, which would change the lives of our people. 

Why are we still taxing animal drugs, increasing on the cost of production for our farmers? Why are we taxing the agricultural implements, which are going to bring the standard of farming that will help us realise our dreams for modernisation?  Who does not know that many farmers in this country cannot even afford a hoe, let alone talk about –(Interruption).

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the Member for giving way. I would like to inform the Member that we are not taxing agricultural implements; we do not have taxes on medicine; and we do not have taxes on some of the items, which go into the production of animal foods and so forth. So, maybe, the Member may have to revise and to give us areas that we should work on, other than areas where we have already taken solutions.  I thank you.

MR. MUTEBI KITYO:  Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the hon. Minister who has given us the previous information that, it is true some of the agricultural implements are not taxed. However, a tractor is imported tax free, but tractor implements like ploughs, and others, including Spares, some of them attract up to 48 percent tax.  

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, it is the Minister of Finance who is actually destroying this economy. It is a petty that he has agreed to run a totally liberalised economy, and a totally privatised economy, in a situation of a third world country, with a backward economy, which still needs to fight its own way. Unless the Minister of Finance creates a market for beef, even if we make these laws here, I can assure you that we are still going to have a raw deal.  Thank you.

MR. OKIROR:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all the Members who have given me that information. I want also to thank the Minister for his information; but I still insist, because I have got contacts with some of the traders who actually deal in animal drugs. They have been crying that the tax component of the cost of drugs is very high.  

I have also been buying drugs, and I see that the price for the animal drugs is actually very high. So, I hope maybe, the Minister will go and work on that one. At a later time, I will be able to give more information so that he will be able to act on that. 

I want to wind up by appealing to the Minister for animal industry, to go back to the status quo of the 60s, if at all he is to achieve anything in this country.  But if you continue insisting with this new arrangement of unified extension work, you are bound to fail, and farmers will continue crying in this country until you leave the seal.  I thank you.

MR. KITYO MUTEBI (Mawokota South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the Animal Breeding Bill, because of the fact that, breeding is the key to success both in animal husbandry and crop husbandry.  But I also do agree with my colleagues for the reservations they have about this Bill. 

The main point is that Government policies have taken long to be farmer friendly, and they have also taken very long to solve farmers’ problems. Farmers have been crying on a number of issues, but we have not provided answers to their problems. Hence, anything to solve the farmers’ problems will be most welcome.  

We need the Animal Breeding Bill, because even other areas of agronomy and animal husbandry will need improved animals.  Some Members have talked of improving pastures, and providing water; Yes, this is complimentary to animal breeding, because you need to have a well bred cow which will grow faster, so that it reduces on your costs. Instead of looking after a cow for six years, before you take it for slaughter, you should look after a cow for 18 months only, and then it goes to the slaughter house. 

So, I think this is a good foundation where we need to really put the Bill in place, so that scientists can give us animals we want for the good of animal husbandry in this country.  

The future of this country lies actually on export of agricultural products. The internal market is not there, because 90 percent of the population are producers, and only 10 are consumers. If we say that 90 percent of our population live in rural areas, and therefore, they are doing agriculture, then it means only 10 percent will be eating or taking what they produce. 

In developed countries, it is 5 percent who are producers, and 95 percent are consumers. It is a reverse in this country. That is why you find farmers all of them bouncing in Owino, Nakawa Market and Kalerwe, only to sell their products at a give away price. 

But if we can arrange and organise an export market, then the future of agriculture will be improved. We have time and again told the Government to have a deliberate programme for export. Most of our products are prime products. They could fetch a prime market, because our agriculture sector is not using a lot of chemicals.  So, most of our products can qualify as organic products, and therefore, fetching markets of the prime price. 

It is very disheartening to see a country like Botswana, which has got only 1 million cows, but able to market their beef, and earn over 100 million dollars; only in beef. In Uganda we have 5 million cows, but even one kilogram of meat, out of our 5 million cows does not find an export market.  Why?  Because our meat is very hard; it is not bred for the international market; our cows carry more worms than intestines; and the extension service is very poor. We have to do all these if we are to deserve an export market. I would like to appeal to this Government to really think very much about export market, because this is the answer to our economy.

Secondly, we are putting very little money in agriculture; there is little investment in agriculture.  It is only 1.4 percent of our national Budget that is allocated to agriculture. What does this mean?  It means that we are having disappointed working staff; we are having programmes which are not properly funded; we cannot irrigate; and we cannot even produce vaccines for our cows here. We cannot do anything with 1.4 percent of the national Budget. So, I would appeal to the Government to increase the Budget for agriculture.  

My last point is that while we are looking at this Animal Husbandry Bill, we have also to think of other complementary programmes, like providing water to animals, irrigation, and improved pastures; so that these animals can have good grass to enable them grow faster, and earn an export market.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. RWABITA (Ibanda South, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr. speaker. I do support the Bill, because it is part of modernisation of agriculture. However, it has got three concerns that need to be addressed:  

First, I want to emphasis the question of market, which has been expressed by my friends. The way I see this Bill, eventually it could easily be self-defeating. In the production process, take the beverages for example, Pepsi-cola, Soda or Beer industries; these people cannot produce an extra litre, unless they know they are going to sell it. But with agriculture, you just tell farmers produce, produce; and they produce things to rot.  

It is the same with the animal products. Now, this breeding centre if it succeeds, it is going to bring more problems to the farmers, because they are going to produce better products, more milk, and there is no market. So, what is all this?  It is a saga.  It is a big vicious circle.  So, before you produce, there should be an affirmative action taken to look for markets.  Otherwise, we can invest a lot of money in this centre, and at the end of the day, the results will not be positive.  

Uganda produces a lot of milk, but we are over 21 million people, and we do not have enough milk for our people.  It is again another interesting situation. Here we are pouring milk, but people do not have enough milk.  How do we explain this?  This is because there is no culture of drinking tea with milk in Uganda. People prefer Waragi, Tonto, Beer, and Whisky than milk. 

So, I would advise Mr. Speaker, that the Ministries of Animal industry, of Education, and of Gender, have a lot to do - (Interruption)

MR. RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Rwabita for giving way. I think the reason why people drink more Whiskies and more Beers, it is because, they are better advertised than milk.  There are more commercials about Beers and Sodas, than about milk.  So, it is a marketing thing.

MR. RWABITA:  Thank you very much, and that is why I am calling upon the ministries concerned; of Education, Agriculture, of Health and of Gender. The Gender Ministry should inculcate the importance of milk values to our women, so that they can feed our children on milk, and also ask their husbands to buy milk for the kids. 

The Ministry of Health, I do not know what they are doing. They have got all doctors, they know the importance of milk, but nobody cares about telling people to drink milk. 

The same with the Ministry of Education; if it could educate our people, our children on the importance of drinking milk, and perhaps even contribute 1 percent of the Budget to buying some few litres of milk for our kids, that will be the beginning of advertising our milk. But the Ministry is just silent; and we tell farmers to improve their farms to produce milk, which will just be poured.  It is very sad. 

I would like to get an answer from the Ministers of Agriculture, of Finance and even from the Prime Minister.  What is the secret behind keeping quiet about the powder milk plant?  Why are you keeping silent about it?  Is it not viable?  Tell us!  Is it not profitable?  Tell us, why?  There is nobody talking about it.  If we produce a lot of milk, and it is converted into powder, it will be easy to sell.  

Take the North of Uganda, most of these peasants do not have milk; even Karamoja, although they have got animals, they do not have enough milk; and then the neighbouring countries. Powder milk would be easy to transport, but we talk year after year, and nobody is interested to tell us. 

 Four years back, DANIDA gave the Government 7 million US dollars, and eventually it was frozen, because the Government was not taking action. So, Mr. Prime Minister, what is the problem? Tell us, and the Minister of Agriculture.

The second concern is preservation of our local breeds. Are we modernising completely or halfway? Because if you modernise to the extent of changing all animals into hybrid, and foreign exotic animals, then we are in trouble; because our animals have got their natural resistance to diseases. Therefore, we should not go wholesale to just change everything into exotic. We can have a problem. 

Take an example of Foot and Mouth disease, in Uganda we have had a lot of breakouts, but we have never had a case like in France or U.K, where you have to kill all the herds. Our animals get some wounds, and we brush them with some drugs, and after few weeks, they are cured. But in Europe, it is a crisis. So, if you change all animals into exotic breeds, then you are destroying our animals’ natural resistance.  

Further to that, today in Europe, people no more take fatty meat; they want lean and red meat. That is where we could sell our meat, because our animals are not fed on rotten food or even processed meat. Animals in Europe are fed on meat, mixed with offals, and what have you; that is why they get these diseases. But our meat is still good, because our animals feed on natural grass. So, I think it is important that we up grade to a certain extent, but not to go wholesale.   

My last concern is a question of Government policy.  Today in France and U.K. farmers are subsidised to kill their animals, in order, to stop the spread of Foot and Mouth disease. Here, the policy of Government has been no subsidy. With this high cost of production, you expect a simple farmer to modernise his agriculture, his animal breeds by not getting some subsidy from Government?  I think you are giving him/her an impossible task.

The Government must start thinking in terms of subsidies, if it wants commercial farmers. Farmers must get some subsidy, so that the cost of production is limited somehow. In Europe, the farmers are happy to kill their animals, because the money they get from an animal, which has been slaughtered, almost doubles the usual cost of that animal. So, the farmers are happy, they know at the end of the day, they will recoup their money, and re- build their farms – (Interruption).

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I am a Dairy Farmer; therefore, I am very, interested in what you are saying. I have been abstaining from over intervention, because I expect relevant Ministers to answer; but on the issue of subsidy, the argument has been that, if you are being subsidised by our Financial Partners, where do you get the capacity to subsidise?  

That is really the problem and so, our approach has been that, we should persuade these other countries which are subsidising to stop subsidising, because if the illiterate farmer is not subsidised, why is it that, the literate farmer is subsidised? That has been now the focus in the international fora I have attended, because you know, the world is becoming a small village. 

Let me also finally say that, on the issue of powder milk, the people have not yet acquired the culture of buying it; they prefer fresh milk. In addition, some of our borders where some of this milk was being sold have been sealed off, for political or nationalistic reasons. A businessman, who invested heavily in powder milk, is now stranded and in fact, I am having inter-Ministerial meetings to see a way forward. 

I hope the Minister will be answering that question of persuading UPE pupils to consume milk under a financial project. But again, there is a problem namely; who is going to pay the dash? We do not want Universal Primary Education to change into another unaffordable phenomenon. People may not afford buying milk, but if we get some assistance from abroad  - this is a matter being considered. I take it that the relevant Ministries will be giving you well-researched answers.  I thank you.

MR. RWABIITA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and the hon. Prime Minister – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR. RWABITA: I am concluding, Mr. Speaker, on a point of advice to the Minister of Agriculture that, as they start on improving on the breeding centres, can they liase with the Minister of Trade and Commerce, and start looking for markets for milk, for beef, for goats, for whatever they are trying to improve on?  Otherwise, production with no market is as good as nothing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I want to end this debate. I know we have spoken on this Bill, and those who wanted to contribute to this Bill, I have another Bill falling under the same Ministry. Therefore, I will give opportunity to those who have not been able to contribute to this Bill, when dealing with another Bill whose report I understand is ready. So, I will give you the opportunity to participate in the general debate about the Ministry of Agriculture and its performance. 

I do not know whether, the Chairman has any answer or any query - otherwise, I will be calling upon the Minister to conclude the debate. But if you do not have or if you have one point, please raise it.

THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr. Kanyike):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Members for their comments on this Bill. We have had an opportunity to talk about the problems that the Ministry of Agriculture is facing. 

The Bill we are discussing is dealing with improving the genetic resources of our animals, which I think is important. But I do agree with the comments of the Members particularly, regarding the question of marketing of milk. It is true we have a lot of milk in this country; our people are not taking enough milk, and we do not have enough market for our milk products. I think this point must be emphasised. I am glad all the Ministers concerned are here, and I think this question has got to be addressed.  

The problem of extension services has been a chronicle as far as the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is concerned. However, it is also being addressed by another Bill, which will be coming to this House soon. 

Having pointed out those two points, a Bill we are talking about refers to the improvement of our animals. Uganda is part of the world, and everywhere in the world people are improving on the genetic resources of their animals. We cannot be an exception in this country. But this does not mean that other problems cannot be sorted out.  

The only comment I would like to refer to is the one, which was raised by hon. Okiror - my friend has gone before replying to it.  He was wondering whether the Ministry was disorganised. What we have found now as we end the Sixth Parliament is that, the Ministry is actually organising now.  

It is the first time in this country that we have had a Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture.  For a very long time, ever since the existence of this country, agriculture has not been practised on any plan at all, and our farmers have not been organised.  For the first time, the farmers are being considered; the Ministry is now focusing on the farmers. Ugandans should not lose heart, because there is nothing to gain in losing heart.  

80 percent of the population we represent survive on agriculture, and we shall have to keep on talking until agriculture is actually improved in this country. That is the only way our people are going to improve their lot.  

Once again, I would like to thank the Members who have contributed to this bill; and I would like to call upon the Government to take very seriously, the points that have been raised on the Floor of this House, as regards to the improvement of the activities under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Dr. F. Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank the hon. Members who have contributed to this Bill. The problem we have is that we are bringing our plans to Parliament piecemeal. As some of you may know, if you have read the plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, 15 areas were identified for intervention if we are to move forward. Because this plan is just a strategic framework, we have had to develop a plan for each of these 15 areas.

Some of these areas do not actually fall under the Ministry of Agriculture; they fall in other Ministries, and will be developed by other Ministries. For example, Rural Road Infrastructure, definitely, falls under the Ministry of Works. It is very important in as far as marketing is concerned. I am sure all these plans will soon come to the Floor of this House for your discussion.  

So it is at the end, when everything has been produced, that one will be able to get the holistic picture of the thrust of the Government towards the modernisation of agriculture, and the improvement of livelihood of our people in the rural areas. We must also note that –(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Minister for allowing the clarification. The Minister has talked of getting a holistic picture in the future. Mr. Speaker, when we passed the Statute for National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO), we thought we were having an organisation, which would take charge of the whole of this area, and do research on them, and have departments to deal with the various sectors under one top centre. Now we are getting this that a resource centre, and also data bank, which mainly really is a research organisation.  

The clarification I wanted to get is that, what is the need for setting up this separate centre, which could have been organised under NARO as a separate directorate, or maybe under the same organisation?  So, was there really need for a separate organisation with separate over-heads and so forth? Is this not another way of increasing the burden on the farmers, who will be using these services?

DR. F. BYARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member has raised a serious issue, which I will answer with all the others raised by the hon. Members who have contributed.  But I will come to it. 

I was saying that as we develop policies and plans, we do them within the policy environment in the country. I listened to hon. Okiror - it would appear that he thought that, we would operate outside the National Policy of Liberalisation, the National Policy of Privatisation, and the National Policy of Decentralisation; which is completely impossible at this stage. 

Let me reply to the Members’ queries one by one. The issue of marketing of milk is a very serious one. We have been grappling with it for the last two years, and I can assure you that we have not succeeded. The problem in the milk sector is that of the weak private sector, that is involved in milk processing and selling; and also the tradition or the habits of low internal consumption.  

Although we produce 600 million litres of milk per year, but when you divide that with 20 million, that is only 30 litres per person, per year. The United Nations recommended quantity per person is 200 litres. So, if you tell someone from outside Uganda that, you have excess milk, he will wonder how it comes about. So under this situation we have recommended the following:

One, that we enable the newly created, Diary Development Authority (DDA), which Members alluded to. Although the Law was passed in 1998, this DDA was created in 2000, to carry out promotional campaigns for the consumption milk.

Secondly, we regulate the handling and selling of milk. We have found that although, the Informal Sector is now responsible for handling 80 percent of the milk that is sold in the country, if we continue promoting the Informal Sector  - we shall destroy the formal sector; and once, we destroy the formal sector, we shall never be able to handle the milk in the country. 

In other countries, milk is not consumed in its liquid form; it can be turned in very many by-products. In one country, they have 93 by-products from milk, which people consume. Half of the milk produced in Europe is turned into cheese, but here all the milk must be consumed in its liquid form; and how much milk can a person take? Although they are talking of Beer, with Beer you can take five bottles or ten, but with milk you cannot take more than one bottle or so. 

So, that is why we would like to regulate the Informal Sector and promote the Formal Sector. Some investors had come in, but they collapsed because we allowed the Informal Sector to over compete them. They were paying tax when the Informal Sector was not paying any tax.  They had over- heads, which the Informal Sector did not have.  

Then we must also attend to the handling of excess milk, which happens only in the wet seasons by turning it into powder. If our people cannot take powder milk, then that can be turned into liquid milk when there is scarcity. Actually, even as we talk now, our Diary Corporation Limited is importing powder milk. Powder milk is required in the production of yoghurt; and is also required in the production of other milk by-products.

Unfortunately, because of the policies of privatisation and liberalisation, the loan which the Government had got from ADB for the construction of the milk power plant in Mbarara was cancelled; but now we have an offer of half of 50 percent of the cost towards a powder plant from the Government of the Netherlands.  If the farmers - because it does not want to give this money to the private sector  - if the farmers or some organisations that belongs to the farmers can handle that money, and top it up and be able to put up the milk powder plant. 

There is also the idea of getting this milk consumed by our malnourished children. We have done a calculation and found out that, to give a quarter of a litre of milk to each child in primary school per week - not per day - would cost us Shs. 176 billion. We think that – because much of the costs are on transportation – we believe that if the milk was first turned into powder, because the powder is less bulky and then taken to schools, the cost would be much lower. 

We are about to put these proposals before Government, and we hope the Government will be able to pronounce itself on the matter. But we have – we can see that unless some Government intervention is done, the whole Diary sector is going to collapse.

Hon. Rwakoojo and others have talked about why not improve our local animals; have we studied our local animals? Yes, we have done; and really most of the effort done under this deal, was towards the improvement of our local genetic materials.  It is possible through natural selection, to slowly be able to create a local animal with some superior qualities.

However, our fear is that, for example, when the Bazungu studied the Ankole cow, and even the East African small Zebu, they found out that even with the improvement they had attained, say, for example, in the case of beef that the meat bone ratio remained too low. There was too much bone, and too little meat.  For you to be able to sell your –(Interruption)

DR. AJEANI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. The information I want to give is this; there was a British Veterinary Officer in the 50s, who was working in the then Teso District. This man gave a written report that if the fresian cow or the jersey or any of those breeds in Europe were imported to Uganda, within no time, there would be soup under their skins. Meaning that our temperatures were too high for those animals to be kept here.  

I thought that was the truth until when I went to the University of Khartoum. I found a Diary farm having all these exotic breeds, and yet there is no spot in Uganda which is as hot as the hottest part of Khartoum.  

Secondly, the point you are bringing about the Ankole cow - I have been teaching animal breeding and animal management in Makerere University, to both veterinary and agriculture students. I found that emphasis is made on breeding, but not the management of the animals. 

What is the point in bringing a good breed, and give it to a farmer who does not know how to manage it? So what I would say is that, please, let us eat these records as we eat bonny fish; the flesh we take and the bones we throw away. Thank you.  

D.R F. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Member for that information. But what I was saying is that, we shall improve on our local breeds; if we find that what we have been able to produce from our local breeds cannot be marketed outside the country, then, we shall go into crossbreeding. This could be with African breeds or they could be exotic breeds, until we achieve something that can be marketed outside the country.
    
Kyempisi and Kiryana of Bunyoro although, they were Breeding Centres, they never belonged directly to the Ministry. You know, they were under the Livestock Industries Limited; and this Livestock Industries Ltd is due for privatisation. We hope that it will be privatised to farmers who will continue to carry on breeding. For example Kiryana and Kyempisi are the only source of the Syaiwal breed. This is a Pakistan animal that was brought to Kenya. It is a very good dual-purpose animal, and had been imported in the country and put on those ranches.  

Our people have been getting bulls and even other breeding stock from those centres. So, we hope that when these farms are privatised, they will be privatised to serious people who can continue to carry out breeding, which is a very paying business.   

Hon. Eresu asked about manpower. This manpower will be answered by our next Bill, the National Agriculture Advisory Services Bill, (NAADS Bill). It will tell you how the manpower to carry out advisory or extension services in the rural areas will be carried out. But you should not be worried that probably there is no breeding going on in – we have no farm in Teso.  That probably we are going to breed for other areas and leave out Teso – no.  You can have a few Breeding Centres, but the animals will come from there and be transferred to Teso.  For example the on-going Restocking Programme is bringing animals from districts, which have good numbers or surplus numbers and taking the animals to districts, which have got low numbers of livestock.

Hon. Bamwanga and hon. Eresu asked whether, the imported semen will not bring in diseases?  As you know, this country has been the most careful in the world as far as BSE and other sexually transmitted diseases of animals are concerned.  We totally banned the importation of live animals, semen and their products.  But because we did not have enough genetic pool within the country on, which to improve on our animals - as you know the exotics in the country are about 20,000 only. If you only continue with those, you will end up with in breeding; and you will end up with performance going down instead of moving upwards. 

So, we thought about importation of semen, because after all, we import from countries that are known to be free from Mad cow disease. Each country carries out monitoring under the OIE guidelines, and we have been very particular that we shall only import from countries, which have kept record for the last seven years and have demonstrated that, they have never had any case of BSE or any of these other diseases like scrappy in their country.  

When you import semen, you do not give it to the farmer immediately. It is first quarantined and examined. At the same time, we are trying to have our own capacity to produce semen. For example, at the ABC there are now five Friesian Bulls, two of which are already producing semen. There are also a few Ankole bulls there. 

Once we get say, about twenty bulls of each breed, we are interested in, and which bulls we have tested for their performance that is progeny testing, then definitely, our importation of semen will decrease.  We can even decide to ban it again.

Dr. Okulo Epak asked whether, our farmers are ready for modernisation?  As I said before, it is because we are coming in piecemeal. When you read the Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture, you follow the interventions are made, and are made at the same time.  Definitely, our farmer will reach a level where he will actually be professionalised; and once he is professionalised, then he will be ready for anything. We hope we shall get there.  

The training of Vets is a half hazard today as we talk, because it is handled together with Crop Science at Bukalasa.  But there are arrangements – there is pressure from the Makerere Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, to take over the training of Paravets, so that we have a cadre lower than the Veterinary officers who can deliver Veterinary services.  

Concerning maintaining of this centre at Entebbe, it is because we do not have the money. If we had the money we would move elsewhere. I do not think the place is even ideal for what we want to do now; but we do not have the money yet. But as you might know, we have already agreed with Civil Aviation Authority to hand over the other area, which used to be habited by the Veterinary Training Institute and even the Research Centre and the Quarantine grounds. 

The Artificial Breeding Centre (ABC) is separate.  It is on the other end, but if at any time we find that it is not possible for us to continue to be at Entebbe, then we shall move upcountry. We hope once Civil Aviation Authority says, ‘we do not want you there,’ they will be able to build us another site outside Entebbe.

Hon. Okumu Ringa talked about the primitive fishing on Lake Albert and Lake Kyoga.  That is true because the investors have been reluctant to go to those lakes, but I hope they will soon do so, since L. Victoria itself will be circulated. I know there are actually two Projects now on Lake Kyoga, and fishing prospects are improving. 

As for the infrastructure for cattle quality, which also takes in hon. Rwakoojo’s question about water, this also is being catered for.  It is being taken care of, and as you might be aware, it is also a big point in the President’s Manifesto. We are going to address it actually as an emergency, as we implement the Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture. And as we talk now, some activity is going on in the Karamoja region.  

Is the Ministry organised? The hon. Chairman has answered this question, but I believe there is still a lot of work to be done. As we face the new challenge, we may actually have to restructure the Ministry, but we hope we are up to the task and we promise you to give our best towards this task.  

I think some of our work has not been published, but we have made a lot of policy changes. We have made some changes in a number of policies within the agricultural sector, and probably we should take time. Unfortunately, the time of this Parliament is running out. But if we are likely to come back, probably one should hold a seminar and be able to show you the direction that the Ministry and the Government are taking as far as the Agricultural Sector is concerned.

On this question of taxes on agricultural inputs, I usually get written presentations from farmers. Now, when I take it up with the Revenue Authority, they say, you show us the area where you are not zero rated, and if you can convince us that it is an agricultural input, we shall zero rate it. 

So, the farmers – hon. Kityo – who know what is happening in as far as agricultural machinery, and the rest are concerned, could come out with the paper and we discuss it with the Ministry of Finance.  At one time, I even set up a Technical Committee, but they did not give me much; they came out also saying that almost everything under agricultural inputs was zero-rated.  

I agree with hon. Kityo that definitely, because 90 per cent of our people are agricultural producers, and only 10 percent are consumers, we have to look outside for the export markets. However, the problem is that the Government is not going to do the export itself. 

I have identified markets and even His Excellency the President, and even other players in the Government have identified markets. We always tell the private sector, but no body takes it up. For example, there is a market for beef in Burundi; there is a market for yoghurt on the Tanzanian Coast; there is a good market also for milk products in Kenya; and there is a market for sheep and goats in the Middle East.  You tell the players but it appears no body is willing to take up the challenge.  

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: I wanted to take up this opportunity to inform the Minister, and the House at large that really, the problem is not the markets; the problem is production. The other day, we signed a contract for supplying 30,000 litres of milk to Kenya, after one month, we failed to perform; that contract was cancelled.  30,000 litres of milk per day to Kenya. I personally ensured that we sign that contract, and we could not release the milk.  

The other day, we were given a contract of supplying 21 tons of fruits to Djibouti, after one trip, we failed to perform. The other year, when I was still the Chairman of the Chamber of Commerce, we had a contract to supply 1000, goats per month to the Middle East, but we only supplied 500. 

 The problem really is that, we have got to go back to the basics, and ensure that production is sustainable, is quality and is able to meet the international standards.  The Private Sector must wake up and actually do what they are supposed to do, and be able to create a situation, which can export.

We have now created a fund in the Bank of Uganda to help exporters, but there are not very many people willing to come and participate in getting those funds to improve their exports. So, we hope that this will be done, so that actually we can increase our exports.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Speaker, the issue of sensitising our exporters, to these opportunities is being addressed by my Ministry.  For instance, we have a ten million-dollar line of credit from Egypt, and we have publicised this.  This line of credit allows for exports to Egypt, anything you want, at generous low rate of interest, for one year if it is simple trade. If it is for industries, it is between three and five years. 

We have publicised this information to Uganda Manufacturers Association, and to the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry. This information is free, and we have supplied it; but so far, we have not got serious applications. The whole programme has been managed by the DFCU, but nothing has come through yet.  

Mr. Speaker, I have to inform hon. Members that we really, have got to wake up as a Country, and as a business community, to look for opportunities out there.  Our internal markets are small. 

The other day, I think it was Botswana; they wanted 70 tons of millet, but we could not raise even ten tons of millet. South Africans are bringing a lot of equipment to this Country, coming in fully loaded containers, but they return to South Africa empty.  So, this raises the cost of imported goods. We have informed Uganda National Chambers of Commerce and Industry about these opportunities; please at least fill half of the containers. So far we are waiting!

So, I would ask hon. Members to sensitise their constituents about these opportunities.  These are just a few examples; there are even many more.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, the Minister has been talking and I agree with him that we have very few things to export; and even when we have to export them, we do not meet the quality standards.  The hon. Minister in charge of Privatisation, talked about funds being available to help exporters. I assume he is talking about the apex funds in the Bank of Uganda. It is true that very few people have taken advantage of those funds for the following reason:

The rate of interest at which this money is borrowed is far, far lower than the rate at which this money is supposed to be lent to farmers; and the reason is very simple, because they are using it to finance Government. That is a fact! You borrow money from the European Investment Bank - that is where the apex funds come from. They come and I think you borrow them at about two per cent.  Bank of Uganda has its own charges, and the Commercial Banks have their own charges. By the time you borrow the apex funds, you are paying something like 26 per cent.  

Now, if you pay 26 per cent for agriculture, I guarantee you, you will fail in every project. So, we need to take an integrated approach.  You do not just say, I have found the market; you do not say, I have found the money; you have to put those together and know that who ever accesses this money, is able to produce profitably and be able to export.  

I cannot understand why we cannot have different arrangements with these apex funds? I am seeking clarification from both the Ministers who are present here, whether it is impossible to make arrangements with the European Investment Bank, and have an agreement that this money that is going to be invested in agriculture is lent at a fairly lower rate. 

It may be because of micro economic stability, and what have you, but the cycle is vicious. Unless you solve that problem you cannot borrow at 26 percent and invest in agriculture, and be able to make a profit. I thank you.

MR. KANDOLE: I would like also to be clarified by whoever the Minister thinks is more responsible for this problem.  A milk cooling plant was allocated to the farmers in Kyaka Constituency, but for the last six months, it has not been installed. One of the reasons is that there is no market. Now we are being told that there is a big market. Which is more correct now, Mr. Speaker?

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker I am also very intrigued by the information by the Minister that, there was orders for millet tons, and we could not even meet a small quantity of it. Surely, you do not just come and say give me millet today, I have a market there.  Is that possible?  I mean if we have a market and we know that that market is sustainable, then let us go out and promote the production of millet; and it will be produced. 

We do not just look for the market when the things are not there - we cannot fulfil, definitely, we will not fulfil it. So, we have got to look for the market in a more co-ordinated manner.  Thank you.

DR. AJEANI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are told that there is a big market in various parts of the World for our crops. But the same Ministers who are responsible should know that we do not even have collecting centres.  The areas where these produce are going to be stored.  Take millet it is not produced all over Uganda, and where it is being produced, there are no roads and storage facilities.  

I would suggest that our leaders when they are going to tell farmers to produce more, they should first of all, go and negotiate for the markets of what they want people to produce; and then take it immediately to the market when it is ready. 

Prof.. Kagonyera is not here, but I think there are other doctors who can support me. A Dairy cow, no matter how good it is in milk production, if you do not milk it, the milk in the cistern will create what we call professionally, back pressure; and that back pressure will kill the epithelia cells, which secrete milk. 

This is the same vicious circle we have been talking about in conferences, and in workshops. That when you tell people to double their production, they comply.  But then they find no market, and if there is no market they resort to local consumptions avenues, which are not profitable. If it is millet, they may resort to 'ajono', or to other things. Then next time you remember that you were talking to an Ambassador or a certain foreign Minister, you say, ‘can you get us market for this and that immediately’. 

It is embarrassing for us as a State. To me this means there is no co-ordinated plan for production and marketing. It is not there, and I am not saying let us point fingers at any body. This Ministry is not managed by one person.  Ministers keep changing, one time I was even there.  

So let us try to help our farmers by first of all, finding markets five or six years ahead, and then we can tell people what items to produce. We should also prepare ourselves to receive these items from the farmers and keep them where they can be safe. 

I have a problem of 'qual quelia'- the weaverbirds - and nobody is protecting me.  Rodents are another problem to the farmers - I will be honest, in my own house I fight rats every night, everyday.  You know the damage they can do. As an agriculturist, any Ugandan who says he/she has no problem with rats or he/she has no rats at home, she is telling lies. Thank you very much.  That is the supplementary information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In this matter the clarifications, which have been given are varied. I think the Government has to think about them.  Why do we not conclude this Bill?  The issue of interest of preparing farmers has been raised; the Government will go and consider it.

DR. F. BYARUHANGA: Finally, Mr. Speaker, hon. Rwabita talked about subsidies although, we are not able to subside as the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister has informed us, we have some smart subsidies. For example, in this country the extension is fairly free and there are some other services in the agricultural sector which Government gives; for example the construction of dams, and things like that which are also in the a form of subsidy.  

But I agree with him that this makes us unable to compete with the producers in the developed world, who are heavily subsidised. Once again, Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Members for having supported this Bill - (Interruption).

MR. ONGOM: My inquiry was not answered. I had asked for a clarification, which the Minister promised to answer later, but I think he forgot about it.

DR. NTEGAMAHE MWEBESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is a Member who raised a point that rats are disturbing him in his house; and the Minister seems not to be responding.  It is a very serious issue, because these rats can eat the Member's suits and other clothes and whatever. So, I think he should advice him on how he can look after his house, and not to have rats.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does he expect the Minister of Agriculture to deal with this issue?  

DR. F. BYARUHANGA: The hon. Member for Arua municipality holds a Ph.D in agricultural science. He knows what to do better than myself.  

But let me answer hon. Ongom, because I promised to answer him. "Why are you creating this national animal genetic resource centre, when we have NARO?"  You see in the case of NARO when they have done their genetic engineering, and breeding and so on - Once they have produced what they call the foundation seed, then they have farmers who are already trained who carry out the multiplication.  

Then another player; the Uganda Seed Project comes in and buys the seed from these multiplication farmers; the farmers who have been commissioned to multiply foundation seed and dress it and sell it to our small farmers. But in the case of the animals, as I said in my introductory remarks, this structure does not exist at all. 

We are not stopping NARO from continuing to carry out research on animals as they have been doing, but we would like to have a centre, which will have separate farms, farms that will co-operate with the surrounding farmers. For example, as we talk now, in the case of Nshara ranch, we bought over 2000 Ankole heifers, and from them we selected 1000. 

We have been going to farmers looking for the best bulls from their herds. They give them to us and we use them to breed those heifers and we monitor them; we measure growth rates of their off springs, and so forth. We hope that at the end of the day, we shall have healthy animals, which we can again return to the farmer.

We thought that this kind of work, plus the promotion of the creation of breed societies and breeding associations was actually some sort of specialised extension work, which we could not leave to NARO, which is essentially a research organisation. That is why we agreed within the Ministry, because NARO is part of the Ministry.

We agreed to have this separate entity to do that kind of work, for as long as a Ugandan farmer is not capable of carrying it out on his own.  For example, in the case of Kenya, the Government does not keep the Kenyan studbook; instead, it is kept by the farmers association.  The people who carry out milk recordings, herd recordings, and grade animals and give them pedigree certificates, are just farmers. It is not the Government.

But we are many years away from operating that way.  This is the kind of work this centre will carry out for us, until the farmer is able to carry it out by himself.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Now, we have ended the debate for this day; and I do not intend to put the question for the Second Reading, but I will put it at an appropriate time.  Therefore, I ask you to look at the report on the Bill, which was read the other day. I think it is on advisory services, so that we deal with this Bill next time when we come. 

Therefore, this brings us to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until Wednesday, 2nd May 2001 at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.09 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2nd May 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)
