Thursday, 29 April 2010

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and in the public gallery this afternoon are students of Kampala International University who have come here to observe proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

Hon. Members, I would like to remind you that we agreed that as from next week on Tuesday, we shall be sitting both in the morning and afternoon to be able to clear the work that is piling on our table. Thank you.

2.49
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you will recall that sometime last year, the enforcement arm of the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) intercepted some little fuel in Koboko Town, which resulted into the people in the town becoming rowdy; they later had running battles with the enforcement officers of URA. In that unfortunate incident, innocent Ugandans were killed by the members of the enforcement arm of URA. This was a nasty incident and even when one of the ministers went there, he was humiliated.

Today, the 29th Day of April 2010, at around 10 O’clock, the same URA officers went to Maracha Trading Centre together with the revenue protection officers. I am reliably told that they were at the trading center yesterday and possibly were told that some young man was hiding some fuel somewhere in the trading centre. This morning they went there in full force, armed with guns and went to search the house of that young man. They broke into the house and what they found there were some 40 litres of fuel and a number of empty jerricans which they swiftly impounded. They also impounded a motorcycle that was not registered.

But as they were going about their business, a section of people living in Maracha Trading Centre gathered and went to their vehicles - asaloon car and two pick-ups - into which the 40 litres of fuel, empty jerricans and the motorcycle had been loaded and offloaded them. This resulted into a scuffle between the URA officials and the people. And from nowhere the URA protection officers shot into the crowd, under the usual guise of self-defence, which was very unfortunate. 

I do not know how these people are trained these days. It is true I have never served in the armed forces, but I would think that one would start by shooting into the air to scare the crowd. But when you shoot live bullets into a crowd, that is very unacceptable and it taints the reputation of Government. And what surprises me is that such behaviour is not the behavior of the mainstream Uganda Army. The Police of today are fond of doing this. It is also true of the private security organisations – you remember what happened in Kampala when one of them shot some innocent civilians near Luwum Street. 

I know that our Government deals squarely with any soldier who kills a civilian; they are normally court martialed and if found guilty, such a soldier suffers death by firing squad. But why is Government silent on the behaviour of the people who are working with URA, but do not belong to the mainstream Army?

Anyway, what happened in the end is that two young men and one young girl were grievously injured, and as of now, they are admitted in Maracha Hospital. After I was called, the RDC –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought you are reporting so that investigations can be started.

MR ONZIMA: Yes, Mr Speaker and I am coming to that. But as I was saying, I talked to the Officer in Charge of the Police Station because the RDC, the  deputy DISO, DPC – you know we now have all these officers in Maracha – are somewhere on official duty accompanying the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, who is performing some functions. So, I only managed to talk to the Officer in Charge the Police Station and some of the people who called me from Maracha, and pleaded with them to calm down the crowds. I also told them to inform the people that nobody was allowed to take the law into their hands. I also informed them that I would pursue this matter through Government, which they listened to and actually nothing happened thereafter.

So, the URA officials took off, and drove towards Arua, which is their main regional headquarters. My appeal to Government is to task the responsible minister to take up this matter. Investigations should be carried out just like the way Maj. Gen. Kale Kayihura sometime early last year did when the DPC went to stop a disco he had himself okayed and in the process his escort, I think on the orders of former DPC of Maracha, a senior four student was killed innocently. So, I appeal to Government to investigate the matter.

THE SPEAKER: I think, hon. Member, a report has been made. So, can I ask the responsible minister to make some statement; we are not debating.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT: (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. For any life to be lost is something regrettable. And for any officer of Government to act contrary to law is equally regrettable. This matter has just been drawn to my attention, Mr Speaker, but I want to assure hon. Onzima that we are going to investigate it, which shall include listening to both sides involved in the matter. Thereafter, we will take appropriate action in accordance with the law. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What is the timeframe? You can give us an interim report.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I want to assure this House that within two weeks, I will come back here at least with an interim report on this matter. Thank you very much.

2.59
DR FRANCIS EPATAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance, which is to do with the local potent gin commonly called waragi or enguli.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you are aware that in the last few weeks, the death toll on account of waragi in Kabale District alone has risen to over 80. 

This morning, the Daily Monitor newspaper also reported a similar scenario in the district of Kamweng where it said that about 20 people are feared dead. We are aware that the obsolete Enguli Act is under the docket of the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. A few months ago, thank God the Ministry of Health had put up a ban to the sale of local waragi packed in small sachets, which enabled a number of people to drink it. However, you are also aware that the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry put up a spirited fight to oppose that ban.

Mr Speaker, we are utterly concerned that a number of Ugandans are at the risk of losing their lives, yet we do not appear to be pronouncing ourselves on the way forward regarding waragi.

I, therefore, would like to find out, from the Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry, as to what measures are being taken to ensure that the people of Uganda do not endanger their lives; in any case I would still go by what the Ministry of Health had already pronounced itself on, which this Parliament also fully supported - we need to protect our people.

I am told the Bill to amend the Enguli Act is still lying with the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. Considering the way the ministry has been defending waragi –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information that this matter came to Parliament in form of a petition and the two committees of trade, tourism and industry and social services made a report, which unfortunately, up to now, has not been tabled. But the report is ready and I am sure it has very good recommendations. So, my plea is that the committee be allowed to present its report to cure this problem. I thank you.

DR EPATAIT: Thank you for that information, but considering the urgency of the matter, I think we need to save Ugandans. I would also like to propose – I know that the report will finally come to Parliament – but that in considering the amendment to the Enguli Act of 1964, there should be some work between members of the different committees. We need to involve a number of committees rather than leaving it only to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. This is because this death has something to do with health. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we be briefed about that issue, Minister in charge of trade? People are dying everyday, as you have heard, in Kabale, they are now 80, then Kyenjojo – I know they are exercising their freedom, but we may have to curtail that freedom. I do not know what we can do? 

3.04
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Kabakumba Matsiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you realise, the line minister for Trade, Tourism and Industry is not around nor are the other ministers of state. However, I would like to inform the House that as Government, we shall take up this issue, especially on the amendment of the Enguli Act. But I also would like to request that space be found on the Order Paper for the report, which has been prepared by the Committee of Social Services and that on trade, tourism and industry so that we can discuss it and implement the recommendations therein.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but as a matter of urgency, what are you doing? Would you expect them to continue dying until the report is brought here?

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, as Government, I can say that teams have been dispatched to these districts in addition to the Uganda Bureau of Standards taking samples of this waragi to ascertain whether it is safe for consumption or not.

THE SPEAKER: But before I get the results from Uganda Bureau of Standards – you have heard that people are dying, can’t you make a decision?

MR KAWANGA: The problem with this issue is that Government has not yet agreed on how to handle it – two ministers are speaking at cross purposes on the same issue. It is necessary that either the Leader of Government Business or whoever is concerned brings these two people together to help them reach a common position. Otherwise, I do not see Government coming up with a clear position when two ministers in the same Government are talking at cross purposes.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think my colleague was a bit impatient because he has said exactly what Government has agreed to do and I was to communicate that very position. (Laughter)

The Rt thon. Prime Minster has planned a meeting between the ministry of Health and ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry to sort out that issue. And we shall in due course be informing the country on the decision taken. I thank you.

3.07
MR PETER ABRAHAMS LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I also rise on a matter of national importance – 

THE SPEAKER: No. You should have seen me before raising it. That is the procedure. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

(I) HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT 2008/2009

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not ready to present the report of the Health Service Commission because I have just seen this item on the Order Paper. I was not aware about it before. But at the earliest opportunity, next week, I promise – 

THE SPEAKER: Is it because you are lacking a copy? It is a question of putting the report on Table. You do not have to make any explanation.

They can get you a copy.

DR NDUHUURA: I do not have a copy. I think the best thing to do under the circumstances, Mr Speaker, is for me to prepare myself and do the needful next week.

THE SPEAKER: I give you ten minutes. (Laughter)

Hon. Minister, all these Members have copies, so it is a question of getting a copy and you formally Table it.

Meanwhile, let me adjust the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Finance.

(II) REQUEST TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE UP TO US$ 567,000 SUPPLEMENTARY FINANCING FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO THE ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY IN UGANDA (IUIU) TO ENABLE THE UNIVERSITY MEET COST OVERRUNS IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF STUDENTS HOSTEL PROJECT

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): First of all I would like to apologise on behalf of the Ministry for not presenting this request yesterday. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to lay on Table a request to authorise Government to guarantee up to US$ 567,000 supplementary financing from the Islamic Development Bank to the Islamic University In Uganda (IUIU) to enable the university meet cost overruns in the construction of students’ hostel project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Alright. The paper should be handled by the appropriate committee and report promptly.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table supplementary expenditure schedule No.2 for financial year 2009/2010 budget. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Again, let the appropriate committee take over the document, study it and make a report promptly to the House.

3.11
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I have no intention of opening debate on this matter because it will be premature. The amounts involved here are very small, US$ 567,000, at the exchange rate of Shs 2,000 it will translate to Shs 1,134,000,000. 

In my considered view, Government can find this money instead of borrowing it. In the recent past we have given to a similar institution Shs 4 billion. (Interjection) Yes. I am not saying it is a loan. We have in the past given Shs 4 billion to a similar institution. Why can’t Government find this money and give it to IUIU? (Interjection) I do understand. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Minister of Health, can you now –

3.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, hon. Members, I wish to lay on Table the Health Service Commission Annual Report 2008/2009. I beg to lay. (Laughter)   

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee of Parliament take it on, study it and make a report.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

3.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, you directed that members of parliament from both the government side and the Opposition under the chair of the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister do sit and harmonise positions on the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. 

I have been in touch with this committee of Members and they have indicated that they are working round the clock so that they can be in a position to present to us printed positions. They have requested that we give them some 30 to 45 minutes. 

In the meantime I wanted to move that we deal with the issue of the new districts as we await their reporting here. I beg to request.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. In order not to waste time, we can start on it now.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER ARTICLE 179 CLAUSES (1) AND (2) OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS AND CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you remember the motion was moved and we sent it to the Committee of Public Service and Local Government to study it and give us a report. Can we now receive the report from the committee?

Are there copies for Members?

3.16
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Emma Boona): The copies are supposed to be – well, I have just received my copy and I was told they were coming in.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe as she is reading, Members will receive their copies.   

MS BOONA: Thank you. Mr Speaker and hon. Members. On the 22 April 2010, the Minister of State for Local Government moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 170, clause (1) and (2) of the Constitution, providing for the alteration of boundaries of districts and creation of new districts. 

The motion was referred to the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government for consideration and thereafter to report back to Parliament.

The motion provided for the creation of new districts of Kalungu, Bukomansimbi, Gombe, Lwengo, Mitooma, Rubirizi, Kibingo, Nsiika, Ngora, Napak, Kibuku, Nwoya, Kole, Patongo and that the boundaries of Arua District and a district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties be altered as follows: By incorporating Terego County, formerly in the district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties, in Arua District. To create Nyadri District, formerly in the district comprising Maracha and Terego counties, consisting of Maracha County with its headquarters at Nyadri Trading Centre.

Background

Article 179 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states that:
1.	“Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament may alter boundaries of districts, create new districts.
2.	Any measure to alter the boundary of a district or to create a new district shall be supported by a majority of all the members of parliament.
3.	Parliament shall by law empower district councils to alter the boundaries of lower Government units and to create new local governments within their districts.
4.	Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries of or the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people, and it may take into account the means of communication, geographical features, density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned.”

Basing on the provisions of the Constitution, the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Rule 130, and recognising the importance of the decentralisation policy in Uganda, the committee undertook its duties and now wishes to report its findings and recommendations:

The committee held meetings with the area members of parliament from the affected districts. The committee also held a meeting with the Minister of Local Government and his officials. And the committee held meetings with some local leaders from some of the proposed districts.

Observations/findings

The committee during its discussion made the following observations and findings:

1.	On the creation of Kalungu, Bukomansimbi, Lwengo, Ngora, Kibuku and Nwoya districts, the committee was informed that there were no contentions and no issues were raised. (Applause)

2.	The committee was informed that Mpigi District Council resolved to change the name of the district from Gombe as proposed in the motion to Butambala to avoid confusion with the already existing Gomba district. (Applause)

3.	On the creation of Kibingo District, the committee received a request to change the name from Kibingo as proposed in the motion to Sheema because of the great historical attachment and identity with the name Sheema. (Applause)

4.	On the creation of Nsiika District, the Committee received a request from the Member of Parliament for Buhweju County for change of name from Nsiika as proposed in the motion to Buhweju because of the historical attachment to the name Buhweju. (Applause)(Laughter)

5.	On the creation of Napak District, the committee received a request for location of the headquarters to Lorengecora and not Napak as proposed in the motion because there is no trading centre called Napak.

6.	The committee received an amendment to the motion in respect to the name of the headquarters for Kole District. The motion was to correct an error because there is no place called Kole Trading Centre and, therefore, the headquarters is to be placed at Ayer Trading Centre.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, isn’t it the policy that the name of a district comes from the name of the headquarters?

MS BOONA: Well, I think the minister will explain.

7.	On the creation of Patongo District, the motion indicated that the headquarters is to be located at Patongo. The committee received a request for the district to be called Agago. However, there was a conflicting position on the location of the headquarters with some stakeholders preferring it to be at Patongo, others at Kalongo, while others preferred Alungar Trading Centre in Lukole sub-county as a neutral location.

	The committee recommends that the stakeholders meet and decide on the location of the district headquarters before the request can be approved.

8.	On the alteration of the boundaries of Arua District and the district comprising the counties of Maracha and Terego, thus creating Nyadri District, currently part of the district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties, the committee was reminded of the case filed by hon. Kassiano Wadri in the High Court whose appeal by the Attorney-General is currently pending before Court of Appeal.

Basing on the above fact, the committee is unable to make recommendations about the matter, however, the committee would like to remind Parliament that this matter has been unresolved for seven years now and, therefore, needs to get resolved urgently.

Consideration of other requests for new districts

1.	Kween: The committee was informed by the members of parliament from Kween County, Kapchorwa District, that the district council had now resolved the longstanding issue of location of the headquarters for the proposed Kween District. The Members requested to be considered by creating Kween District with its headquarters at Binyiny so that the district takes effect on 1 July 2010. (Applause)

	The minister indicated that he had no objection if the stakeholders had resolved their differences on the location of the district headquarters. 

	The committee recommends that Government considers the request for Kween to be granted district status.
2.	Kapelebyong: The committee noted that the ministry had received a request for the creation of the district of Kapelebyong from Kapelebyong County in Amuria District, but it was left out on the motion. 

	During the meeting held with the minister, he indicated that a technical review was still in the process.

	The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry expedites the review process.

3.	The committee also received requests from Ibanda County North and Rubanda County West for granting of district status. The committee recommends that Government considers them. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker and Members, these are the recommendations: 

The committee accordingly recommends that Parliament approves the creation of new districts as per the motion to take effect 1 July 2010 as follows:

1.	Kalungu District currently part of Masaka District consisting of Kalungu County with its headquarters at Kalungu Trading Centre. (Applause)

2.	Bukomansimbi District currently part of Masaka District consisting of Bukomansimbi County with its headquarters at Bukomansimbi Trading Centre. (Applause)

3.	Butambala District currently part of Mpigi District consisting of Butambala County with its headquarters at Gombe Trading Centre. (Applause)

4.	Lwengo District currently part of Masaka District consisting of part of Bukoto County, comprising the sub-counties of Malongo, Kyazanga, Lwengo, Ndagwe, Kisekka, and Kingo with its headquarters at Lwengo Trading Centre. (Applause)

5.	Mitooma District currently part of Bushenyi District consisting of Ruhinda County with its headquarters at Mitooma Trading Centre. (Applause)
6.	Rubirizi District currently part of Bushenyi District consisting of Bunyaruguru County with its headquarters at Rubirizi Trading Centre. (Applause)

7.	Sheema District currently part of Bushenyi District consisting of Sheema County with its headquarters at Kibingo Trading Centre. (Applause)

8.	Buhweju District currently part of Bushenyi District consisting of Buhweju County with its headquarters at Nsiika Trading Centre.

9.	 Ngora District currently part of Kumi District consisting of Ngora County with its headquarters at Ngora Trading Centre.

10.	Napak District currently part of Moroto District consisting of Bokora County with its headquarters at Lorengcora Trading Centre. 

11.	Kibuku District currently part of Pallisa District consisting of Kibuku County with its headquarters at Kibuku Trading Centre.

12.	Nwoya District currently part of Amuru District consisting of Nwoya County with its headquarters at Anaka Trading Centre.

13.	Kole District currently part of Apac District consisting of Kole County with its headquarters at Ayer Trading Centre.

The committee further recommends that the headquarters of each new district, which is not yet a town council, shall become a town council in accordance with provisions of regulations 32(2) of the third schedule to the Local Government Act. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson and the members of the committee for the report.

3.28
MR OKUMU REAGAN (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you Mr Speaker. I just want to raise 3 concerns. First of all I want to thank the committee for moving very first. My first concern is on the issue of Maracha – Terego. Although the matter is in court, I would like to advise the Minister of Local Government to consider granting each of these counties a district status since each of them would like to become a separate entity, to resolve some of the problems we are facing. I do not see why one county should be reverted to Arua district and yet they had already attained a district status.

In any case, in terms of population, those counties are actually bigger than some of the existing districts that we do have. I would, therefore, like to appeal to the Minister of Local Government to consider these counties in order to resolve the existing controversy.

Secondly, on the issue of Agago District, I see that the committee recommended that until the headquarters has been agreed upon, the district will not be granted.

Agago District is only one, and, therefore, the contention is not going to be like Terego - Maracha where each county wants to host the district headquarters. In Agago the headquarters will remain in the same county.

My appeal is that we should not really waste time since the minister had proposed, we should include Agago District here and the matter of the district headquarter will be administrative.
There is no big contention (Interruption) but I am the one debating you will have the opportunity to stand up and say no. You cannot say no to what I am contributing.

When Pader district was created there was tension caused by a number of trading centres wanting to host the district headquarters, Kalongo was one of them, and Pajule was another one. It was eventually agreed to create Pader in an area there was no trading centre and today Pader has emerged from nowhere to become a district headquarters. This is why I am saying even in Agago District we can see there is tension between Kalongo and Patongo. I want to assure this House that these two trading centres have been rivals for a very long time and if you put a district in Kalongo or Patongo it will be a problem.

My appeal is that the minister just finds a neutral ground between the two trading centres and establishes the district headquarters there.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: The information I want to give is that yesterday a meeting was held in Agago County at a neutral ground at Lukole. It was one of the worst of meetings that has been held in the current Pader District. In fact the people even failed to agree on who should vote to determine the headquarters. 

I would personally think that for us to learn a lesson of failing to agree among ourselves the district be shelved. So, the issue of neutral ground has even been rejected because there are people who want Patongo or no other ground. Even when Prof. Latigo had agreed to a neutral ground, the people from Patongo rejected it. If we grant a new district, therefore, it will be worse than the situation of Maracha-Terego.

MR OKUMU: First of all I do appreciate the information given by hon. Otto, but I also know that the people who attended yesterday’s meeting were not the entire population of Agago County; they were selected leaders; and the purpose of creating districts is to give services to the population because leaders have their own selfish interests. 

For me if the leaders in Agago are failing then the minister has a right to revert to the population to decide where the headquarters should be because the meeting of yesterday like others before has been a meeting of leaders and they either come from near Patongo or near Kalongo and their own interest is to have the district near their homes.

I would like to say that we should not leave Agago out of this. This is a proposal by Government to take services closer to the people and if Government has discovered that there is need in Agago County to take services closer to the people, there no need to deny the people of Agago a district status.

Thirdly, I have seen the trend of creating new districts, and I do appreciate that people do need services. I also do note that counties in Uganda are extremely very big. I would like to urge the hon. Minister, that instead of doing it piecemeal, we declare counties in Uganda districts. Because what we are going to do with the remaining counties? They are equally very big.

MR KYANJO: The information I want to give in line with what my senior colleague is contributing is that in the meeting of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs this morning, we agreed with the minister to inform the Uganda Police Force to follow the Police zoning rather than the political regions – for fear of uncertainty- because we are unable to finance the splits and it is difficult for the Police to prepare programmes that are going to be effective because the trend seems to be endless.

MR OCULA: Thank you hon. Okumu for giving way. I want to give information to the House in support of what hon. Okumu has suggested - that every county becomes a district – (Interjections)- I have done research that shows there are 146 counties in Uganda and so far, already 111, if we create the districts of today – already 111 districts are in existence. Therefore, that means that we are left with only about 35 more districts to be created –(Laughter)- if we declare all the counties in Uganda a district, then we should have done a lot of work.(Laughter) So, I am in support of hon. Okumu.

MR OKUMU: I think my proposal is not very wild because the Minister of Local Government himself knows the geographical boundaries of all these counties and how wide and big they are. Compared to some of the districts being created, some of the counties being left are extremely very big in terms of size and population. We also do have the population statistics and also the size of the land area of these counties. At an appropriate moment, I will also be moving a motion so that we as Parliament resolve to create all counties in Uganda’s districts in the name of giving services to our people – to me, that would take services closer to the population.

MS NAMAYANJA: I also agree with hon. Reagan Okumu. His suggestion is not very wild, but given the circumstances and controversies that have been created in the countryside over creation of districts and particularly the issue of headquarters – I will give an example of Agago that we are talking about now – no, Nakaseke is different –(Laughter)– actually, even Nakaseke was a one-county district, but we had very big controversy over where the headquarter should be and the same applies to Agago now. I believe that that is something that can be given consideration in future, but as for now, let us consider those districts or countries that have already settled their differences and are at par with every person in the population.  

MR OKUMU: I do not think that that is very relevant information because it does not have much substance –(Laughter)- because first of all she agrees with me, and so what is the purpose of creating – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, there is a motion creating specific districts and you have indicated that in future, you will move a motion. I would think that since in future you will move a motion – when you properly move your motion, we shall debate it.

MR OKUMU: I can do that even immediately after this one. Otherwise, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. My appeal is that let us create all counties in Uganda and give them district status in the name of giving services to the people, and from there, we can move on. I thank you.

3.41
DR JOHN YEKKO ARAPKISSA (Independent, Kween County, Kapchorwa): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am Dr John Yekko representing Kween County, Kacphorwa District. Well, I want to thank the chairperson and committee members for this report – the problem that has been in Kween has been the issue of the headquarters that was eventually resolved last Saturday. The committee had recommended that Kween becomes a district. We have also had consultations with the Minister of Local Government and he has said there is no problem. Other consultations elsewhere were in approval of Kween, but when I look at the list of the 13 districts, Kween is not there. I, therefore, appeal to the minister to amend the motion to include Kween when he finally moves it. I thank you. (Applause)

3.42
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I stand to support the motion because from the membership of this House, I realise that Members are excited about these new districts – so the Members want it. And because the Members want it, let it be, because it means that the people we represent would like to have these districts.

However, I also want to raise the issue of methodology. I think hon. Okumu has raised it. I was sad because he spoke before me, but my side, the NRM side know that this has been my concern. I think that Government needs to have a very systematic objective which I even call a scientific way of determining these districts and counties. I agree with the fact that if we decided, for example, that all former counties should become districts, then we as Government side will not be accused of succumbing to political pressure and even the other systematic structural issues will be dealt with. For example, with due respect and as a member of the women’s Movement, how many women Members of Parliament on affirmative action are we going to get, considering the fact that every time we create a new district, there has to be a Member of Parliament there. All these have to be into consideration. Otherwise the public spending bill will be so unprecedented. I think we need to plan more and have a system that is objective and determines. We do not have to ask in my view –(Applause)- for example, why would Nakaseke which is about the same size as Nyabushozi have a district and I do not have it in Nyabushozi? Why don’t I have my own district? I am not saying that because I am asking for it. I have heard that counties that are smaller than mine are going to be subdivided – and the answer is, “I have not asked.” But if there was a system in place, I would not have to ask because the facts would be determined ahead of time so that now Government decides that, “Yes, here the size is big of the county, the population is big, so automatically this part of the country is granted a district or a new county.” Otherwise, I support the motion.

3.45
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): I thank you. I also stand up to add my voice in support of the motion for the creation of new districts. Actually before hon. Okumu stood up, we were also discussing the issue in the lobby, of why we do not just plan and decide to make every county a district. There are many other African countries that have done that - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, don’t you think that those who are proposing that every county becomes a district are just ridiculing the process? Are they sincere? They are just ridiculing the process -  

MR ACHIA: It would be good because we would not be the first country in Africa to do that. Ghana did that; their districts expanded from 116 to 266. They decided to give every county a district.

Secondly, while we have made every county a district – 

THE SPEAKER: So, will the term ‘county’ die?

MR ACHIA: Yes. While we have made every county a district, we will not be afraid of too many districts because we can go the Kenyan way where a number of districts say, 10 to 15 districts, have a provincial administration –(Interjection)- we have the regional tier thing. At that level, we will now have one regional RDC, CAO and civil service and -(Interruption) 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I just want to give information to my honourable colleague to reinforce his argument. Today, in Uganda, we have administrative units at the level of LC I, LC II and sub-county. At the sub-county, there is a government; from the sub-county, we jump to the district. Actually, the county has been left without any administrative structure. Therefore, your argument will fit in, in such a way that we now establish a county to become a district.

MR ACHIA: Hon. Members, I was still developing the point that once we have these counties becoming districts; we can now have regional administrations where we have – instead of having 10 DPCs or 10 district Police officers manning districts or 10 – whatever it is in the different districts; you will have to centralise regional administrations. I give you an example of now Napak and Moroto. One RDC has been able to man these few sub-counties. We can have that one centralised between Moroto and Napak having one regional administration. Actually, the whole of Karamoja could have a centralised regional system of governance and we do not have to have every district, and every county having a CAO plus headquarters, administration and so on. So, it is possible to have regional systems running the new districts.

The third issue Mr Speaker and hon. Members; it is important – what the honourable MP from Nyabushozi has mentioned. What is the criteria for creating the new districts? I was thinking, for example – I went recently to Kaabong, and to cross from the border of Kaabong up to Karenga is 120 kilometres. It is one constituency with over 15 sub-counties. To go from one corner of the district of Kaabong of the constituency of Dodoth to the last part when you enter Namukora is over 120 kilometres. When you leave to go to Jinja from here, it is 80 kilometres. How many districts do you go through? It is 115 kilometres to Bugiri. There are so many districts between here and Bugiri. There are so many districts from Iganga to Mbale. You can count approximately seven districts every time you go to Mbale. There are about seven to 15 districts; but to cross from Kotido to Karenga at the end of the constituency, it is about 120-something kilometres. It takes about three hours to cross a constituency. So, we need a clear strategy of how Government is planning to create new districts.

If it is taking services closer to the people; these districts such as Kaabong should have been divided a long time ago without even the local people asking. The government itself through its analysis and assessment could have known that such a place like Kaabong or Dodoth Constituency needed a district 10 years ago. We need a clear strategy.

Do we also have a system in place for evaluating the performance, viability and of course the benefits of the districts we have been creating. Since 1996, we have created over 40 districts. So, who has done the assessment to find out how viable, how important -(Interruption) 


MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I have stood on a point of procedure. Last time the Minister came here and read a Motion then Members went to the Local Government Committee. Now the details that the honourable is giving were actually meant for the committee’s consumption. So, is it really procedurally right to drag us backwards –(Interjections)- when we are supposed to look at the other Act – the Bill that is coming?

THE SPEAKER: I thought you said you were supporting the creation of these districts? (Laughter) 

MR ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I am merely – I stood up to support the Motion and add value because I do not think this is the last time we are creating districts –(Interjections)- add value to the –(Interjections)- to those who are going to present requests for more districts next time. 

Government should be –(Interjections)- should do its job upfront and propose new districts on the basis of their technical assessment. We do not have to wait for people to ask, but grant the districts on the basis of the technical assessment that we carry out across the country. We may discover that even before people have found that they need a district, they should have the district based on a certain assessment criteria.

In conclusion Mr Speaker and hon. Members, we have been creating districts –(Interjections)- for a long time now. Maybe 40; maybe 60 – I do not know how many we have created. There was a time when there were 51 Districts in Uganda; now they are 111 today. Have we done assessments and evaluations of their viability? Because we are saying we are creating districts to take services nearer to the people? To what extent have these districts that we have created so far addressed that problem? Can we compare the statistics at the time when a district was created to the statistics today to assess to what extent a new district – a district, which was created 10 years ago - has actually addressed the problem for which we created that district? We need to carry out an assessment, we need to be informed. Probably the honourable Minister of Local Government – next time when he comes here to propose new districts could give us a report of the evaluation of the benefits of the newly-created districts. Thank you Mr Speaker.

3.54
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the chance given to me to contribute to this Motion. Mr Speaker, today when this Motion is passed, 13 new districts shall have been born. I know that this is going to cause excitement within our population. It is also going to cause excitement among members of parliament, especially those who have made a spirited fight in causing the curving out of these new districts. 

The reasons given are various, but I think one reason stands out as strong; extending services closer to our people. It sounds very nice and convincing, but I would like to ask, is this practically happening even in the case of districts that were created before the 13 that we intend to create today? 

It is very fortunate for us as a House that these districts are coming on board when we are to commence the cycle of the budget. So, as legislators, we are going to have this embedded in our minds; that we have got to provide for these new districts. It comes with a cost. It is not just about pronouncing ourselves here in this House; it is going to come with a cost. I just want to extract one area, Mr Speaker, where I think –I would like to congratulate the people of Ngora who are now at the verge of leaving Kumi. I also want to congratulate my colleague, the Member of Parliament for Ngora, hon. Francis Epetait and the Woman MP for Kumi and all the people of Ngora and those of Kumi for what they did to ensure that the district comes on board. 

But, I would like to particularly talk about my sector and the policy of Government to provide all or half of road construction equipment to every district. If we have to provide each of the 111 districts with a motor-grader – a motor-grader costs between UShs 350 to UShs 500 million. You might think it is a small cost, but multiply that by 111 districts and that is one piece of equipment. We have to add on a bulldozer, two trucks, an excavator and a roller; that comes to about UShs 2 billion per district. 

We might argue that it is possible to share this equipment among various districts. But I would like to tell you that it is not easy. I am speaking from experience – (Interjections)– no, you are not going to be denied your district my dear friend, but let me develop my argument and inform you about the decision that you are going to take. The decision is good, but it comes with a big cost. 

So, fellow members of parliament, we need to think about the appropriation for next year, including the new members of parliament for the next Parliament, who will be probably 30 extra members from the number we already have. 

Looking at the list of the new 13 districts is that we are going towards one-county districts. I think Government needs to be brave and say that instead of coming here each time there is a need to create a district, we should have a policy where each county in this country is granted district status. For the sake of not opening the Pandora box –

THE SPEAKER: But Engineer, aren’t you contradicting yourself? You said it is going to be expensive to run these districts that we are creating. You said that we might not even afford the graders. Now you are talking about making all counties districts – as you said, let us be brave; if you are opposed to the idea, just say, “It is not good”.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I am not opposing the creation of districts, but I am saying we should brace ourselves for the costs that come with districts. So, as a country, we need to make necessary sacrifices. But when you look at a country like Kapelebyong County, I do not know what the Member of Parliament did not do for him and his people not to be granted a district. I know he really put up a fight, but unfortunately, he is excluded from the list of districts to be created. 

So, instead of creating controversies, I would like to support the proposal brought forward by hon. Okumu Reagan to the effect that we should make every country a district all over the country. This is not a big issue, it is something that can easily be done; we can make sacrifices, since we have already agreed to sacrifice and make these 13 new districts, why can’t we sacrifice once and for all and close the chapter of districts. And these small counties will acquire new counties and the counties will later demand for district status – where shall we end? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.02
MS JUDITH AKELLO FRANCA (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the committee report, on page four it says, “On the creation of Patongo District, the motion indicated that the headquarters are to be located at Patongo. The committee received a request for the district to be called Agago. However, there was a conflicting position on the location of the headquarters”. 

Mr Speaker, this report is true, although we thought we would have a little more time to consult. I have risen up to humbly request this august House to pass the District of Agago today, and then we have wide consultations within one month on the location of the headquarters, because the principal has been unanimously agreed upon by the two conflicting parties. They agreed that the district be called Agago, but the location of the headquarters will be agreed upon within two or three weeks time; within that time we shall be able to –(Interruption) 

MR OCULA: Thank you, my sister Franca for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am a member of the committee. If I remember clearly, we had a problem with the headquarters of Agago. But the committee agreed to give them one month. Unfortunately, I do not see that recommendation in the report. We agreed to give Agago one month to decide on the headquarters. That was based on the fact that the minister come before the committee and said there was argent need to make Agago a district. So, I am wondering, maybe my chairman can tell me how that decision disappeared from the report! Thank you.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Ocula for that supplement. Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank the minister for the role he played to ensure that this motion comes on board. For several times I have been asking on the Floor of this House why Agago was not appearing; the request has been there for a very long time. 

So, I want to make my final plea before this Parliament that we consider it. And I want to promise that one month will not elapse before we settle this issue of the location of the headquarters. If we pass it today, I believe we will be able to handle this before next financial year. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.06
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity. First I would like to beg for your indulgence because I am both a very interested party and a member of this committee, but because of the doubts that have been created in the minds of my colleagues – 

THE SPEAKER: But since you are a member of the committee, whose report we have received, why don’t we give opportunity to others?

MR MALINGA: I just have a few documents to tender. To clear the doubts of people about what happened to the creation of Kapelebyong. Some members doubt whether the Member of Parliament did not do what he was supposed to do. I have some documents here relating to the progress of our request for this district.

I have a letter here, where I wrote on behalf of the people to create the district. I have a letter that was written to me by the honourable minister asking me to give a detailed submission in view of the demography and viability among others to justify the request for the district status.

I have a response here on the issues of security, population, economic activities and the viability of the proposed district, and I also have here a submission of the Chief Administrative Officer of Amuria asking the minister to create the district of Kapelebyong and he has attached the minutes of Amuria District Local Government Council which was attended by 21 of the 22 councillors where they unanimously agreed to create the Kapelebyong district. I also have here an attachment of the resolutions of the sub-counties of Obalanga, Kapelebyong and Achwo that make up Kapelebyong County. I beg to lay these documents on Table.

I also have here petition forms that were signed by the people of Kapelebyong to request for the district to be created. (Laughter)

Finally, I really want to say I have done my part. I would like to request the minister to expedite the process of the creation of Kapelebyong District. I have heard my very good friend hon. Kabakumba saying “MoU” and I would not think this should be the standard measure for creation of districts. I would like to pray with my colleagues that when the minister finally comes, please help me and we create Kapelebyong District. (Laughter)

4.09
MR CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me an opportunity to comment on the report. First of all, I want to thank the committee chair and the entire committee for your report. I think you have done a good job for at least trying to clear some of the controversies that were making it difficult for us to decide.

The journey which Kole started in the year 2002, has finally come to an end, and I want to congratulate the House through you, Mr Speaker, for making Kole to become a district this year. Thank you very much.

I further want to remind the House of the problem of not agreeing for the greater good. I want to remind the House that sometime in 1995; we met His Excellency the President on the issue of giving Northern Uganda, a university. We discovered during the meeting that some members from both Lango and Acholi sub-regions had very strong positions on where the university was to be placed. We based the decision on the report of the technical team. The technical team decided after looking at all the factors that the university had to be based in Lira.

After we discussed that matter with the President, some of us from Lango sub-region decided that for greater good, we did not have to delay establishment of that university because we the people of Northern region were not decided on where the university had to be based. So, we decided that it had to be based in Gulu despite the report which was presented by the technical team. 

So, I am trying to appeal to the House that when the people need services and the opportunity is there, why deny them because some people think it must be in my courtyard; it must be in my compound. It is unfair for the people of Uganda.

That decision needs to be done now; an opportunity has come for the people of Agago to have a district; and Agago has suffered for all these years and because of a few selfish people, we are saying let them not have it. I think this is unfair. For the greater good of the people of Acholi who have suffered for all these years, I appeal to the people who are involved; please let us look at the greater good and not individual good. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to inform the honourable Member and this House that there has been a precedent in this House where there has been controversies in districts about the location of the headquarters but Parliament has gone ahead to approve their creation and asked the people to go and resolve where the headquarters should be. This happened in Manafwa District, it happened in Nakaseke, in Ntoroko and in many other districts.

So, the disagreement or failure to agree where a district should be located should not cause this Parliament to sit again in future or postpone a decision that we take now just because people have not agreed. (Applause)

What we could do is to approve the location and task the Ministry of Local Government to ensure that they go and resolve that one as one of the implementation strategies. I thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you for that information. I think that clears the way and I still want to appeal that if this House can take a decision in the interest of that ordinary Ugandan in Agago, let it be done now. Let the issue of the headquarters be resolved; it is a minor issue, it is administrative and I think we can handle that.

I also want to appeal to the House that the issue of Kapelebyong does not have to wait for the technical team; it is a fact, they have made a demand, they have put down their point that the district is needed in that area. Kapelebyong has been the gateway receiving not only rebels but also the Karimojong raiders or the cattle raiders -(Laughter)- sorry for the use of Karimojong; the cattle raiders. (Laughter)

Kapelebyong has been at the gate receiving all these forces; it is important that now that an opportunity has come, that we should grant the status of a district to Kapelebyong. This is important for us, it is important for the ordinary person in Kapelebyong.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of Maracha and Terego, I think if the two counties have failed to decide, the House can decide for them and the committee made its point very clear; and I want to read the minutes of the meeting of the 8th December.

In the presentation of the report, the committee said that, “It is the considered view of the committee that the Government should consider granting each county a district status to avoid an impasse.” This was the decision of the committee; it is in black and white; it is in the Hansard of 8 December. They went further to say that during their meeting it was concluded that it was all about politics. That is the decision of the committee and we had accepted that committee report. I, therefore, see no contradiction and I do not see where the court would come in here.

So, let us take a decision that let Maracha be a district and let Terego be a district and we clear the matter, “to avoid impasse.” That is what the committee says. So, can we really resolve this matter here and now -(Interjections)- here and now; because you can see Terego is unhappy - the ordinary man and woman there is unhappy. Forget about hon. Wadri and hon. Alex Onzima. They may not be in the Parliament tomorrow, but the ordinary person there will never forgive us, because an opportunity has come and we have denied it to them. 

The issue of Terego and Maracha started in 2005 -[Mr Matia Kasaija: “Information”] is it a good one or a bad one? (Laughter)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I just want to inform my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that the reason why - if I understood what the committee said in their report - this matter cannot be resolved now, is because that matter is before court -(Interjections)- yes, it is before court and, therefore, I do not think we can handle it and resolve it today. So, that is the information I wanted to give to hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

MR OCULA: Thank you hon. Ogwal for giving way. What is being proposed about Maracha and Terego is that if Maracha is created as a district, then automatically Terego will remain a district and for that matter the court case will just collapse. 

The problem which we are having now is that Government wants to take Terego to Arua. If it is to be done like that, that would mean that the court case would stand. Therefore, the information I want to give and to help the minister, is that why don’t you amend the motion to say that you are only creating Maracha District and Terego remains a District then the court case will just collapse immediately? (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, I want to say that the minister did not read the appeal. The substance of the case is to move Terego from where it was already a district with Maracha as the sister county, and take it back to the old district. That is the point of contention. But we are now saying that there seems to be consensus that Maracha be a district. We are also saying that there is no contradiction and I want to quote minister Mbabazi when he said, “If Terego wants to be a district, we have no problem.” It is there in the Hansard. You can read it for yourself. (Laughter) I can read it for you -(Interjections)- you have read it. You are approving with the thumb. 

So, there is no contradiction. Whether Maracha becomes a district today and Terego becomes a district today there is no contradiction. Where there is a problem is where you are going to move Terego from where it is already a district with Maracha and put it back to Arua. And the Hansard has recorded that the people of Arua met and said they would not accept Terego back -(Laughter)- and the people of Terego have also said they do not want to go back to Arua; and I am telling you Mr Speaker, the precedent has already been set in this House.

I remember when we were discussing the issue of Dokolo, which I represent in the House today, with the first batch, Dokolo was supposed to be made a district together with Amolotar. The two disagreed; and so it was decided that either the headquarters be in Dokolo and Amolotar carries the name of the district or Dokolo carries the name of the district and the headquarters be in Amolotar. The two communities disagreed -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much hon. Cecilia Ogwal. It is not only Dokolo and Amolotar; even Bududa and Manafwa -(Interjections)- but I wanted to add that so that if that one took place what is the problem here?

MRS OGWAL: Thank you. I wish they could allow me to conclude now. So, I am saying that this House used its wisdom to decide that let Amolotar become a district and let Dokolo become a district and there was no contradiction; there was consensus on that issue. So, I feel that we can do the same. We can rise above petty issues. 

So, I am pleading to you, Mr Speaker; let history judge us and you as people who acted in the interest of the ordinary Ugandan who cannot stand and use the microphone to plead his or her case. So, we are here to plead for their case and I, therefore, want to move that the districts of Agago, Kapelebyong, Terego and Maracha be added to the list. I beg to move. God bless you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I think it is high time we ended this debate. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. My friend hon. Cecilia Ogwal has just moved a motion and it has been seconded. I do not know whether it would be procedurally right for us to proceed on that motion, debate it and pronounce ourselves on it.

THE SPEAKER: No, the ideas can be taken by the minister, but proposing the creation of Terego and Maracha districts has a financial implication and that kind of motion cannot be brought by you or me. It has to be brought by the minister. But the minister can buy the idea and amend.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, can we, therefore, move that Agago and Kapelebyong -

THE SPEAKER: Minutes have been taken, so the minister will say something later. But I think it is high time we really concluded this matter.

4.25
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to contribute to this motion. I support the creation of the district. You know, there is no cheap democracy and aspiration of the people must be respected, and that is why we are creating this district. 

Mr Speaker, my experience is that when Pallisa was one and included Budaka and Kibuku we were getting 9 billion. When Budaka was created, they gave it 3 billion. Now Pallisa and Kibuku are getting 6.5 billion; and now Kibuku has gone and it is also getting 3 billion and Pallisa gets 3.5 billion possibly. 

But the problem Mr Speaker is that Pallisa County has 12 sub-counties and 3.5 billion, which is left for Pallisa County, is highly inadequate for any progress to be done there. 

The Pallisa District Council resolved to create Kibuku and Butebo districts in the same resolution. The people of Butebo are requesting the honourable Minister of Local Government to tell them how Kibuku alone was picked to be a district and Butebo was not whereas it was under the same resolution made.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I was actually rising on a point of information, but because my brother resisted, I had to turn it into an order; is hon. Opange -(Interjections)- in order to  tell this House that Pallisa District is getting only Shs 6.5 billion and yet we are getting 20 billion? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I think he is informed. (Laughter)

MR OPANGE:  Mr Speaker, the issue of budget allocation is done in this House, and we are always having the schedules from the Ministry. There is a need to put the standard figure for these new districts as start-up budgets because Bushenyi District has been getting more money than any other district in this country due to the massive population and what have you. 

So, Mr Speaker, on the issue of Butebo District – the honourable Minister of Health was in Kibaale yesterday and he told the people that he is fighting hard to have Butebo District and that is the reason we are requesting the minister to keep the people expectant and know when Butebo District is also coming to this House.

The issue of Terego - Maracha District, with due respect to hon. Adolf Mwesige - I am not a lawyer by profession - but by looking at the issues in Terego - Maracha District, when you look at the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, there is a district in the Schedule, which is called  Terego - Maracha. But we are now altering boundaries by taking Terego back to Arua. I would like the honourable minister to teach me if you actually won’t delete that Terego - Maracha from the Constitution, what do you do? Is it not involving amendment of the Constitution?  

So, Mr Speaker, we are requesting that Terego and Maracha be separate districts from each other because we cannot go against the will of the people. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

4.30
MR GODFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The last time the Minister of Local Government moved a motion to withdraw the matter of Kisoko and Tororo, I sought clarification and in his clarification he stated that the President was still consulting. As a result, I had a constituency meeting in Tororo on Monday with the people and we have written an open letter to the President.

With your permission, Mr Speaker, I wish to read:

“25th April, 2010

The title is: ‘Free the people of Tororo;’

An open letter to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda;

Your Excellency, we thank you for whatever pieces of good and development that Tororo County has received during your tenure. This letter has been written after exhaustive representation to you the ruling NRM Party and the government at various levels on the 12 year old quest by the people of Tororo County to have a district status, to no avail.

The Colonial administration and others before you recognise that the former Bukedi (which was later renamed Tororo District after the current town and the county which hosted the headquarters) was not ethnically or culturally homogeneous and divided into six counties of Pallisa, Samia-Bugwe, Bugwere, Bunyole, Budama and Tororo along ethnic lines in 1947. That quelled ethnic tension at that time. 

On a similar line, except for Tororo and Budama, your Government has presided over the formation or conversion of these ethnically based counties into districts vis-a-vis Budaka and more recently Kibuku for Bugwere from Pallisa; Busia from Samia-Bugwe County; and Butaleja from Bunyole County respectively. 

Your Excellency, you will appreciate the relative calm, contentment and progress in these new districts curved out of Mother Tororo/Bukedi. Your Government had come to a point of granting the residual two counties of Bukedi(Tororo) vis-a-vis Budama and Tororo East a district status as Kisoko and Mukuju last year, but made a last minute u-turn. The last submission to your Government for new districts which includes granting of the former sub-county of Kibuku District status is silent on Tororo. 

We understand that the reason for the delay in granting Tororo County a district status is to do with the location of Tororo Municipality...” 

Mr Speaker, the letter is just a two page one and I am reading the last page.  

“For the sake of less informed Ugandans, we wish to set the record straight that Tororo Municipality was curved out of Osukuru sub-county in Tororo County and has always been part and parcel of Tororo County as Kampala is of Buganda. 

Tororo also by no choice of ours has been the host to the headquarters of all previous districts under Bukedi/Tororo as Kampala is to Uganda. Tororo cannot move away from itself just as a man cannot separate from himself or from his shadow - and I wish to add a woman. 

We do not quite understand why the NRM Government does not appreciate this straightforward and historical clear position and instead want to sow seeds of doubt, discontent and conflict among the people of Tororo with potential dire consequences. The longer this lingers unresolved, the greater the potential for suspicion, mistrust and turmoil.

Your Excellency, we do not have to tell you how distressed, disappointed and frustrated we, the people of Tororo County are. Furthermore, the line your NRM administration is taking, is counter to the plain truth and interest of the people is not only testing our patience, but alienating us from you and the NRM and provoking anger, opposition and resistance. This need not to be but is inevitable as long as the NRM Government looks on and frustrates the continuous exploitation of the people of Tororo County.

We kindly request and appeal to you, Your Excellency and your Government one more time to set...”

THE SPEAKER: You see hon. Ekanya, Tororo is not part of the motion, I think what you should have done when we sent the motion to the committee, you should have gone there and presented your case for that district.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Speaker I am just reading the last paragraph but I appeared before the committee. With your permission let me conclude the last paragraph.

“We kindly request and appeal to you your Excellency and your Government one more time to set the people of Tororo free from unwanted domination, bondage and exploitation regardless of party politics.

Kindly give us a district status we have sought for. We have demanded for it for over a decade because we need it, we deserve it and merit it. It is the right thing to do. There are lines that should not be crossed even in politics, namely; the deposition of the minority; do not try to give away our land for politics or other gain. It is wrong. Do not rob a people just because they are few or unrepresented in the NRM. 

In the interest of fairness, justice and peace in our land, we the undersigned sons and daughters of Tororo earnestly appeal to your Excellency for a fast and final resolution of this matter. May God bless you and give you wisdom.”

I beg to lay on Table.

4.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Pereza Ahabwe): Thank you Mr Speaker and hon. Colleagues for those comments. I also want to thank the committee for the good report. I will start by accepting some and not all recommendations of the committee, I will especially agree to those recommendations that are related to names and locations of some of those districts.

I will particularly accept that for Gombe District that I proposed, I replace the name Gombe with Butambala; I agree with that one. I also want to agree that instead of Mitoma District we can use the name Ruhinda. Instead of Nsiika I agree that we substitute it with the name Buhweju as proposed by the committee. I also want to agree that Sheema replaces the name Kibingo District in Bushenyi.
I further want to agree with the committee’s recommendation and in view of what has been said by my brother anf friend hon. Odonga-Otto that it is not desirable to create another problem by naming the district of Agago without naming the headquarters.

I want Members to know that we have not been sitting on that aspect. We held consultative meetings in that area particularly with sub-county councils. While 9 of the sub-counties agreed that headquarters of the proposed Agago District be at Patongo, five sub-counties dissented preferring another place called Alungar located in Lokole sub-county. These two positions at that time seemed to be irreconcilable and in view of the experiences that we have had, I think the rules of engagement should be invoked in the process and possibly at a future date they may agree on a common position by consensus; and I think we should go that way – although the majority rule says the majority should take the day, but I do not think that path is really desirable.

I also want to inform the House that Government considered the request of Kween County to be a district of their own, and a similar scenario arose because they failed to agree on the headquarters for that district. But after consulting both groups that were contending for the headquarters, they agreed that a neutral place called Binyiny Trading Centre be the headquarters of the new district and I have no problem amending my motion to include Kween as part of the districts to be created.

I think it must be clarified that Government had already taken a position on Kween. I only decided not to include it because they had disagreed on the location of the headquarters, the way I am taking a position on Agago. Government had already agreed, the money was available to operationalise the district, but because people have failed to agree, I deferred the creation of Agago until that agreement is reached. It is in a similar spirit that I am agreeing on Kween because they have now agreed.

I appreciate the proposal for every county to be a district; it is a very good proposal. I want to inform the House that revenue collection on the side of Government is incremental; you will agree with me hon. Reagan that as revenues improve we shall keep incremental creation; the trend is clear, it is not a bad idea but certainly not now. 

Hon. Malinga you are not the only one, we have received various proposals, as I talk now the people of Rubanda County in Kabale District have submitted a proposal to create a district. The district council of Kabale passed a resolution to create Rukiga District. We have your documents on Kapelebyong. We have several requests, but agree with me also that the processing is technical and it does not take a very short time. We have a technical team that processes these things technically; it establishes the viability according to the parameters that you set in the law. So, rest assured that you will not be left behind in future. But as of now, it is not possible. 

Yes, hon. Cecilia Ogwal; creation of Maracha and Terego districts. Government has taken a position and the position is based on the request that I have on record from the people of Terego. I have records here where the people - first of all Arua District Council - sat and said that instead of the headquarters of the district that was proposed that would comprise Maracha and Terego counties – that instead of having the headquarters at Kubala, they would rather stay in Arua District. I have a letter that the same community wrote to H.E. the President – 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I first of all would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity –(Interjection)- yes, with his permission. The recommendation of the committee in my understanding was very clear. Whereas it is the Minister of State for Local Government who moved this motion and maybe a lay person in terms of the law - but the senior minister from the same docket is a professional lawyer. I have in my possession a letter from the Court of Appeal, which arose as a result of an appeal made by the Minister of Local Government. In the letter, he is referred to as the Appellant and Hon. Kassiano Wadri is the Respondent –(Interjection)- I am the Respondent and I am reading what is here. I have got the original letter with the seal of the Court of Appeal embossed. The question I would like to ask this honourable House and the honourable Minister, further making reference – 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you read the letter?

MR WADRI: Okay.

“COURT OF APPEAL OF UGANDA,
P.O. BOX 7085,
KAMPALA, UGANDA. 

13 April, 2010.

1.	M/S Alaka & Co. Advocates 
2.	The Attorney-General

RE: CONFERENCING CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10 OF 2010

HON. MIN. OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT …………….APPELLANT 
AND 
HON. KASSIANO WADRI ……………RESPONDENT

The parties are requested to prepare conferencing notes in the above mentioned appeal as shown here below:

Appellant(s):

(a) (i) Brief facts of the appeal.
(ii) Complaints/ issues to be solved in the appeal.
(iii) List of authorities and the authorities you intend to rely on. The parts in the authorities you are referring to should be highlighted with a marker.
(iv) Legal arguments on points of law in relation to (i) and (ii) above.
(v) To file the written arguments by ……… and serve the respondents.

Respondent(s):
(b)	The respondent(s) should reply to them and file the written arguments in court by ………… and serve the appellant.

Appellant(s):
(c) The appellant will reply by …………
(d) The court will then hear the conferencing inter-parties on 24 May, 2010 at 10 a.m. 
(e)Thereafter, the outcome of the conferencing sessions will be forwarded to the Head of the court for directions on the way forward in relation to the quick disposal of the appeal. 

We hope you will comply with the directives on conferencing in your endeavours to quicken disposal of your appeal.

SIGNED: REGISTRAR, COURT OF APPEAL

C.C The Deputy Chief Justice”

I beg to lay a photocopy of this letter on Table. 

I am, therefore, seeking this clarification from the honourable Minister of State For Local Government as to whether in his own judgment he does not think the committee acted correctly that this matter which is before the Court of Appeal should not be discussed, and further reference be made to Rule 60 of our Rules of Procedure. I just need clarification on that. I beg to move. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: We are taking a lot of time on this issue. Why don’t we – please give us your response. But let us conclude. (Laughter)

4.53
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Rule 60 of the Rules of Procedure reads as follows, “Reference shall not be made to any matter on which judicial decision is pending in such a way as may in the opinion of the Speaker, prejudice the interest of any party to the action.” The appeal before court is mine; I was exercising my right of appeal. I did table the judgment of the High Court here. I also tabled the notes of appeal which I filed in the Court of Appeal. I argued then and I still argue that the issue before court was whether the Minister of Local Government, the Electoral Commission and the interim district council of a district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties have the powers to determine the headquarters of the district. The background to the case is that this Parliament created a district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties in 2005. It never named that district and never determined the headquarters of that district. It left it to the ministry and the stakeholders for further consultations. The then Minister of Local Government made consultations and in his wisdom, declared the district headquarters to be at Nyadri. Hon. Kassiano Wadri challenged the minister’s decision and indeed the High Court said:

1.	The minister did not have the powers to do what he did - to declare the headquarters of a district. The court went further to say that the Electoral Commission together with the interim council of Maracha – Terego should sit and determine the headquarters of the district. I contested that position, hence the appeal on grounds that the power to create districts in this country under Article 179 of the Constitution, rests with Parliament and by extension, the power to create the headquarters rests with Parliament – I still hold that view. 
My submission is that the issue before court is whether the Electoral Commission and the interim district council have powers to determine the headquarters of a district or not. I am saying it is Parliament, but the court said it is the interim district council and the Electoral Commission - that is the issue. The issue in this motion now, is that Government is inviting Parliament to exercise its duty under Article 179 of the Constitution to alter the boundaries of that district by creating Maracha as a district and altering the boundaries of Arua to return Terego to Arua. (Interjections)

If all matters that are in court were never to be discussed by Parliament, then Parliament would never debate anything. That is why the Speaker is given discretion to decide whether discussing this matter is prejudicial to the rights of the parties or not. My submission is that it is not. I invite you, Mr Speaker, to make a ruling on this matter. 

4.58
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the battle lines have been drawn. What the honourable minister is doing is rewinding the clock. I hope he has got a copy of the Hansard dated 8 December 2009. If he has that, I invite you to page 10,452 where your appeal was read in verbatim and laid on the Table. The ingredients of your appeal in the said Hansard are very clear. You see, what went to court is – Mr  Speaker can you give me permission to read it because it had already been laid and is already on Table. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, with your permission, allow me to read it. (Laughter)

Okay, I will take the information, but I would want to read the whole thing. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: The information I am giving, which is also a kind of clarification I am seeking from the Minister is, Article 179 of the Constitution states that, “Subject to the provision of this Constitution, Parliament may –

a.	Alter the boundaries of districts
b.	Create new districts.”
We created Maracha-Terego District. My interpretation is that either we can alter the boundaries of the districts we have created or create new districts.  We do not have powers to destroy the districts we have created –(Interjections)- Once we have created  –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I think we should divide this Motion into two parts. One part will be affecting Maracha and Terego. I suggest that we deal with that one after we have dealt with the first part, which will include other districts. By that time, we will have stabilised and be able to proceed. So, I think what we can do is to proceed and deal with other districts so that Maracha-Terego is dealt with last; either today or next week.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, that is okay.

THE SPEAKER: But now, the problem – no, we shall deal with Maracha and Terego last. 

5.02
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (The Hon. Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. While the Prime Minister was away, I was the Leader of Government Business - for the duration of the absence of the Prime Minister. Now that he has come, I have handed over to him. But I just wanted to say –

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I have been forced to rise on a point of order to avoid future confusion and also to understand if there are new changes; because before the Prime Minister entered, we had the hon. Kajura seated right in the place where hon. Amama Mbabazi is seated. Is it, therefore, in order, for hon. Amama Mbabazi to claim that hon. Kajura, in the absence of the Prime Minister, does not fit the protocol of being the Leader of Government Business? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, are you asking the Prime Minister to explain or are you asking me? That is in-house.

MR OKUMU: I think the Prime Minister can explain.
 
THE SPEAKER: Since he is here, he will tell us.  (Laughter)

THE PRIME MINISTER: The Speaker of Parliament, hon. Members of Parliament, I was not aware that the Second Deputy Premier was around, so –(Interjections)- just a minute. That is why I requested –(Interjections)- just a minute please. That is why I requested hon. Amama Mbabazi –(Interjections)- just listen - to take charge, but of course –(Laughter)- he is a reasonable person. When I ask him to take charge when a more senior person enters, that person takes charge. I thank you.

[Banyenzaki: “Clarification Mr Speaker.”]

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I did not intend to make this an issue. I was just saying that it is true hon. Kajura was here and thenhe left at that time. 

Now, there is the question of Agago and the idea that the creation of this new district should be kept pending until consultations have been done. As hon. Dombo said, we have created districts here before even when the question of headquarters has not been sorted out. Therefore, we think the creation of Agago should not await that. We should go ahead and create it if Parliament thinks so, and then Parliament should authorise the Minister to go and consult the people and then come back to report just about the headquarters. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think I am now calling – no, no, let us proceed. Let us proceed.  

I think we are going to follow – Article 179(2) “Any measure to alter boundaries of a district to create a new district shall be supported by the majority of all members of parliament”. So, we are going to count one by one. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, those for Kalungu District – I am going to get my staff here to count you –(Interjections)– now, because of the sitting arrangement, we shall start with one side and then go to the next. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, with due respect to the views that oppose districts, like mine, it now looks like there is no contention over that. Why don’t we go through in the normal way? 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the concern that has been raised by my honourable colleague. In the last seating when we were creating districts here, we had the same view and the Attorney-General advised that we cannot risk to approve them omnibus – that was the ruling of the Attorney-General and it has not been reversed. So, we have to bare the pain and go through it that way. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me start with that side – the first district mentioned is Kalungu out of Masaka District. 

(Members voted by show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: The position is as follows; Abstentions are five and 152 members voted for Kalungu District. 

The Constitution provision says that, “Any measure to alter the boundary of a district or to create a new district shall be supported by a majority of all members of parliament”.

5.19
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you are talking about majority in this House, it must be majority of those who vote -(Interjections)- because how can you count a vote of someone who does not have a vote? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it appears the provision pre-supposes that we know the number of members of parliament and, therefore, it requires that those supporting the creation of a district must be the majority of the known number of members of parliament.

Therefore, this one is a majority of 152, but it is not a majority of all members of parliament because I suppose the majority of all members of parliament should be over 160 and, therefore, this is below the required number.

I think what we can do because even when you add abstention we would only be 160. What we can do is to postpone the voting so that all people are put on notice so that on Tuesday, we go through this exercise. (Applause) Hon. Members, I advise you to advise other friends who did not turn up to turn up on Tuesday. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have ruled that voting should take place on Tuesday given the fact that the numbers are less, but there are some Members who are busy upstairs. Given 10 minutes, the numbers will be okay so that we finish this.

THE SPEAKER: Really, I do not know because everybody knows - let us put them on notice that on Tuesday we will be voting on this.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, it is easy to assume that numbers will be realised on Tuesday, but it is equally difficult to realise the numbers. I would strongly support the proposal by hon. Ssebagala that we suspend for a moment and call Members who are interested in the subject; the number will be realised. That is my view.

THE SPEAKER: You see hon. Members, you should take note that this is a very long process; we may not even be able even if we did, to finish the exercise today. Therefore, the best is to say on Tuesday we are going to vote on the districts and we are required to attend.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we have not adjourned. We are proceeding with the committee stage.

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there any general report you want to give us?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Chairman and honourable members of parliament, I want to thank you for having proposed that a committee be set up to sort out our differences. I chaired this committee and I am very grateful to the members for having proposed practical solutions to our differences. In fact, we agreed on all amendments except the following two:
 
a)	The proposal under IPOD to amend section 31 to introduce affixing of the thumbprints on registers by voters and also voting by thumbprints.

b)	The proposal to amend section 38(i) to repeal the words “sub-section 4 to request another person present at the polling station to assist the voter for that purpose.” 

It is our view that Parliament should resolve these two issues. Otherwise, we agreed on all other issues. I thank you. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: So, then, you just read the amendments you have agreed on and we go through the exercise. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman and hon. Members. The amendment to section 27 was passed yesterday and I am moving on to the amendment in section 28. We are proposing to insert a new section, that is, 28(a) to read as follows: 

“The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section 28 the following: 

28(a) packing and dispatch of election materials 

(i) 	Political parties, political organisations and independent candidates taking part in an election may, through their duly appointed representatives, be present during the packing and dispatch of election materials.
(ii) the Commission shall provide political parties, political organisations and independent candidates taking part in an election with: 
(a) 	the serial numbers of ballot papers supplied to each polling station and 
(b) the serial numbers of seals affixed and enclosed to the ballot boxes supplied to all polling stations as soon as practicable after packing and dispatch of the election materials, and in any case, not later than 24 hours before the polling day.
(iii) Any replacement made to the fields referred to in sub-section (2)(b) shall be documented by the presiding officer and witnessed by the agents of the political parties, political organisations and independent candidates present at the polling stations.”

Mr Chairman, we beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 28, as amended, agreed to.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, now I move on to section 38 which the Prime Minister has clearly stated was not agreed upon. The position is that we bring it to the House for determination and I beg to move as follows:

1) 	The principal Act is amended in section 31(5)(a) by inserting at the end of the words, “and every voter shall, after being identified in the voters’ roll, fix a thumbprint against his or her name on the voters’ roll.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

(Mr Odonga Otto rose_)

THE CHAIRMAN: But we debated this yesterday - we did. Okay, you bring another and we shall debate. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, with all due respect to your chair, on this clause which we just voted on, I beg that we recommit it so that Members can understand the salient arguments that were raised.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is the debate we had yesterday.

MR ODONGA OTTO: In fact, hon. Lukwago even moved the wrong amendment. We had changed from thumbprint -(Interjections)- just a second. I was in that committee this morning and we spent many hours with hon. Ruhindi even without -

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I will give you limited time for debate. But we debated this yesterday.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just limited time, Mr Chairman, we were raising that on the voters’ register, as you go and they identify you, instead of people just ticking, we have the voter putting his thumbprint. We had changed from thumbprint because they said the thumbprint is a little bigger and it may not fit in that space. So, we had changed that we use the index finger and you place it besides your picture as they give you the voter’s card. 

We are taking this lightly, but we may be the first victims because it is very easy to tick against someone’s name and someone votes for you. But it is a little more difficult when you have to put a thumbprint against the voters’ register so that we avoid these issues of - because you cannot be outrageous and put your thumb in over fifty places; the prints will look identical. But for ticks, you can easily tick. 

This would be the gist, hon. Members, where we can ensure that the actual person is the one who votes. And besides, in case of an electoral petition, you just prove in court that that thumbprint against my face is not mine. I think it will be for the good of democracy -(Applause)

So, I appeal to Members that we think over this. Presidential elections can be saved; parliamentary elections can be saved. It is for your own good that if you lose you lose with a clean conscience. I appeal to Members to reconsider and we support that amendment.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, we had very fruitful deliberations. There is no doubt we are agreeable on most of the provisions that we are considering.

It is pertinent to note upfront that none of the members in our committee that we formed disagreed with the principle being proposed. It was only the practicability of the proposal that put us a little bit in disagreement. This is because, with the decongesting of the polling stations, we estimated every polling station now to have about 800 people or voters -(Interjections)- we were told that after decongesting the polling stations, that is the average number of voters expected at every polling station. Some good mathematicians, and I am not one, who were in that committee calculated and realised that if you get an average of 10 hours, which are going to be allowed for voting, change it into minutes or seconds and divide by the number of people, it would mean that each one would take about 48 seconds to vote. That is impracticable.

Two, the mess that it will create - remember we are voting for different candidates. You get a ballot paper, you vote for the President; you vote for Member of Parliament; you vote for Woman Member of Parliament; and every time you vote, you are affixing –[Hon. Members: “No.”]

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the honourable Attorney-General is misrepresenting the position. What happens is that the identification we are talking about only happens at the entrance. Once your photograph and name have been identified, then you dip in the finger. That is the only time that you will need to dip in that finger; the other times you will use the thumb, full stop.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had earlier agreed that all parties, organisations and independents participating in the elections will have a copy of the register for that particular polling station. Therefore, whenever a person comes all the people will be able to know who has come because they have their photographs and their names. So when a person reports to the table, you have to also check in your register. Therefore, the question of someone coming back will be prevented by identifying them.

MR RUHINDI: Let me clarify; I appreciate hon. Ben Wacha’s clarification, but Mr Chairman, we also accepted another fundamental amendment which mitigates the problem being envisaged. This amendment is that at that table at which the presiding officer sits, the agents of candidates will also have the opportunity to sit there. And will be positioned in such a way that they are able to crosscheck the person voting against that person’s card or other identification and against the register. There are other fundamental inhibit mechanisms which we have put in place, which can ensure that the problems being envisaged will be mitigated.  

MR BAKKA: Mr Chairman, I have just established another danger here with the idea of using ink to mark on the voters’ register at the first table before voting. When you give a voter – if you put the ink on this finger and you give him or her a ballot paper to go with to the next table, as they are picking the candidate of their choice, they will invalidate that ballot paper and it will cause very many invalid votes. It is impractical -(Interjections)- you will have very many invalid votes because our people are illiterate.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, we took in account all the possible problems that could arise including what the hon. Member is talking about. And we agreed that should the amendment be accepted, it would have been possible for us to use different types of ink. 

MR WADRI: Furthermore, Mr Chairman, when we considered this issue – yes, it is true that we have made provisions for the polling agents of the respective candidates to sit at the same table with the presiding officer. But we also noted that for those of us who are here, when you reflect back to the days when we have had elections in 1996, 2001 and 2006, there have been instances where polling agents of certain candidates were turned away -(Interjections)- yes they were turned away to the extent that certain candidates did not have polling agents. That, therefore, leaves a leeway for the presiding officer and whoever is there to conduct and commit electoral offences of systematically ticking voters. There will be no proof. That is the reason that we insist that each of the voters thumbprints against   his name in the voters’ register. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are aware that one time a bishop went and found that they had voted for him - you are aware and it was in the newspapers, but I do not want to name the bishop. If we had electronic voting - definitely to produce your ballot paper, you would have to thumbprint it. In short, your thumbprint or whichever finger you are using is supposed to assist you get your ballot paper out.  

The purpose of our having a person putting an identity on himself that he has voted is very important. Just ticking; anybody can do it. And, Mr Chairman, if we go by minutes, which I want to demonstrate here. Ten hours times 60 minutes, you get 600 minutes. If you went strictly to where people have voted over 100 percent and you count, that every minute by the time they check and another minute for giving you the ballot paper, it will averagely take you five minutes to get to the place where you cast your vote. But because of ticking, it takes a second and -(Interjections)- the one who is saying, “theory” is good at stealing. (Laughter)  

I plead, therefore, that since it is only at one point, let us try it this time. If it does not work out, we shall amend. But this is a law which should be practiced - democracy is very expensive and we should go the long way. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, there is another limb to that amendment which we also debated, but again failed to reach a conclusion. We wanted to amend 31(5)(b) that: “Voting be done by thumbprint only.”

MR RUHINDI: What was deferred to the plenary for decision was in respect of affixing thumbprints on the register and voting by thumbprints only. We deferred and of course we gave our reasons. Because in the first place, we looked at a ballot paper on which there is even no name of a voter, and you are just affixing a thumbprint or a tick. In the case of thumbprints, you can imagine – I know there are people who are vulnerable in one way or another who vote by thumbprints, but at the same time that scenario is not prudent and not effective in any case rather than creating cumbersomeness. So, we objected strongly to that proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we propose that the principal Act be amended in section 33 by inserting at the end of sub-section 3 the following -

Before I do that for the benefit of the Members, 33(3) reads as follows: “A representative or polling agent appointed under sub-section 2 shall report to the presiding officer of the polling station on the polling day.”

The amendment we are proposing is to add to that provision as follows: “And shall sit at a table provided under paragraph (a) of sub-section 5 of section 31 or be positioned in a such way that he/she is able to crosscheck the names of the voters on the voters’ roll against the voter’s card or any other identification given.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 33, as amended, agreed to.

Section 33, agreed to.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, now I move on to 38. There are two aspects of amendments to this; one, we propose that the word “illiterate voters” be deleted from the head note on sub-section 1 and be restricted to persons who are unable to fix the authorised mark or tick by reason of blindness, old age or any other disability. So, we propose to delete illiteracy.

The justification – it was debated widely yesterday - and the reasons were advanced by many that it is susceptible to abuse and illiteracy, and even in this particular case, it cannot be a ground for one to say that they cannot identify a symbol or photograph of a candidate because of being illiterate.

MR WACHA: I am sorry I have to disagree with my learned shadow Attorney-General. The problem here is not illiteracy, but the problem we are trying to cure is that one individual should not be the one to keep on assisting a voter at the polling booth, but to say that there are no illiterates who cannot vote is going overboard.

There are a number of illiterates in the constituencies who need assistance. The only thing which we have to guard against is that no individual should act as a professional aider.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that is different.

MR WACHA: If you read through that section, what we are complaining about is already provided for, “that no one person shall aid more than one voter at a time.” I am insisting that the word “illiterate” must remain in that provision.

MR WADRI: I want all of us to appreciate what is on table; is it as a result of illiteracy that one fails to identify symbols? Illiteracy is about reading and writing, but not identifying whether this is a tree, a radio or a bicycle; no; they have got pictorial representations. So, let us differentiate between being illiterate and being able to identify symbols.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, we debated this matter extensively and if I may actually use the worry expressed by hon. Ben Wacha, when he pointed out that in some of our jurisdictions leave alone these urban constituencies, a person coming from some of our villages by showing him/her a paper or pen, they are likely to start trembling – iot is a fact. So, really to say that you delete the expression illiteracy is not being wise and prudent. 

What hon. Ben Wacha is referring to is already provided for in sub-section 3 of the law which says, “A person shall not assist more than one voter to vote under sub-section 1 in the election, and in (2) it says, “It shall be lawful for any member of a voter’s family to assist a voter under sub-section (1) notwithstanding the fact that the former is below the age of 18 years.”

MR KATUNTU: I am a little bit confused; how will a presiding officer know that this person is an illiterate? Will he go through some interview to ascertain that the person who is seeking assistance is an illiterate? We need to be practical as the learned Attorney-General is saying. If I am the presiding officer and hon. Jessica Eriyo comes and says that she is illiterate, will you take her through an interview or you will assume that actually she is illiterate?

You will find an instance where somebody who is literate actually will claim to be an illiterate because outside the booth somebody has given him money and he wants to make sure that actually he votes a particular candidate.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I want to ask hon. Katuntu - imagine a voter who wants to vote for you; but he is illiterate and he comes to the desk and says he cannot read the name Katuntu, and he has never seen hon. Katuntu –(Interjections)- yes, this is true. Some of the people who vote for us have never seen the candidate or even the picture of the candidate, but just hears a name on the radio or from the campaign managers. Now, he comes to vote and he cannot read the word, “Katuntu” and he cannot even identify the picture of hon. Katuntu. In this case, he has seen a symbol and there are so many who live in mountains like me who comes from the rift valleys. So, in this case, you want him to go away without voting?  


MR MUGAMBE: The presiding officer does not have to identify the illiterate person, but it is the illiterate person to identify her or himself. For sure, many of us are illiterate in various fields - be it computer – and there are very many circumstances where we are illiterates. (Interjections) So, as far as voting is concerned, this person is illiterate. (Interjections)  Do not take the literal meaning of “illiterate”. This person needs assistance - a person who may fear to go voting if he is not assisted. So, maybe in Kampala Central, there are no illiterate people, but there are people who even fear to go near the polling station and they need assistance if they are sure there is -(-Member timed out.)  

MR WAMANGA: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Yesterday, we debated this issue very extensively and the last Member of Parliament who spoke clarified this issue very nicely. Illiteracy means that you cannot read or write but you can see the pictures of the candidates on that ballot paper. You can clearly identify the picture or symbol. Whatever symbols are on those ballot papers can be identified. I saw what happened in the Rukiga polls – you could find a young person asking an old person, “Can you please come and assist me to vote?” And yet the person claimed they were illiterate. People can clearly identify the pictures of people on those ballot papers. 

Therefore, we should delete the word, “illiteracy” on that ballot paper. I do not see the argument - why Members on that side are the ones arguing that it should be there because they are the ones used –(Interjections)- you know what I mean. You must be logical, because the pictures are on that ballot paper and the illiterate people can read and see that this is the picture of this one or that one. So, I do not see why we should not delete the word, “illiteracy”.     

MR ODONGA OTTO: Maybe we should address our minds from the point of the mischief we are trying to cure. We are avoiding two scenarios: The first is where you have volunteers in the villages telling people, “Just declare yourself illiterate and I will vote on your behalf.” (Interjections) Yes. 

Secondly, people who get money, salt and sugar – some of them may not stand the pressures, and so for accountability, they rather declare themselves illiterate and then the other person who has been harassing them in the villages can go and vote on his behalf so that they can rest. 

There are times when a candidate loses in an area and they harass you saying, “You are the people who have been causing us problems. You wait and see.” So, some people would opt to declare themselves illiterate so that when the other GISO has voted for him, then he is at least free from harassment. That is what we are trying to cure – (Interjections)- yes, that is what we are trying to cure.

MRS AOL: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I was wondering because it looks like illiteracy also has levels. If the level is really bad, why don’t we categorise them with people with disability who need to be aided by some other people? Otherwise, illiteracy only as illiteracy is just about not being able to read and write. (Interjections) When it comes to pictures, I do not think that an illiterate person will not know that this picture is of a key, bus, radio, bicycle or ball. I think we are going a little too far. Let us just categorise them with people with disability - and they may be very few – so that they are aided; even if they are too old. I thank you.    

MRS BABA DIRI: I thank you very much. I am sorry to deviate from the position of the minister because yesterday, I strongly supported the idea of deleting the illiterate person. I said that during voting or campaigns, there are photographs and banners everywhere. Even the oldest person or most illiterate person will know who is ‘Museveni’ or ‘Kiiza’ – they can identify. But if you cannot see the picture as I said – once more, that means that you are a person with disabilities and we will consider you under disability –(Interjections)– I am sorry to say this because this is through my own experience. Anybody can pretend to be illiterate and bring somebody to pick – I am really sorry to deviate from the minister, but I think that is the truth. We are here speaking generally to find a solution to the right clause in our Bill. I thank you. (Applause)
 
MR KIGYAGI: I think it is important that we live in reality – in a country where we live. Let us not live in utopia. About 35 to 40 percent of our people are illiterate and they are so illiterate that even if you showed them a bus, he will tell you that this is “a bus”, this is “a tree” but will not read the name. But if you ask him or her to either tick or put a thumbprint, they will put it in a wrong place. So, for you to say -(Interjections)– listen to me – that you remove the word “illiterate”, you are really being unfair to our people as 40 percent of them will be disfranchised and will not be able to vote. Let us be very fair – for people in the rural areas, you can even get somebody who is illiterate and give them the ballot paper and they will not tick in the right place.

Secondly, all of us have participated in the elections -(Interjections)– listen to me hon. Colleagues. All of us have participated in elections and the way the elections are going on in Uganda, people are alert, the agents are alert and there is no fool that is going to come there and keep ticking for people and pretend – even people in our own polling areas know those who are illiterate and the agents will say, “This is a liar,” and they will not allow them to be voted for. 

Let us really leave that for the purpose of the practicability of this exercise. Kindly, hon. Members, let us be fair to our people and allow them exercise their right correctly. At the polling stations, let us and our agents be very vigilant and if hon. Kyanjo comes and says he is illiterate, we shall say, “no.” And when the agents say, “no”, the presiding officer will not allow hon. Kyanjo to be assisted. I thank you.

MR BUKENI: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This matter is becoming contentious, when it should not. First of all, as the Attorney-General has said, the Electoral Commission is increasing the number of polling stations. It means voters will be coming from a very small area where they are known. I am also sure that the candidates will pick polling agents from the same locals who know the voters. It is very easy for the polling agents to know who is illiterate and who is not. It is very easy for the agents to refuse anybody who is pretending to be illiterate because they are local people whom they live with. It is, therefore, not necessary for us to argue over this matter, because there are illiterate people not because they are being created by this House, but it is on record that in Uganda about 35 percent of the people are illiterate although the number is reducing. These illiterate people are known and, therefore, the agents will help them. They will treat them as they come and voting will go on as it were. So, I do not think we need to get out of what we are. If there are illiterate voters, then we leave it as it were because they are there. I thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you Mr Chairman. Yesterday, I contributed on this matter and today, I did not want to rise again, but I am forced to do so. I have voted in this country since 1962; from 61 to 62. Until maybe the last – the Seventh Parliament, there was no provision for illiteracy. But if you go back and see the percentage turn-up, more people voted in those days than today; but at the same time, the level of illiteracy at that time was much higher than today. I am surprised that when we are trying to get rid of illiteracy, Parliament is busy promoting illiteracy -(Interjections)- that it should be there. I think we should remove the word “illiteracy.” (Interjections) We have voted for years without providing for illiteracy. I thank you.

MR MADADA: Mr Chairman, if we accept that in this country we have illiterates and we know that voting is a right of every citizen, it will be denying some people their right to vote because they are illiterate. I wanted to say that the definition of illiterates in this country under the context of literacy will include functional skills. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is in charge of functional adult literacy and we defined illiterates beyond merely not knowing how to write and read. But if you lack a functional skill to do a certain activity, you are illiterate. Therefore, if I lack the knowledge to vote right, I am illiterate in that area. I should be directed or be advised on how to vote. That is my right. Thank you. 

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I have been following the debate on this particular clause and I am now trying to understand that Members are trying to refer to illiteracy to mean ignorance. If you follow the line of debate, it does not help to portray or to mean exactly illiteracy. In this particular clause, we are talking of ignorant people as opposed to illiterates.  So, in a very simple way in order to have all of us move forward, I think –(Interjections)- yes, that is what Hon. Madada is trying to say; that we should add ignorance, because that is what we mean. 

But in actual sense, Mr Chairman, if I come to you and say I am ignorant, how will you define it? How will you justify that I am illiterate? You cannot. Somebody who is literate can come and portray himself as an illiterate with an intention. So, there is no purpose at all of having the word “illiterate” or “illiteracy” in this particular provision if we are being sensible. Thank you very much.

MR TIBAMANYA: Mr Chairman, I am aware that there might not have been illiteracy clauses in the 1960s, but that was because the voting was different. Those illiterates were not required to tick the ballot papers; they were only required to pick the ballot paper and drop it in a box labelled DP or a hoe or a hand and so forth. But this one involves -(Interjections)- just a minute. This one involves looking at several pictures and being able to tick one of them. Therefore, when you are illiterate; when one does not know how to read and write or even further when one has seen a piece of paper for the first time in five years - because that is the only time you see the piece of paper in five years for some of our people. It is important that somebody be assisted. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Listening to what is on the Floor has made me wonder what position I would take; but now I am getting really convinced. A few months ago, I wrote about the position of my constituency, particularly Teso region. I said that in the many years we have been watching – the last 24 years, we have more illiterate people who can barely read or write. I also know that the programme of the Ministry of Gender - the Functional Adult Literacy Programme - while we talk about them in this House, they are actually not on the ground. The Minister himself has attested to this. 

So, what we are about to do is actually an indictment on the NRM Government. For the last 20 years, we are more illiterate than ever before. You need to go to Teso –(Interjections)- yes, you need to go to Teso. You will find that the elders can speak –(Interjections) - I am honest, you need to go to Teso. Our elders can speak English; they can write it, yet the young people cannot write, they cannot read, they cannot count. (Interjections) So, I want to agree – I want to support the maintenance of illiteracy because that is the actual position, courtesy of the NRM Government for the last 24 years.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The other limb to this - I do not know whether I should proceed to move it going by the trend of the debate. The other limb is to delete by repealing the words: “Or the voter may, subject to sub-section 4, request another person present at the polling station to assist that voter  for the purpose...” for the benefit of those Members who do not have the original provision, it says, “Where a voter is by reason of blindness, illiteracy, old age or any other disability unable to fix the authorised mark of choice on the ballot paper, that voter may report at the polling station accompanied by a person of his or her choice to assist the voter to fix the authorised mark of choice on the ballot paper, if necessary on the voter’s behalf. Or the voter may subject to sub-section 4 request another person present at the polling station to assist that voter for the purpose”. 

The justification is that there are two options, illiteracy and disability. That a voter may either come with a person accompanying him or her to assist him or her in voting or to come alone and when he or she reaches the polling station, somebody there can help her. She or he can request for assistance. The amendment is intended to leave the voter with only one option, to come with somebody who will assist them because that is the only person they can trust and the only person who cannot change their position. 

This provision even goes to the extent of allowing the person assisting to fix a mark on behalf of the voter. So, you need to have somebody who is well known to you and a person whom you trust not to change your decision. We are moving this amendment to exclude the aspect of any person around the polling station assisting. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, this is the voter’s choice; the person at the polling station is not imposing himself or herself on the voter. The voter has come with all this knowledge that he or she may come with a person from home. By the time this person comes alone and is unable to do what he or she is supposed to do – and let us agree, there are people who live like destitutes, but they have a right to vote. There are old persons we know of, who do not have a person worth carrying to the polling station to assist him or her. So, that person comes to the polling station and makes a choice; this is a personal choice. 

And as it has been observed, for as long as that person who is assisting does it once under the law, so that we do not have professional aids like they have been called, I do not think there is much problem with that. In any case, Mr Chairman, we debated this matter substantially yesterday. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and negatived.)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I move an amendment to section 39 –(Interjections)- we needed to get a clarification whether section 33 is done and if it is on record.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, we did that also; the positioning of agents – we did; that they sit near so that they can crosscheck. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to section 39, the head note: 

Special procedure for voting for persons in institutions and operation areas 

Clause 1: “Subject to this Act or any other law, the Commission may make special provision for the taking of votes of patients in hospitals or persons admitted in senatorial or homes for the aged and similar institutions and also persons in operation areas such as soldiers and other security personnel, but the commission shall publish in the gazette a list of the operation areas referred to under this section.

Clause 2: “Subject to sub section 1, the Commission shall not create special or separate polling stations exclusively for the Army or any other security personnel.

Clause 3: For purposes of this section, 

a)	Operation areas includes an area where soldiers and other security personnel are deployed on special duty during an election period and may include restricted areas,
b)	Restricted areas include areas experiencing an epidemic, disaster or insecurity.”

Mr Chairman, I bet to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 39, as amended, agreed to.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move on to section 42 of the Principal Act. We are suggesting that the Principal Act be amended in section 42 by -

a)	Inserting before sub section 1 the following: The presiding officer shall ensure that the polling takes place in a free and secure environment. 
b)	Renumbering the current subsection 1 as subsection 2 and substituting it for the following: A presiding officer other than a presiding officer for a polling station located in an urban area may in the absence of a Police officer appoint at least one person present and resident within the area of the polling station as an election constable to maintain order in the polling station throughout the polling day where the presiding officer finds the services of an election constable to be essential.

c)	Substituting for sub section 5 the following: A presiding officer who has appointed an election constable at a polling station shall announce publicly and record the appointment in the space provided for that purpose in the polling report book.

d)	Inserting immediately after sub section 5 the following as 5(a): A presiding officer may, where he or she deems it necessary, request for Police assistance and he or she shall record in writing reasons which necessitate the request for assistance. 

e)	Inserting immediately after sub section 6 the following as 6(a): For avoidance of doubt, a military personnel, a member of Internal Security Organisation or External Security Organisation shall not be appointed as an election constable. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, are you talking about the “kanyamas”? (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, probably for the justification to the Members who have not read this provision, the position has not changed much, as far as maintenance of law and order at polling stations is concerned because the provision for the presiding officer to appoint an election constable is already there. We are just re-organising it to make it better. We are improving on the provision; we are not introducing any thing new as far as appointment of elections constables is concerned. So, the element of “kanyamas” or “kiboko” squad or something does not arise here. I thank you.

MR KIGYAGI: We were given amendments moved by hon. Lukwago, but the amendments which we were given have again been amended. Some of us are not following. If you have new amendments, please circulate them. I have the amendments here.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you see they went back and sat and these are the amendments which they agreed on. We are just seeking clarification.

MR KIGYAGI: Are we observers?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, he had amendments, but we could not agree; we advised that they meet and synchronise and this is the position.

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Chairman, why don’t they circulate the amendments? I mean, I am an observer now. I am following this yet there are new introductions - we chose a committee on behalf of Parliament. Let them circulate those new amendments.

THE CHAIRMAN: I note that what he has read is in the copy which I have just received.

MR KIGYAGI: No, but it is unfair to us.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think this amendment which he has read is in respect of appointing somebody to maintain order at the polling station in the absence of the Police and so forth. This is what he is saying. But isn’t this thing clear?

MS BABA DIRI: Mr Chairman, what the honourable Member has raised is true. He has read these things very fast and we cannot remember the first things we discussed. For example, is it a conducive environment? What is this conducive environment you are talking about? How do you interpret for persons with disabilities? For us, normally, we say accessible environment to everybody including persons with disability, but if you say conducive environment, it will not cater for people who are on wheelchairs, who are blind, and so on. We need that clarification. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think environment, he is talking about the place where the voting is taking place. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 42, as amended, agreed to.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, again through that process where we had a meeting in the committee, we abandoned the proposed amendments on 43 and even part of 48. So, I beg to move on to 51. The principal Act is amended in section 51(a) in sub-section 1 paragraph (b) by inserting between the words “Display” and “At”, the words “At a conspicuous place”. Is it clear?

THE CHAIRMAN: Conspicuous is known.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, two, by substituting for paragraph (c) the following - “One copy shall be enclosed in an envelope supplied by the commission for the purpose, sealed by the presiding officer and delivered to the sub-county headquarters or division headquarters to the designated officer of the commission together with the report book for transmission to the returning officer”.

(b) By inserting immediately after sub section 2 the following - 29(a) “A presiding officer who without reasonable cause fails to cause to be posted a copy of the duly filled and signed declaration result form in contravention of sub section 1(b) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 12 currency points...” -(Interjections)- I was corrected, Mr Chairman. I do not want to be accused of - “....on conviction to a fine not exceeding 12 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding six months or both”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 51, as amended, agreed to.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the next amendment is in respect to section 52, the principal Act is amended in section 52(a) by substituting for sub section 1 the following - “The presiding officer shall immediately after close of polls deliver the declared results and the sealed ballot box to the sub-county headquarters or the division headquarters to the designated officer of the commission together with the report book for transmission to the returning officer”.

(b)By inserting immediately after sub section (1) the following - 1(a) “A polling agent who wishes to accompany the presiding officer to witness the delivery under sub section (1) may do so at his or her own expense”. 

I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 52, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the remaining amendments are in respect to section 56 and we have abandoned it, but instead there is an amendment being proposed by the chair of the committee and in addition to that there are two other clauses which were stood over. I do not know how we shall handle them.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 2 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes an amendment in clause 3, to insert a sub section immediately after sub clause 8. We insert sub clause 9 which should read as follows - “That fundraising for purposes of this section shall not include the soliciting of funds for a candidate to organise for elections or donations given by the President in the ordinary course of his or her duties”.

The justification is to provide a definition of what amounts to fundraising.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to delete section 64 and replace it with section 64(4), 64(5), 64(6) or 64(7). The justification is to correct an error of cross reference.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 4 of the original Bill?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, for purposes of taking care of the amendment that has been made in respect of fundraising, it should be redrafted. The principal is okay. Instead we should amend section 68 of the principal Act like this: Section 68 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for section 64, clause 5 or 6 the following: Section 64 sub sections (4) and (5), and (6) or (8). 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, before we pass the amendment being proposed to clause 4, there are serious issues we would wish to raise in regard to the donations by the President –(Interjections)- no.

I can see here that the President will be free to give out donations; it would be in executing his duties as a President probably to do other matters other than giving out donations.

If we are to curb the culture of commercialisation of politics, issues of giving out donations during campaigns should surely be completely out, if we are to appreciate the magnitude of this matter. The culture of giving out money, even if it is the President, there is no way you will draw a line and say that this one is not intended to induce somebody to vote in his favour if he is a candidate. You cannot draw a line that this is not intended to bribe somebody and that you are influencing a decision of that person by giving out that donation. So, during that period, I think the President should not give out donations.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, this is what I have raised before. I even had an occasion to discuss it with him. This is the issue of the Constitution and you cannot change the Constitution by an ordinary statute. The problem I think is that in the Constitution, for instance, Parliament is not stopped from carrying out its activities. Members of Parliament continue to carry out their activities as members of parliament in their constituencies. This is the position.  (Interjections) This is the position here, that while the President is standing for elections, he continues to act as a President. 

So, the problem -

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, it is true that at one point when we had a discussion you drew my attention to that, but I will want to remind us of the Supreme Court ruling in the case of hon. Bakaluba Mukasa vs Nambooze. The whole thing was about bribery of voters and yet hon. Bakaluba was a sitting Member of Parliament. Parliament had not been dissolved and, therefore, he was a Member of Parliament. In that particular case, why was it possible to prosecute him, as it were, successfully, in that petition and why do you think that it cannot be possible in the case of the President?   

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem is what is in this Constitution. The fact that a Member of Parliament continues to be a Member of Parliament even during elections has never been raised in any petition. So, it has never been a subject of adjudication. People have never raised it and that is why I put it to you that it is a problem. It is a problem we have to address. Can we stop members of parliament acting as members of parliament when they are candidates in parliamentary elections? This you have to address. We may not finish today. It is the same thing with the President. Also the President’s powers and activities are here and so, by an Act of Parliament, you cannot come -

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the counsel you are giving me. The question I am asking myself - and it may not only apply to me that I am failing to understand it - is that the Constitutional provision is that Parliament is never dissolved and even during elections you still remain the incumbent Member of Parliament for a constituency and that you can continue to exercise and execute your duties as the incumbent Member of Parliament, which among other things could be to go and fundraise; it could also be, after you have addressed people, “otulesse otya?” or how do you  leave us? How come then in this particular case -

THE CHAIRMAN: They have never raised it as an issue and in courts we only adjudicate on issues raised. If it has never been raised, therefore, there is no authority going against this system, but it is an issue. It is an issue that should be raised, that the problem this provision can cause is there but no adjudication in any petition has alluded to this issue.

So, maybe it is high time we raised it somehow for the courts to help us to make a pronouncement on it.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, after a careful reading of this particular clause, I think it is limited in nature. It is saying, “Fundraising for purposes of this section shall not include the soliciting of funds for a candidate to organise for elections or donations given by the President,” and now I want to emphasise, “in the ordinary discharge of his duties.”

It looks like it is really not an open cheque for him. It is limited to those which are in the ordinary discharge of his duties as a President. So, if I were to raise it in a court of law, my emphasis would be that actually this donation given was not in the ordinary discharge of the President’s duties and I give evidence. It would be a burden on me, therefore, to prove it to the satisfaction of the court that actually this donation was intended or was an inducement or a corrupt donation -

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, if you have the evidence.

MR KATUNTU: So, I think this is the purpose and the mischief is cured in my view.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I am surprised because by inference, section 68 is making reference to section 64. Now, under section 64, we have made it an offence to give alcoholic beverage to people, but we have not made it an offence to give food and refreshments under - 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the law - maybe in Parliamentary elections - allows a candidate to give food and drinks - yes when he is organising - it is there, it is specific and it is not an offence. You can go and buy sodas; you can go and buy non-intoxicating alcohol. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, instead the practice is that people buy alcohol for others and not food -(Interjections)- no, that is the reality. What is bothering me here is that they are saying, “Any person who solicits from a candidate money, gifts or alcoholic beverage...” they are making it an offence against the person who asks for it. I do not see why we should penalise the person asking as opposed to the person giving. We should instead deter – in fact, I want to be helped by this Parliament so that we even ban food and alcoholic beverages together. 

We should not leave a leeway for food because it may mean killing cows in several villages. If we could ban it by law, because why should you cook for people so that they vote for you? Attorney-General, I beg for your assistance; I think we should ban food alongside alcoholic beverages and we just leave refreshments and drinks because of the burden of cooking for people during a campaign.  If we are not making it illegal then it may reach very dangerous heights.

MR RUHUNDI: I do not know the clarification being sought because you need to read the whole of 64 in order to get the import of the meaning. [Mr Odonga Otto: “64(iii)”] Because (iii) that you are referring to is an exception and that is what the chairperson was bringing to your attention. It says: “Sub section 1 does not apply in respect of the provision of refreshments or food - 

(a) 	offered by a candidate or candidate’s agent who provides refreshments or food as an election expense at the a candidate’s campaign planning and organisation meeting; or 
(b) 	offered by any person other than a candidate or a candidate’s agent who at his or her own expense provides the refreshments or food at a candidate’s campaign planning and organisation meeting.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, then hon. Members we had finished the four but there was one which we stood over, that was 19(a) clause 1.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, before clause 1, we stood over the amendment to section 3 in our IPOD document. We were suggesting to delete the words, “within 12 months before the nomination day” in sub section 1. That is the period within which persons aspiring to be candidates may consult. So, it was 12 months under the law and we are saying that it should be open.
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Are you still following it?

HON.MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: But does it make sense to you? It should be open because there is no way of enforcing this provision.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I thought that the chair at that time had guided us and we were all in agreement that in a free and democratic society, people who aspire for offices can consult. You cannot have a law - for example, if I called five people in my house or at a church and you say that is an illegal gathering. So, I thought we had already achieved a consensus on consultation.

MR BYANYIMA: I have an amendment.
 
THE CHAIRMAN: First of all, is there a documentation system used to record the aspirants?

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Chairman, much as we have been having the 12 months, you cannot leave it free because it is open; it creates a bit of disorder. You cannot –(Interjections)- yes, some people have been doing it, but we should have at least 24 months before nomination. I am moving to amend it to 24 months much as we have been having 12 moths. 

MR WADRI: Please, justify. 

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Chairman, if you open it, I think it is good for whoever takes office to be given time to be able to achieve their manifesto. But you cannot allow people to as soon as the election is over to start consulting endlessly. 

Mr KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank you hon. Byanyima for giving way. Well, I think the spirit of this amendment is aimed at the faith in which it is being brought. When you say you want to restrain, you are going to cause problems for no reason at all. Take an example where I have contested as a presidential candidate; having lost, I have come out to tell the public that I have conceded defeat; I made errors in my campaign but I am coming back. Will I then have committed a crime to thank those who supported me?  So, there is really no problem at all. Naturally - I beg you to abandon the thing.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Byanyima, what are you going to do with comedians? (Laughter) 

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Chairman, the principal Act has been talking of 12 months and this is the time we have been in. I know that all people have been going around the country looking for votes and consulting for five years, but the country needs to stabilise and the candidates must also be able to achieve these milestones. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Has he asked you for money?

MR BYANYIMA: No, but there must be order. I agree, Mr Chairman, but this principal Act which has been in force has been operating - it is one yearp but we are saying that we change it to 24 months.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, we need to know that we are in a multi-party dispensation. The strength of a political party depends on how the structures operate right from the grassroots to the district to the national level. As a party president or a secretary-general or secretary for mobilisation, you need to consult and be in touch with your structures. 

Even at the parliamentary level as we are here, we have got other people at the grassroots consulting right from the word go; when you were voted, people started showing interest.  The moment you begin closing shop and building a cocoon around yourself, you will be judged to be selfish. Let those who want to go out and mobilise do it. After all, it will not affect: One, the operations of Government; and two, it will not add any expenses on the taxpayers’ resource.  So, why should that really be an issue? Let the person move and burn off his energy.

MR OKUMU: Mr Chairman, I just want to inform my friends on two grounds; one, that politics is a profession. When somebody is a politician, what else do you expect him to do apart from continuing to politick? Secondly, as a political party, they are there to capture political power, and to recruit members all the time. So, every party is about politicking. So, what measure are you going to put in place to stop politicians who are professional in doing their job or political parties whose only activity is just to politick?

THE CHAIRMAN: But are you going to make it an offence? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 3, as amended, agreed to.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, we propose that we restrict this amendment to only withdrawal and remove the expression “or is qualified” reason being that I detailed the provisions under which, in the Constitution and the Act, a nomination may be invalidated or may be made void. There may arise a situation where that is done by the Electoral Commission and a person appeals to the High Court as provided under the Constitution, and the appeal is under consideration. Certainly, under those circumstances, it would be very unwise to declare anyone remaining during that period unopposed.

We feel that we leave the expression withdrawal and the other circumstances of invalidation and ceasing to be a member are already taken care of under the provisions of the law.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the title stands the title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
7.01
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.02
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.03
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Freddie Ruhindi): I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

7.03
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Freddie Ruhindi): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED 
“THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2009”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. It has been a very big struggle really. Thank you for the spirit of working together.

7.03
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman representative, Soroti): On behalf of our team, I would like to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for the way he managed to chair, and to also put on record our appreciation of to the chair of the committee, the Attorney General and the ministers, hon. Urban Tibamanya, hon. Rukutana and last but not least hon. Amama Mbabazi.

We appreciate the consensus building and it is our hope that as we go into the other amendments before us, we will continue to build on this rapport and make good use of it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is an announcement, UNFPA, Ministry of health and other partners are planning a two months intensive campaign to accelerate the reduction of maternal mortality in Uganda. There will be a national launch on 5 May 2010 at Namboole Stadium. Members of Parliament are invited to attend and participate. Letters of invitation have been put in your pigeon holes. Among the activities that day will be a football match at 2.00 p.m. at Namboole Stadium between former Uganda internationals and the Uganda Parliamentary Football Team. Members of the team are reminded to appear at Lugogo tomorrow for training.

Hon. Members, you remember that I announced recently that members of various committees should not move out of Kampala until we finish this work and the budget. It has come to my notice that certain committees have moved out and there is a committee planning to move. The administration of Parliament is instructed not to facilitate you. We should concentrate on our work here in Kampala, finish it and then go. We have two weeks to go.

7.06
MR STEVEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): On behalf of my colleagues on the committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, I would like to extend our thanks to all Ugandans that have participated in this very truly challenging work. I think this is first type of work that we have experienced in our life on the committee. We would like to thank those of us, and you, Mr Speaker, for guiding us through the process and to say that out of the four Bills that are with us, three have been cleared and we hope that with this momentum, we should be able to tackle and handle the last one in the course of next week. I would like to thank all Members of Parliament for the input you have given us; it has been a truly enriching experience and we hope to build on it for the future. I thank you very much. (Applause)
 
MR SEBAGGALA: I thank you. As you have stated it clearly that committees should suspend their upcountry tours until this task is finalised – the Committee on National Economy is planning to move out tomorrow and I wanted to know whether we are going to have any session here tomorrow. We are coming back on Saturday or Sunday and I think that will be okay. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: That is okay. (Laughter)  Hon. Members, we have come to the end of today’s business. Pursuant to the agreement we made, we shall be sitting in the morning as from Tuesday, to be able to clear the work we have. So, the House is adjourned until Tuesday at 10.00 a.m. when we start work here. 

(The House rose at 7.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 May 2010 at 10.00 a.m.) 


