Thursday, 25 April 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairperson, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE JUDICATURE BILL 1996

MR ELYAU  (Kalaki County, Soroti): Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I rise to up to support the Bill, but Madam Chairperson, allow me to comment on some impossible legislation if we could do now in this short small Bill.  I find myself touched deeply about the intention for Interim District Land Board.  In CA, we took a month, Madam Chairperson, how best land can be handled in this country and who should the land belong to. So, we discussed and found out it is the citizens.  Now, if it is the citizens of Uganda, Madam Chairperson, I think we should not be in a hurry to put in an interim District Land Board, because, we are only one month to two months for a new Parliament which we shall - I say so, because, when such adjudicators, things will go wrong quickly, you will allow the magistrates to come in to discuss matters of land and so on.  

So, for me as a farmer, I find myself embarrassing -(Interruption)- land sometime, when the constitution came into being, the man concerned, feels disturbed, because, land is the only resource that we have, having failed in life, especially for us, who are farmers, Madam Chairperson. So, I thought this area of cases where the court must not rush in discussing land any where until the next Parliament, because, they say, the Parliament shall prescribe the certificate or what other things, that means, we must be patient, because I do not know why we would be in a hurry as far as that line is concerned.  Otherwise, other intentions to conform to the Constitution, I have no quarrel, but I find it fear Madam in that area, because, in Teso, I remember, advocates used to go to the village to harass the owners of the land; sometimes you find them abusing people in the courts.  So, I find a lot of difficulties especially in these Constitutional matters.  I hope I am talking about the right Bill.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, the intention carried in this Bill is clear, is to do with the Interim.  For purposes of continuity, there must always be some institution in place to make the country run.  Right now, we have got an interim electoral -(Interruption)

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I wonder whether hon. Member from Kalaki is in order to be discussing a Bill which is not on the programme, because, we are discussing the Judicature Bill and he is discussing the Motion of the business that is coming next. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  No, he is out of order.  Hon. Elyau, concentrate on the Judicature Bill, please.

MR ELYAU:  Madam Chairperson, okay, I think as I did ask that I hope I am not talking on - it means I knew that may be, I would be corrected, but then information was to come which I thought was going to correct me.  So, I think I can apologise for that one but I intended to talk eagerly about the issue of land, because, that one, was very much palatable, as far as I am concerned and the Ugandans are concerned.   Even then, Madam Chairperson, some of us who are not lawyers, we worried, if something comes touching the law, we will make sure we are safe.  So, I should not be mistaken for the sake of having it, because, when you talk about - some Acts like these Acts of 1967 and so on, us, we cannot availably get it; we always find a problem, Madam Chairperson; that is why yesterday, I was complaining that at least, if these materials are given to us, so that we the lay men can help those who call themselves lawyers to run about these affairs, because, in CA, we had that problem, lawyers misled us a lot and we went on to disagree when things are very clear even. So, I say so because, Madam Chairperson, recently in Teso, last two/three years, according to me, laws have not been followed properly.  

I want the Minister to take note of this, before I came into office, things like these laws and appeals were not properly done.  I remember one case; I gave an example to this House.  A girl in my house was defiled, raped by a man using a gun, this man was arrested, he condoned, he was taken to the doctor.  When police took him, this man was remanded for about 400 days but I was surprised that this man was just released and is now back in the Army and this man - what kind of - even the man admitted even there was a gun, now, this man is only may be fair, otherwise, this is a man who could come and gun us down.  So, where is protection?  So, I think the Minister should also know that as we go in for new laws in conformity of the Constitution, people should be protected, the laws which are seriously put in this House, should be taken into account.  

I want to find out from the Minister if the Public Prosecution has enough powers, because, for us in the East, I think ours is not doing the right job, because, I was surprised to see a man being released and he is now back to the gun, when he is the man who went and raped the girl, it was true, he consented, the doctors told the woman, the chap said she was raped, but I was surprised that he was released.  So, these laws, sometimes, although we are doing them here, they are not practical.  So, I think the Minister should find out whether these laws, even if they are done, they are effective, especially when he was not in office, now that he is in office, I have more regard for him, I will get more to tell him.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.

MR BWANIKA BBAALE  (Katikamu County, Luwero):  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I stand to support the Bill and doing so, I would like first of all to thank the judiciary for the great improvement so far seen in the judiciary.  These days, courts tend to really to speed up cases and there is general improvement, may be it has been due to a number of factors; some of who which include the increase in the number of judges, because these days, we do not have many people staying on remand for many years, like it used to be in the past and secondly, the fact that the magistrates and high court judges are given big salaries and a lot of fringe benefits, I think this is a very good motivation for them; they normally deal with the cases very, very speedily.  

However, I would like, Madam Chairperson, that we still have a problem in the administration of justice and this is mainly at the police level; many people are arrested and they tend to stay in police stations for quite a number of days, before appearing before the court and this is in direct contravention with the existing new Constitution.  So, if the Minister responsible could look at that one, may be, we are going to go a long way in - we shall have really reached a very big step in that administration of justice.  

Madam Chairperson, this Bill before us really, appears to have left out a very important quote, which this House passed when we were discussing the Children’s Bill.  This House approved the establishment of the family and Children’s Court, which is a special court which is going to deal with the families and the children’s problems including adoption and fostering but in this Bill which is being proposed, it does not appear anywhere that this Bill will cater for that area and me, I see this is a special court for which this Bill should address.  So, I would like the Minister, he is winding up, may be to explain to us, as to when this family and children court is going to be established, because, it is a judiciary, it is his Ministry which is responsible.

Turning to the Bill, Madam Chairperson, under Clause 3 (e), this is all precedence (e); where in accordance with paragraph (b), (c) or (d) of this section, there is a quality of precedence in respect of two or more judges; precedence among them shall be determined by the Chief Justice, it is very difficult, I do not know how he will do it, whether looking at somebody’s face, whether choosing his friend.  I would like to propose a very fair, because, you are saying, now, all at a similar, but there is an area where they can differ and that is the age.  Why can these not look at the age of the person, then, they take precedence?  Even here, we are all Members of Parliament, but when I need Okurut, I really respect him as my elder, but we are all equal, when I meet Abu Mayanja.  So, I think age should be now the criteria, if all of them are at par, make the age really determine and say this one now, is a senior citizen, that kind of thing.  

So, Madam Chairperson, I think the Minister should really consider that one, because, that one will really bring a lot of problems, saying that whenever we are at par, the Chief Magistrate picks so and so; I think with age definitely, there will be able to say who takes precedence.

Now, Section 26 of the Bill, this is now where a petition for nullity of marriage or divorce has been filed in a high court and then continues.  There is a Bill which is called the Domestic Relations Bill, which should have come in this House.  I want the Minister there, to tell us when this Bill is coming, the Domestic Relations Law.  There are so many Seminars we have attended, we have proposed a Bill, but it is not coming.  We hope this Bill will come in and address the areas of marriage and divorce, it is an overdue, many people are suffering because of the current law which is not very good in some areas.  So, if this Bill comes into force, I think people will find very easy ways of dissolving their marriages and contracting new marriages whenever necessary.

Section 42 of the Bill, Madam Chairperson, this is under the Rules Committee, the composition is okay and (f), the Bill is proposing Director of Law Development Centre of his or her representative.  But this is Law Development Centre, but we have Faculties of Law of a University teaching law.  My proposal I would like the Minister to consider, putting a representative of one of the Faculties of law of a University from the University we have in Uganda, even the Universities which are teaching law, are represented at this Rules Committee and Section 43, is a bit confusing me.  The Rules Committee, may by Statutory Instrument make Rules, me, I propose that, let the Chief Justice, with approval of the Rules Committee make Statutory instruments; I think it should be the Chief Justice, with approval of the Rules Committee to make Statutory but not the Rules Committee to make statutory instruments.  I think to me, it looks a better way of putting it in this law instead of leaving it as it is.

So, Madam Chairperson, I stand here to support the Bill, but I want to emphasis that since we passed the Family and Children courts, the Minister should tell us as to when they are going to become effective, because, we want courts which are going to handle problems of our children.  I beg to support.  Thank you.

MRS NKWASIBWE (Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you Madam Chairperson.  First of all, I feel proud to see you in that Chair and as I congratulate, I feel tempted to address you as Madam Speaker, although and I am sure, you will maintain the title even when the new Government comes in.

Madam Chairperson, I stand to support the Bill, although I am a lay person regarding matters of law, not trained, in legal issues, but as a good citizen, I know the well being of the society depends on proper implementation of laws the legislature makes.

Madam Chairperson, as I support this Bill, I have a few observations to make regarding the current happenings in our society and it makes me feel that there are many laws we need to make apart from updating the old ones. Currently, there is a very serious strike going on by the Makerere Lecturers; this is a bit worrying and it makes me feel that may be the Minister need to consider making a law governing strikes in the country; because, every institution has regulations.  Various professions also have a code of behaviour, they have professional ethics to observe and up hold, may be there is something lacking in the system; so that a likelihood of black mail may come up, so that whoever makes a demand must go on strike which I think is not a good example for the coming generations for which we are planning.

It hurts Madam Chairperson, to remember, for some of us who usually read the Bible; it advises that, while children should respect their parents, parents also should not exasperate them.  I quote this bit of the Bible, but what I want to say, is that, it is not easy to tell the impact of the strike to Ugandan children tomorrow.  If I am a parent and I behave the way I do today, before my juniors, how do I expect them to behave tomorrow?  If Government has aggrieved these Lecturers, I plead that Government does something to them, because, Madam Chairperson, to take an important person -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  It is not only the Lecturers, Madam Chairperson, but even we, as leaders in Uganda, we know that everybody has got a right to stand for elections to be elected President or Member of Parliament, but where you have Presidential candidates going around campaigning and then you have the Vice President going where the candidates have been going and decampaigning, what kind of culture are we imparting to the new generation and to the fairness of the elections?  Is this not going backward when we say we brought in peace and all the good things, because the elections were cheated and if you do not return somebody’s car which has been stolen, you also become a thing.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Wanendeya, what is the information?  You are now contributing, please, sit down.

MR NKWASIBWE:  Madam Chairperson, I am sorry the hon. Member was trying to divert the debate to what is happening during these election campaigns.  I think we are dealing with the Judicature Bill and I am also referring to modes of discipline which is usually brought about by laws made by this House.  So, Madam Chairperson, as I support the Bill, I also want remember that there is no law regarding the aged.  Hon. Ntimba yesterday tried to talk about catering for the old people.  We all know very well that what is on the ground in development today, is partly the effort of those who are really old; they have paid taxes ever since they were able and although some of them may be enjoying the benefits of their labour as the Minister for Constitutional Affairs seemed to say yesterday, I am sure many old people are lamenting and there is no Government provision even give a bit of bonus to the old people, unless they have been serving in Government and they only enjoy gratuity.  I hope the Minister will consider the aged, could be determine the old age exemption from paying tax, I do not know, may be I need to be directed on this, I do not know whether being exempted from paying tax, I do not know the age at which that starts, but all the same, I feel that the old people, our grand parents, our grand uncles, our grand aunties, need some benefits for their sweat while they were still paying their taxation and I think the Minister may consider this as he tries to modernise the laws.

Madam Chairperson, I remember this House passing a law on environment and when you go around the country, many areas are not really caring for the - there is no effort on the ground, either to stop soil erosion or to plant trees and although there is a lot being talked about clearing the water hyacinth on the lake, it seems day by day, environment is being destroyed at a great speed.  So, I would like to appeal to the arm of Government wherever possible to try and bring about activities which can -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that while she says that we passed a law on environment, there is even a more basic one an Article in the Constitution, which says, every person is entitled, has a right to a healthy and clean environment.  So, what she is actually saying is that all these should be done.  What I want to bring to her notice is, that a lot has been neglected, even what is found in the Constitution.  So, I think we only have to wait a little bit until the Constitution starts being applied at it should.  As a matter of fact, I do not even know whether the constitutional requirement, that every Bill which comes to this House, must go through a Standing Committee of this House has been followed as we debate this exact Bill.

MRS NKWASIBWE:  Madam Chairperson, I thank the hon. Member for his information but it is always a story, we wait, we wait, but wait until when.  We shall wait for the new Constitution to come in place, but what I am saying is that reinforcing laws - there is Government now in place, in this House is continuing to make laws today; the question of waiting is a bit bothersome.  

Decentralisation also was effected but when you go to a local level, you find mobilising the community to take active participation in issues of environment protection, it is not there, there is no guidance whatsoever regarding even creating by-laws at a local level.  The Chiefs and the LCs leadership do not seem to be legally empowered well enough to mobilise and everything seems to be depending on voluntary activity, but I think there is need for strong implementation.

MR WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, indeed.  I want to associate myself with the views being expressed by hon. Mrs Nkwasibwe, because, even when you go lower to the LCs, even where the environment has been interpreted to mean only tree planting.  So, if you are doing tree planting you are really serving the environment, other things are missing.  I think a lot of effort should be put into the education of our people, we even find that local authorities have really abused this one; you find garbage rotting everywhere, a dog is knocked down by a car and it spends three/four days on the street.  So, I am really worried, Madam Chairperson.

MRS NKWASIBWE:  I thank the hon. Member for his information which is actually relevant to what I am trying to say.  If I may refer to my district in Kabale, I find that efforts to plant trees, efforts to conserve the soils, to stop soil erosion, by reinforcing soil bands, are depending on voluntary activity.  When you talked to the Chiefs, they say, they are not legally empowered, the LC executives cannot mobilise the community, because, the law does not empower them even to apprehend those who do not respond.  So, Madam Chairperson, I hope the Minister will look into this issue and I support the Judicature Bill.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you Madam Chairperson.  Last week when you occupied that important Chair, I happened to be absent up country in an area where Kony is very active now. So, I did not have time to congratulate you, may I, even if it is a bit late, to do so and join others who have done so that in the struggle for the emancipation of women and affirmative action, your occupation of that Chair, goes a long way to assist our daughters, mothers, and wives, to realise higher ambitions.  

Having said, that Madam Chairperson, what is before us now, is to do the judiciary, the Judicature Act before us is intended to replace the one of 1967 and in doing so, Madam Chairperson, the Act or the Bill brings into being the innovation of a court of appeal, there are others like the Supreme Court and the High Court, have been there. But Madam Chairperson, I wish at this time to say that when we are talking of the judiciary, many people in this country forget that the judiciary is a very important arm of the Government - it is a very important arm of the organ of Government and we tend too often to emphasise two organs of Government or two organs of the State, namely the executive and Parliament and the resources and all these which go with State matters tend to be lumped on the Executive and on Parliament and on the Legislature.   I believe that when a Minister requires money as an executive arm of Government to carry out a function, that money is always found, whether it is to travel abroad or to tour the country and we legislature know that when it comes to our resources to be here, we are served rather well, it may not be prompt, but the delay can always be rectified.  

But Madam Chairperson, as a person who has belonged to this profession of lawyers, I wish in the process of debating the Judicature Act, that the Judiciary has not received that attention and importance which it should and you may agree or disagree, that actually, part of our national problem arises because of the failure to administer justice.  A society that fails to look at justice as a key factor in the relationship between its nationals, in the resolution of conflicts, that society is bound more often than not, to resort to means which are not legal, which are not civilised, which are not modern and, therefore, I do hope that with the new Constitution in place, with the Judicature Act, the new Act coming up and with the new attitude in the country and the new - the sort of manpower we have in Parliament today and in future, we should be able to address the problem of the judiciary more seriously and give the judiciary the resources that they need to administer justice.  My brother here has been - (Interruption)

MR OGWANG:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and I would also like to thank hon. Atubo, for giving way.  Part of the problem of the judiciary in this country, has been lack of judges and magistrates.   This has been echoed on many occasions by the Chief Justice and even by the Attorney General; this country is lacking judges, we are forced to hire expatriate judges to come and carry out work of the judiciary in this country.  I think hon. Atubo is right to say that the judiciary needs a lot to be desired.  Thank you.

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that at least, in this Government, I have seen that the judges were given a bit of recognition by giving them a little higher salary, that is why there are strikes even in Makerere and everywhere.  So, it is wrong to challenge that Government has not done anything, because if you talk about recognition, then it means Government does not have -(Interruption)- at all.  That is why the other people are striking, because, they were considered and were given higher pay.  So, recognition has been there, Madam Chairperson, not on that one at all, if the judiciary were not given attention and respect, I do not think Omara Atubo would be here, he would be still in Luzira.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Madam Chairperson, I thank my Colleagues for the information they have given but I have argued before that the problem really is not manpower within the judiciary or in this country.  For me, there are enough people, there are enough qualified Ugandans to occupy all the offices within the judicial system in this country - Supreme court, Court of Appeal, High Court, every where; sometimes I even hear and they were even offered appointments to be judges, but the only reason why they turn it down, is that, they have - if you are made a judge, suppose you are in private practice, like me or the Attorney General was, and you are going to be Judge of the High Court and you are going to be paid UShs 100,000 at that time and given a free house and a car, who from the private practice could accept to be a judge of the High court?   

So, Madam Chairperson, these whites you see being appointed on our bench as our judges, are being paid by the Commonwealth and they are getting thousands of dollars in foreign currency, which our judges are not getting.  So, when I am talking of resources, I will also include the terms and conditions.  I am aware that the Government has tried its best - thanks mainly to the former Attorney General Abu Mayanja who tried his best to get things for my Colleagues in the Ministry of Justice and the situation is improving, but it is not commensurate with the economic situation in the country. So, things which affect the judiciary include for example, judges going on circuits to up country.  If the Judge cannot be given money to go up country, then you have a person who is for example, on remand in Moroto in Karamoja, waiting trial for murder, a judge may not be able to go there for three years, because of things like transport, lack of allowances and so on and you cannot blame the judiciary for that. So, I address this problem, appealing that we can make a wonderful law like we are going to make this Judicature Act, it is a technical Bill and most of you may find it not easy to debate it, I find it a good law for that matter, but making a good law without the backing of resources, -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, again, I want to inform the hon. Member that much as the Government has tried to improve on the conditions of the service of the judiciary, on such up country trips, there is one such judge not long ago traveling in a very old car that was due to be retrenched, the car should have been thrown away some two/three years ago, but they kept him telling him to hang on, until the car knocked on his way to an up country station and guess who had to give him a lift, some tourists had to give him a lift and the junk car was left with the driver and it had to be towed away.  Now, they have given him another in similar situation.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Chairperson, having spoken for the judiciary, the requirement for resources, I also would like to speak for an outsider; the people who see the judiciary, how do they see the judiciary?  Of course, we all agree that judiciary is a very important arm of the State, of the Government, but it also has its own internal problems and I only want to mention one and one of them is what in law we call, execution of court process and this one, is closer my heart, because, it affects nearly everybody, these are the court brokers.  

Mr Chairman, I said, we are making this good law, the Judicature and I do hope, that at an appropriate time, the Attorney General will come with other laws, because this is dealing with much higher courts.  I hope you will be able to up date the Magistrates Court Act, you will be able to bring the Act, my brother here, was talking about, dealing with Children and so on, but this particular aspect of the court brokers has become a total nuisance and they seem to be out of the legal system and they seem to be out of control and because they handle money and they handle property and so on, it is very easy for them even to corrupt other people who are involved in that.  They, therefore, affect even the people who are in court themselves, they even corrupt the police who are supposed to assist them, they corrupt the local chiefs and the LCs, because, if they over execute, for example, they are supposed to execute for UShs 1 million and then they execute, like I know in one case where they were supposed to execute for UShs 1 million and they went to a ginnery and seized 20 bales of lint which is worth UShs 20 and therefore, they go around sprinkling all this money; so that even if it takes UShs 10 million only, the other arm of Government, the other arm of the Judiciary, may not be able to follow them.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I would like to inform the hon. speaker on the Floor by way of adding on what he is saying, that we have one case, where one court broker collected UShs 1 million from a debtor and he gave a cheque for the same amount, the cheque bounced and the matter was reported to the Police and it is now about six months and the Police has been busy conversing with the court broker without any action being taken.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  So, Madam Chairperson, through you, the Attorney General, this issue of a court broker is a very urgent matter which should be addressed, the law should be revised and more stringent measures should be taken to ensure that court brokers behave.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  May I inform my brother on the Floor, that some of these court brokers go even to the debtors once they are given summons and without even getting permission from the high court, they just shoot at, and that, happened to me and the matter is in a court of law.  Thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  So, Madam Chairperson, under Clause 17 of the Bill, the courts are empowered to apply customary law; the Constitution also talks of the same, the Magistrates Court Act also talks of the same.  But the point I want to raise here, Madam Chairperson is that, the customary law has become a type of law which is so unpredictable and which, to me, has reached a stage, where the District Councils, let me call them the lower legislative bodies, should be asked to compile these customary laws, so that the sources of these customary laws are known and some of these customary laws which are completely in human, which are completely out dated and do not meet the modern standards should right away be made inapplicable.  

Madam Chairperson, I am saying this, with relevance to the LC Courts where some of these customary laws have been applied, especially when it comes to issues of marriage and of children and of divorce.  A customary marriage, for example, has been most abused.  You find in a local area, where dairy is the payment of pride price is still the practice.  A person at the age of 70 years would like to divorce his wife at the age of 65 and his father-in-law, of course, is dead, his mother-in-law is dead and the people who received those bride price most of them are dead, but this man at the age of 70 wants to divorce his wife at the age of 65 who is a grandmother and a very big grand mother and he goes around successfully in the lower courts succeeding to get an order for this divorce, a woman who has delivered possibly 10 children and has got 50 grand children, after 50 years of marriage is being divorced because, under certain customary law, you can divorce a woman any time, because, she has failed to cook for you, because, you suspect her here and there.  

I am giving this, because some of these customary laws affect us - this is a clear case where one wonders whether a customary law of that type should still be applicable, but you find it being applied by the lower courts, the Magistrates Grade II, Grade III and the RCs and by the time you make appeal to the Chief Magistrate and come to the High Court, injustice has already been done in a year or two, because, these appeals can take a year or two.  

So, Madam Chairperson, through you and to the Attorney General, I do hope that at the appropriate time in future, all these customary laws should be compiled, for example, the District Councils in Lira and Apac should be asked to write down, what are the now customary laws which they would like to apply; so that people can read them and they challenge them.  But a person should not just come to a court and say, this is the customary law of the people of Otuke and I think it should be applied.  Thank you.

MR ABU BAKER MAYANJA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my hon. and learned Friend and I am grateful that he has given way, that the demand to write down customary law and codify it, would of course, certify it and prevent it from growing.  What we call customary law here, is what is known as the common law, for instance, in England and although this common law in England has been modified, I mean, sometimes without recognition by Statute law, but no attempt has been made to put the whole of it into a code.  When you do that, you stop it from growing and hence meeting the growing needs of society.  There was need about this I remember, at the time of independence and a very great out cry and what, we did, I am sorry, Madam, to make this a bit longer, it is not my usual style.  But there was a demand that at least customary criminal law should be codified and this was achieved after a great deal of struggle by the enactment in the Constitution that nobody should be punished unless the crime and the punishment thereof were enshrined in a written law.  But apart from that, I think it would be extremely dangerous to go and codify customary law that will stop it from growing and really from meeting its need and what we would now have, would be - really a very curious situation of having our statute law and applying it including the common law, we would still be applying English, un written common law, but we would have stopped our own law from growing. So, I think it will not be very advisable to do so.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Madam Chairperson, I respectfully do not agree with hon. Abu Baker Mayanja that merely writing these customary laws and making them known would stop them from growing.  On the contrary, I believe that by making these customary laws known, it would be a source of debate, of knowledge and nobody is going to put a stop and say, we have now codified the customary law of the Langi, anything outside this customary law book is not customary, not at all.  We are only saying that, what is known should be written.  Now, the situation in other countries like in Britain he has talked of, is that this is a society which is highly literate, the records of the courts are well maintained, the judgement are written and circulated, but what about in Uganda?  A judgement which is passed by an RC I Court in Rubabo, may never be known by the Chairman of RC I in Otuke, but - so, this is really the point I am talking about.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I think Madam Chairperson, this question of the customary law and our values are becoming a problem.  They are becoming a problem because, today, when you talk to a number of children who even are at the University level, you will find very few who know the values of our society.  Now, if we do not at this stage or very soon begin to write down our role, cultural, customary values, are we not going to run the risk of extending modernity artificially to destroy even what we would have our legal system rely on?   Madam Chairperson, I find a lot difficulty in our children not understanding their mother tongue. I was beginning to ask hon. Abu Mayanja, whether writing down our customary values would actually interfere with their growth.

MR ABU BAKER MAYANJA:  It would not, and I am not against the writing down in textbooks, in legal practices of customary law, may be I misunderstood hon. Omara Atubo.  I am not against, for instance, a book like the one on Buganda called ‘Law and Justice in Buganda’ by Edon.  There was a former Judicial adviser Buganda who came and wrote down all our - as he understood it, that is okay and that is how things go, I thought that he was advocating that we should do for the civil law, what we have done for the customary law, I mean for the criminal law and say that it will cease to be law unless it was in a written form but if he is not doing that, he is only appealing to academicians, judges, lawyers, anthropologists and politicians to write down this law, well and good.  Thank you Madam Chair.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Exactly, what I was saying was that all these customary laws and values should be written down and the sources should be known. I was not advocating legislation where you say, unless this customary law is passed by legislature, that one which is unknown shall never be - that is not the case.  My fear is that, at the moment, somebody comes from no where and says, this is the custom governing illegitimate children or children born out of the wedlock in my tribe; this is the custom governing divorce in my clan, this is the custom governing disputes over piece of land in my clan.  That one is really Madam Chairperson, what I am saying, it is unknown source.  Are we going to rely on the whims and on the imaginations of an individual person on issues of customary law, 30 years after our independence.

In conclusion, Madam Chairperson, I was tackling the issue of the RC courts.  The RC Courts as part of our judicial system, I believe, was made with good intention at the time when we needed to feel some vacuum created in the rural areas, in areas where for example, you do not even have magistrates or justice was intended to be expedited.  But that good intention has not been met by two principles which are so important in the implementation of issues regarding justice.  One of them is this question of the RCs the people who are constituting that RC court to be seen to be fair and impartial, to be independent, these are local people, they are not well trained, most of them, they are also having problems of living within the local area, relatives, they belong to a clan, they know possibly the background of the dispute and, therefore, they are naturally affected by the situation within their environment and another problem of this implementation of the work of the RC court, has also been, what I may call lack of resource, I do not know what this is what affected their record, they failed to maintain proper records, so that when you want to appeal from RC I to RC II, to RC III, to the Chief Magistrate, you do not get a proper record and if you are to get it, you get two sentences of the judgement.  This case was heard by our court and it was passed against so and so and, therefore, the Chief Magistrate has got to order a fresh trial before now a properly trained Magistrate Grade II or Grade III and Madam Chairperson, I think that time has come for the Government to really assess the success or failure of the RC Courts and to see how to address and find solutions to those RC courts.  

My conclusion as a person who spends part of his time in legal private practice, a source of my livelihood, is that, the RC court, well intended as it was, has not done a good job and that if it is intended that it should do a good job, a lot more resource, training and reorientation has got to be done. If it is not done, the RC courts are becoming a source of injustice in the area where they are.

With these remarks, Madam Chairperson, I support the Bill and I do hope that it is a great step forward in the improvement of the judiciary in the administration of justice.  Thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI  (Kajara County, Ntungamo):  Madam Chairperson, let me first take this opportunity to congratulate you for being in that Chair; it would have been even better if the whole House had actually voted for you in the formal way as we deal with all the Speakers and brought you to that seat.  But being as it may, we are still very pleased that you have made where you are in the manner that you have done it and I congratulate you for the recognition that you have received.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to address this Bill on few aspects.  The first aspect is the administration of justice and what I consider as legal practice and what I see happening in our country.  It is true the judges in this country have been looked at a bit, the conditions and terms of services, but at the same time, while that has been done, I still feel like my Colleagues have said, that it is inadequate, these are people who sit on the bench and decide on a person’s life.  So, they need to be fully protected, so that there are no temptations of any sort or any destruction.  As I look even what the review that we have carried out, I still feel that there is a lot to be done.  For example, the Insurance part in their terms of service is not catered for, they are just not - there is no social security for them in terms of feeling that their tenure of office is fully protected from the vagaries of the market which influence what happens to them.  T

hen there is the other thing, although, even if we improved their conditions of service, the people who work with them also needs to be looked at; it is the clerks who hold the files.  These people are as important in the administration of justice as the judges themselves.  You go in the court, you find your file is missing; you are not on the list.  We have looked at one aspect of treating the judges, we have forgotten the people they people they work with and those are as important, because, if they do not bring the file, despite the fact that the judge is well catered for, he will not in any way do the work he needs to do and this spreads down, it comes down to people who are in the Police Force, who do the prosecution; those also have got to be looked at, because, that is where the system really starts. Those also have got to be looked at because that is where the system starts.  

Madam Chairperson, I have seen a case.  Just last two days, one Arm of the Police, where we were in Ntungamo - we had some funny things happening; hooliganism caused by certain people, sponsored by other people - by Karuhangas of this world.  These Policemen apprehended and this has been on the news.  So, it is not something new.  I have the twelve names of people who participated.  They took the trouble to bring them to Police in Ntungamo.  The DPC unfortunately was not there.  The OC Station is part of that system - of the sponsors of the hooliganism.  Immediately the returning officer left, the man released the whole lot although Radio Uganda has been carrying on saying that these people have been arrested, no.  Immediately he left, they were released even without taking statements from them.  That was the most interesting thing, because I am speaking this with empirical evidence.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information.  I think that we should try and be fair even when we have interest at stake.  My Colleague and Friend, hon. Kanyomozi knows very well.  He was saved by those people when he was found in a plantation addressing the rally (Laughter).  He was guided properly where the road passes until he arrived at the Police Station.  He was helped by those people because ordinarily they would have put him in.   

MR OGWANG: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that at times people find themselves in very tricky position and conditions.  Take for example, hon. Kanyomozi attending a rally somewhere where the incumbent resident Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was addressing a rally, and despite having a bad rowed crowd, hon. Kanyomozi played it cool and in the end he had a flash of a very big photograph on a News Paper showing him greeting very beautifully the incumbent President.  That is a kind of situation where each one can incidentally find himself or herself in.  Thank you very much.

MR KANYOMOZI: Madam Chairperson, I am just amused by all these things.  First of all from my young Colleague, I happen to be a Member of Parliament for that area and not only that, the incumbent President was visiting that Constituency.  I was under civilised manner, supposed to meet and accept him in my Constituency.  So, there was nothing awkward.  That is the politics I believe and that is the politics I practice.  Furthermore, just to make my Colleague’s position, I was not addressing a rally in a plantation.  I was sitting in somebody’s house and the Law allows me to do consultation as an agent of a Presidential Candidate.  The issue that I have been addressing is the issue of what happened less than two days ago.   People were arrested, taken to Police in Ntungamo and immediately the returning officer who told the Police to take them there for safe custody left.  They were released by the OC Station.  I am saying they were guilty because they broke the Laws as they say.  That is the reason why they were taken there.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, is it in order for hon. Kanyomozi who is a very distinguished Parliamentarian of long service to say that people who were arrested were guilty as charged before they were tried by any Court of competent jurisdiction.  Is he in order?

MR KANYOMOZI: I was saying that they were released before they were even charged.  But this was not even done.  They were brought there and then next minute they were released.  I am questioning where justice is in that case.

The other aspect which I think I need to address to, I am saying that in the administration of justice, -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I wish to inform the hon. Member now holding the Floor and the House that his first allegation was that this Bill does not protect judicial officers and those who are administering justice.  I want to draw your attention, Madam Chairperson, to Page 27, Clause 48, which deals with particular matter and with your permission I will read that Clause.  ‘A Judge or Commission or other person acting judiciary shall not be liable to be sued in any civil Court for any Act done or orderly to be done by that person in the discharge of his or her judicial functions whether or not within the limits of his or her jurisdiction.’ 

Two - ‘An officer of the Court or other person bonded to execute any order or warrant of any Judge or person referred to in sub-section 1 of this section, acting judiciary shall not be liable to be sued in any civil Court in respect of any Lawful or authorised act done in the execution of any such order or warrant.’  Madam Chairperson, I beg to inform.  

MR KANYOMOZI: I was wondering whether the former Attorney General thinks that the Police is part of the Judiciary and that they have all the rights and the section that he was reading, to do whatever they want.  If they are going to do that, then the administration of Justice is going to be meaningless.  I am sure he does not want us to carry that to the ridiculous extreme that he is now trying to state in his information.

Let me continue, Madam Chairperson. I am saying that we should try and look at the Judiciary in totality, and the administration of Justice in totality so that justice is done properly for the citizens of this country, from a lower angle up to the Supreme Court.  If that is not done, then we will be losing the track.  

There is another aspect which I think I need to touch on.  That is the aspect of the lower levels of administration of Justice.  The RCs and the R.C System.  I have a feeling that we need to separate these elective offices from the administration of Justice.  I would rather have a situation, Madam Chairperson, where the citizens in RC can appoint a Committee of Distinguished person; elect Committee from whom they could choose people to sit on local cases, rather than have elective persons; the politicians, the you and me to some extend, who are waiting for the vote after your term.  I know people will say, but in America they do it.  We have not reached that level yet.  But at the moment these people who are given the responsibility of administering Justice at a lower level and also aspiring for offices, end up not doing the very thing they should do.  If we had that Committee of Distinguished citizens at the RCs, from whom for each case, we can get people to sit on individual cases, it would be far much better than leaving it to the RCs.  What we have seen in some areas, does not ogre well for administration of Justice.  

I would really think at a later stage when the Attorney General brings another Bill, he will have to deal with that problem squared, although this is limited to the high organs of the Court.  

I would like to turn to Article 17 of Customary Law.  While I am not saying I am agreeing with my Colleague hon. Omara Atubo, and I think the other former Attorney General also may agree.  While we are now going to codify all the Customary Laws and bring them here, and legislate for them, I think there is a need to have a list of them somewhere where they can be referred.  Madam Chairperson, I am saying this because I have been a victim of Customary Law.  My grandfather was given a cow by another grandfather of a friend of a family.  My father missed paying that friend.  If I give you a cow, Madam Chairperson, your son is obliged to give my son a cow at a later stage if I do not give it in return after they have produced twice.  If you forget under the Customary Law, that thing would go on and be inherited by your grand child.  

So, I would like to suggest, Madam Chairperson, that some sort of a codification of this customary Laws or customary practices should be recorded somewhere and looked at so that a body of them are known so that they can be referred to.

Lastly, Madam Chairperson, I would like also to touch on issues relating to the composition of the Rules Committee - Article 42.  The Chief Justice, Attorney General, Deputy Chief Justice, Principle Judge, two persons from the low society.  I was thinking that rather than having them nominated, I would like the low society to elect those Members to represent them.  I am just wondering whether under (f) is the Director of the Law Development Centre or his or her Representative.  We are going to have Faculties of Laws, except that I think these are the only ones who teach the people who are going in for practice.  What happens if we have another Law Development Centre?  We will have to amend the Law.  

Then the other thing which I am worried about is his representative.  That one worries me, because he can send a junior to this higher level.  We have had a practice here of removing Permanent Secretary or his Representative.  I would like the same to apply.  If it is the Director of the Law Development Centre, let him be the one designated to sit on this Committee and not to send the representative.  This is a very important body.  He is there in person and he sits there in his capacity as the Director of the Law Development Centre and not his representative.  

With those few remarks, Madam Chairperson, I thank you.

MR BUTAGIRA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Let me also add my voice to those who have congratulated you for occupying that important Chair.  

Madam Chairperson, I have few comments to make on this Bill which I support whole heatedly.  Madam Chairperson, I will go straight to those comments on Clause 7, sub-Clause 2, that concerns appeals which have originated from Magistrates Grade I, or Chief Magistrates, and they go all the way to the Supreme Court.  Madam Chairperson, I am welcoming this Provision.  The Law as it is now does not allow third appeals.  If your case originates for instance, in Grade II Magistrate’s Court, and you appeal to the Chief Magistrate, you are dissatisfied and you appeal to the High Court, you cannot from there appeal to the Supreme Court.  This has been a serious loophole which this Bill has addressed.  Now any aggrieved party can go right through to the Highest Court so that he has nobody to blame.  I welcome this provision.  

Madam Chairperson however, I am rather not happy about the rider or the qualification to this right.  It says, you can only go to the Supreme Court only on a matter of Law of great public or general importance.  Madam Chairperson, these are civil matters concerning two parties.  I do not see how any question concerning public at large has to be imported into this.  Surely if you have a case - if you are appealing on a substantial question of Law, you should be allowed to go.  Why now impose this additional qualification that it should only be on a matter of great public or general importance.  I think that rider should be removed so that you can right appeal so long as your question involves a great question of Law or substantial miscarriage of justice.     

Madam Chairperson, I also welcome Clause 19, 2.  The High Court there without limiting its powers to do justice, is given powers in any particular case with regardless of the Law, to intervene in order to meet the ends of justice.  Now, this is a general power I think which is welcome and it will strengthen the powers of the High Court in dispensing justice.  

Now, on Clause 21, this concerns matter of High Courts.  I have two points to make here.  Madam Chairperson, One - I think that there should be a trend towards moving away from having these Judges rotating going up-country to hear cases.  It is very expensive.  Instead they should strengthen the number of Judges up-country.  As of now, there are Judges who are stationed up-country.  For instance one in Jinja, Mbale, Mbarara, Fort-Portal.  I think what should be done is to strengthen their number at those stations so that they are able to handle both civil and criminal cases and they do it expeditiously.  As of now the system of Judges going around as it were, roaming from one station to another and before they finish cases, money is finished.  They come back.  This has resulted in delay of hearing cases.  So, I think the move should be to decentralise these Judges.

I question the wisdom of - it says the High Court shall hold sessions in various places to be designated High Court circuits and that this has to be done in consultation with Chief Justice I do not know why the Chief Justice is involved in this issue.  It is the Principle Judge who is heading the High Court and the Magistrate’s Court.  It should be determined by the Principle Judge rather than the Chief Justice.  

MR KARUHANGA: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, there are two points I wanted hon. Butagira to clarify on.  The last one on the Chief Justice.  In the Constitution, the Chief Justice is the head of the Judiciary.  Surely, Justice should not start roaming around Courts when he is not aware.  This is just in conformity with the powers that we have given to him in the Constitution.  

The other point I wanted to clarify on is this Third Appeal.  In section 7, 2.  It seems to me that it is not proper and I wanted him or the Attorney General to help the House to understand what 7 - 2 really means.  If somebody starts from the Chief Magistrate or Magistrate Grade I, and is going to make appeals, he is entitled to the Third Appeal to the Supreme Court.  Does it mean that he is going to jump Court of Appeal?  In the Constitution, we do not allow - we did not provide for a jump.  In fact I tried to convince the Chairman of the Legal Committee whom I am happy is in the House, and also the whole House in the CA that the person can go straight to the Court of Appeal, to the Supreme Court, and I was defeated.  Now, by introducing this, you are actually making it possible for somebody to say, after going to Magistrate Grade I, then to Chief Magistrate, to High Court, now he is entitled to the Third Appeal.  So, he goes to the Supreme Court.  This, therefore, becomes a conflict with the Constitution.  I have not read the Constitution just now, but that is what I know that we passed.  Therefore, it seems to me that hon. Butagira is congratulating the Attorney General for not doing the right thing.  
MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, it seems to read here that a party agreed, it may lodge a Third Appeal to the Supreme Court own the certificate of the Court of Appeal.  How can the Court of Appeal give a certificate when it has not had - maybe the word, ‘Third’ should be ‘Fourth’.  

MR BUTAGIRA: Madam Chairperson, if hon. Karuhanga had read this Provision correctly, there is definitely an Appeal to the Court of Appeal.  Otherwise, no certificate can be given as hon. Abu Mayanja has rightly said.  So, they do not jump to Supreme Court.  You go to Court of Appeal, but from Court of Appeal you have no automatic right unless you are given a certificate to appeal to the Supreme Court.  

Then hon. Karuhanga said, on the question of contradiction, there is not contradiction on this issue.  It is just administrative and since the Principle Judge heads the High Court, surely you can do this.  There is nothing to do with Constitution.  

But let me go to something of substance.  On Clause 26, what is the wisdom of this new innovation called ‘Proctor on State’?  Someone is petitioning for a nullity of marriage or for divorce, and normally the two parties go to Court, give evidence, and now what is the purpose of involving the Attorney General in matters that are purely of a private nature between those two married couples?  I want to be enlightened about this provision.  

On Clause 27, Madam Chairperson, I am very happy about this Clause.  This concerns determination of leases by the landlord for non-payment of rent by tenants.   Madam Chairperson, in this country this provision has been greatly abused and I am glad because in other jurisdictions - in other countries for instance, Britain where we inherited, they reformed their Laws long time ago. But here, I will give you an example which some people do not know.  If you are holding a lease, or renting a premises say for 27 years and it happened particularly around here in Buganda.  We had mailo owners.  A mailo owner grants you a lease for 99 years.  You build a house on that property.  If you default in paying even one shilling, the law now as it is entitles the land lord to re-enter to come and chase you out and whatever is there, your house and the house, despite the fact that the sub-lease is still subsisting, goes automatically to the land lord and you take nothing.  I was a victim of this myself.  I lost a house on this one, but I am glad justice is being done - at least shave those others that may lose their property on something that has been really out of date.  So, this provision is very welcome.  

But I am suggesting that before re-entrance, the land lord should give a notice of say six months before exercising his right to re-enter so that the tenant may exercise his right as provided here to bring a case to High Court.  But as for now that one is not there.  Which means the man can just straight away re-enter.  Now let there be a notice first before you exercise that right.  

Madam Chairperson, this Law just consolidates or reproduces what is in judicature Act 1967, and as I said, I welcome it and I support it.  

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, I support the Bill.  In doing so, I would like first and foremost to thank DANIDA and the Government of Denmark for the support to the Judiciary in renovating the Court buildings and the residences of Judges.

When NRM came to power, there were no Law Books.  It was really difficult if not impossible to administer Law without Law Books.  But even now we have produced a set of Statutes and subsidiary legislation.  They were not available, but now they are available.  I hope they will be made available not only within the Judiciary, but also within all Law administering agencies and even to the private practitioners of Law.  

Madam Chairperson, whilst welcoming the gesture of the roll of Government of Denmark, and thanking them, may I say that it is also that it is our Government’s duty bound to realise that it is not enough to appoint judges.  But we must provide them with the logistics to enable them to do the work.  First and foremost of the logistics, are law books.  Also the houses in which they practice.  Madam Chairperson, I have found that now this in Kampala at any rate, it is no longer possible; it is almost impossible for the High Court to administer Justice in open Court because there are no Courts.  This Court Building was constructed when the number of Judges were assumed to be about six, that there could only be a maximum of six Courts being simultaneously held.  But now with 25 judges, when it is possible to have say about ten different judges of the High Court sitting and hearing cases, they have now moved to hearing everything in chambers.  But there is I think need for an open Court with its formalities which is now large, and that will only be possible when the Court Buildings have been enlarged.  From what we hear now that the NRM Government has build up the economy and the taxable capacity of the country has improved, and there are sufficient resources, we hope that even Judiciary would be remembered.  

Hon. Butagira talked about Judges being stationed in ruthless judicial towns - Jinja, Mbarara, Fort-Portal, Mbale, Gulu, Arua and so on.  They would be there because now the Judges are enough.  But the physical facilities there may not be sufficient. If you post more than one Judge, for instance in the case of Arua, there is only one building - one Court used by the Chief Magistrate Grade I in charge of the High Court.  If one of these is sitting, the others cannot sit.  So, if you put two Judges in Arua, they could not all sit.  So, there is great need to expand the capacity of the Courts.  I would like to request hon. Members of this House to be interested in this matter so that they can bring about the adequacy or inadequacy of these facilities to the people in Kampala.  

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, in the Arua case, I used to see a situation of sharing general environmental facilities there plus the civil structures.  Whenever a Chief Magistrate was using the Court facilities, a number of times Grade I Magistrate used to use a tree opposite the Arua Post Office; it is a very large tree.  But only to try civil cases.  

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, it would be unseemly for a High Court Judge to sit and administer justice under a tree however, large it may be and irrespective of whether it is situated near to the Post Office or not.  

Madam Chairperson, as you know the Law which we administer in this Country based on English Common Law and the doctrine of the President cannot really be administered in the Courts unless the decisions are reported and so that they can be referred to by the Courts, Practitioners.  

Madam Chairperson, let me talk about the East African Law Reports.  These are no longer coming.  So, there should be Law Reports in order to assist the administration of Justice and it is high time - Madam Chairperson, we are now moving into the age of computerising.  I am told or I was told when I was Attorney General, by the Land Solicit General who knew these things that in some jurisdictions in the United States of America, for instance, nobody brings to Court Law Books.  All that is done is that if a Lawyer quotes a case, the Judge taps it and it is produced on the Computer and is read there and then.  But there is great assistance that could be provided, if the storing of all this information could be put on computers. 

The second point I have talked about is facilities.  I now want to talk about the great need by the Government and all authorities engaged in the administration of justice to be informed and to take it as cardinal principle of belief that they shall maintain the rule of law.  There are a few instances which still leave a great deal to be desired; ten years after the establishment of the NRM Government.  I am keenly aware that there are certain things which we had to close our eyes because of the circumstances of the time.  But Madam Chairperson, it is not acceptable that even up to now certain Laws which are on our Statute Books are still a dead letter.  Madam Chairperson, I am talking about such Laws like the inquests act.  The inquests act, Madam Chairperson, requires certain inquisitions to be carried out when death occurs in certain circumstances.  

For instance, people die sudden violent deaths.  The last inquest that I know of is the one in the Nakulabye incident of 1964.  I do not know if there has been any inquests since then.  Yet people continue to die violently; people continue to die in custody; people continue to die in circumstances which in the interests of transparency require that an inquest should be held by a corona to establish because of death if not the agents of death.  

Secondly, the Police still arrest people in Uganda, and keep them in custody for long periods of time in defiance and violation of the Constitution and other Laws of this Country.  The Police know that under the Constitution now it is unlawful for somebody detained for more than 48 hours without taking him before a Court of Law.  Madam Chairperson unless there is personal liberty all human rights which we have tried to set that tend to be rendered nugatory.

MRS MATEMBE:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I am very aware of the existence of the Constitution and I know it talks about so many things even including equality for women, sharing property, equal treatment and the entire staff.  Likewise, it talks about the 48 hours.  But this is a Constitution made against a background of inadequacy.  As hon. Mayanja certainly knows, he was at one time the Minister of Justice and Attorney General.  I do not even know what he did during his period about this inquiry act and I believe many people were dying.  Now, this is a situation where in the constituencies where we come from, there is no courtroom let alone the personnel enough to charge somebody, or the vehicle to transport people from upcountry to the nearest court where they can be charged.  All these, the inadequacies and inefficiencies in the judicial system because of lack of facilities, render it almost impossible to implement the Law.  I am sure he did find it difficult also during that time and not much has changed as far as I know.  What I want to put clearly here is that, whereas the Constitution is in place, there are so many things and so many structures and so many facilities that would be needed and also domestic Laws that will be needed to bring into implementation of this Constitution.  I believe he does not expect that every Article in that Constitution will certainly operate.  I thank you Madam Chair.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I thank hon. Abu Mayanja for giving way for this information.  Madam Chairperson, on the issues of the inquests I want to inform the House that while I was Attorney General, the Inspector General of Government and I toured the prisons of Uganda, particularly those around Kampala, and were concerned that there certain anomalies which may have required inquests and so as Attorney General I directed the authorities that the appointment of justices of peace who carry out inquests should be revived at once.  I had assumed that this was done, I am sure that hon. Abu Mayanja who succeeded me must have found this circular around.  The fact of the matter is that many of our officials do not act on policy directives given by Ministers and I believe that this is one of those that may have died a natural death.  I wanted to inform the House Madam Chairperson that we have put in the Constitution that no one should be subjected to inhuman degrading, treatment or torture.  Nevertheless, yesterday I was in Chaka, Kabarole leading a Seminar on the Constitution.  One after another, witnesses revealed that when people are arrested they are beaten up by the Police particularly by the Askaris at Gombolola and Saza Headquarters regardless of this Provision in the Constitution.  This practice which has been on from the Colonial period continues even today that when a person is arrested by the Police, he is automatically subjected to beatings even when it is not necessary.  All that the Law allows is to say that if the suspect has used violence or is about to escape, such force should be used as to restrain him.  But once he or she has been restrained, there is no need to beat them or torture them.  Certainly today, that is contradict to the Constitution. Thank you.

MR BITAMAZIRE: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I find it a kind of paradox when certain statements come from certain people.  I would have, for example, respected the case of inquests from somebody who maybe about 30 or 35.  People have been killed in this Country since after independence.  When the present Regime is put to carpet, the NRM has not performed to certain levels in terms of the Law.  Yet I do not personally belief it, for example, if you say inquests have not been used effectively.  Hon. Mayanja who was the Minister!  I have never been the Minister of Justice myself, but is the failure technical or political?  I am saying, there is a failure.  Me, I would rather appeal to the Lawyers, those involved, to handle this. Let us find out, is it technical, or political, is it NRM, it is Obote?  What is it?  Let the learned ones tell us.  There must be something wrong.  Maybe the society.  Here we are.  We make the Law in black and white, but the new people who work in that Ministry try to implement or interpret it.  So, I would rather say, Madam Chairperson that this question of inquest I think be registered and that the Attorney General or Minister for Justice, who is here follows it up, and then let us get the reports about this particular point.  Thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, I think I was the first to congratulate your appointment there.  Now, I hope you will use that Chair since it has now been occupied for the first time by a Lawyer to clarify rules of procedure because these abuses they get on some of us.  If you want to make a contribution, you can wait and make it.  You cannot say that you are making information which will be to clarify something just in two or three sentences.  You go on to argue and the rest of it.  I have been informed.  I do not think I am energy wiser by all that information.  But Madam Chairperson, today there is a burial taking place - and incidentally I did not mean that the killing was political.  I meant that it required a political commitment - making a political commitment to see to it that the Law is being followed.  Maybe I was misunderstood.  I was saying that in my village Lungujja, yesterday a killing took place.  Somebody who is mentally disturbed went for his father -(Interruption)

MR KIDEGA: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification from hon. Abu Mayanja because he made a statement in this House just right now that when they came into power, that he put aside certain because of political reasons.  I am wondering if that condition now of those things which have been put aside now can be tackled, and while they are put aside such things like inquest, might he not have included the very one he is talking about?  I am seeking that clarification, Madam Chairperson.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, I have some fairly serious contribution to make. I will attend to that presently.  I said there had not been inquests that the last inquest I know of was 1964.  From 1964, there was part of time of Obote Government, then Amin Government, the UNLF Government, then Obote II Government, the Tito Government.  I have not said that it is only the NRM Government that has not carried out the inquests and that is why I am worried about it. Now, I am saying that when we have killed the snakes, it is now about time to start killing the rats and the cockroaches.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I think this question of inquests is taking a very long time for us.  But actually what happens is that by Law, if a person dies in a Police Station, there must, bye-law, an inquest.  Now, the only person who could seriously look into such a matter and say it is absent would be the Minister in charge of Justice because he should make sure that justice is done, and that is why he was appointed to the job.  So, I think now hon. Mayanja should address a current Minister of Justice and say, you are really useless for you are not doing this job.  You should now start opening your eyes.  He may talk about what he did when he was there, but he could concentrate on the current one.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, I was talking about a person who was accused.  This was the son of my neighbour Lukonge, and he is a mental case.  Now something small happened within the family and he started beating his father by a piece of firewood.  Then our neighbour moved from across the road to come and separate them.  The boy hit this other man who had come to separate and the man is now in hospital.  So, two Policemen came and fired in the air and then shot and killed him. Some people think that perhaps it would not be possible for two policemen to try to disarm this mad man without killing him. But what is causing concern -and it is -(Interruption)- people can say, hon. Karuhanga may be, if you continue in the pavilion long enough may be you will be the next Attorney General. They are certain things which I have not been able to do when I was Attorney General.  But that does not mean that I am therefore, gagged from ever pointing them out. I am not even accusing anybody, but I was just saying that, -because this is total government policy.  I tried to point out but - I did a lot along this.  There are certain built in resistances. Not in the Cabinet but in other implementing organs of Government. 

For instance, hon. Members know that hon. Kiyonga has made about three speeches warning policemen not to keep arrested people in custody for long periods of time without taking them before the courts, and beating is even worse; and our purpose of mentioning it in this House, is to boost up ministers or the calibre of hon. Kiyonga to trace them; to support them by sending word to our police force to propose that it is not right. That they should keep people in custody, when they arrest them; they know the suspects that they have committed crimes. Then there the procedures, after they have overcome, them, the procedures should now be followed. They should take them before a Magistrate; even a Magistrate Grade III is a Magistrate, or a Magistrate Grade II.  

But to keep a man - there was a man who was arrested according to one newspaper report really because he had not paid somebody’s debt; and some big Minister - I do not know whether that is correct; hon. Members have read it.  The man was kept in custody for nine months without being taken before the courts; and people are arrested and beaten up.  Everybody who is arrested is beaten up, is given Chai. So, some of us have been taken to these prisons and we know. Everyday I pass on the road you find policemen stopping vehicles. They do not stop private cars. They stop lorries and commercial vehicles, and we all know what is happening there.  If we do not mention these things in this House, how will we ever get these matters stopped? 

The process of democratisation does mean in my humble submission, that there is commitment to the rule of law; and that our agencies, people who are armed and paid to administer the law, they do not abuse the powers given to them.  They are exercising fiduciary authority; fiduciary powers on behalf of the whole society.  Sorry, I do not want to go into philosophical matters but there it is. So, I hope that the powers that - especially the Inspector General of Government - will once again take this, that we consider it a very serious blemish on our police force.  That they still arrest people, and keep them in custody for weeks, for months when the law says that they must take them before the courts not later than 48 hours.  

The last point I want to talk about is the provision of prisons space.  Madam Chairman, there is no-it is very difficult to administer justice properly when the prisons accommodation are so inadequate; and I am speaking about this in the House because I know it is very, very difficult for this matter to be redressed otherwise.  When we came up, we found all facilities in this country inadequate; and most others have been redressed, some of them by self-help, schools, dispensaries, hospitals, roads.  But Madam Chairman, as you know, no politician that I know of who has ever called a meeting and said, let us raise funds to go and build a prison. Or let us raise funds and go and expand the prison facilities; and yet these are really necessary facilities within the scheme of the administration of justice; and these are matters which only the Government can deal with.  Madam Chairman, the last extension to our prisons services was carried out in 1958.  Now, according to the Census of 1959, I think the population of Uganda was then 6 million. So, the prison services were built to meet if you think they could meet.  But we can say they were built to meet the needs of a country of 6 million.  The population now is nearly 20 million, the facilities have not been added to; and it is -(Interruption)

MR OGWANG: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Madam chairperson.  I would like to thank hon. Mayanja Abu, for bringing the issue of inadequacy of accommodation in our prisons. I would like to suggest to the House that since we have copied the British system, perhaps he could even go as far as suggesting that we privatise our prisons the way the British are doing. Perhaps that will be the only way which we would run our prisons efficiently.  Thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA: I thank the hon. Member for that information, and I am sure the House has taken it up.  But, I was going to suggest, and this is the matter I was taking up which I had no time to finalize; and I would like to suggest to the hon. Minister-the hon. Attorney General, Minister for Justice that it may be high time we really started thinking of forms of punishment other than incarceration, other than putting people in prison.  In countries, systems of jurisdictions which are much richer than we are, they still find that it is not easy to accommodate all the anti-social forces of society, it is not easy, it is very difficult, it is expensive, you have no space, you have to feed them, you have to provide them with medical services and so on. They have thought about different ways of punishing offenders; and I am suggesting to my honourable and learned successor that he should look into this.

In conclusion, I would like to say -Madam Chairperson, all these matters have not been within the Bill, but they are very pertinent to the administration of justice. I want to speak about one matter that, it is a cardinal principle of our law that no man, and in case a man embraces a woman.  No man or woman should be brought in jeopardy twice, the rule against double jeopardy.  So if we have a law that a person cannot be prosecuted again for a matter if he has been prosecuted on an earlier occasion before a court of competent jurisdiction which could have convicted him on the same facts.  Now, I will find that these appeals against acquittal, I am told they are in the existing Judicial Act.  If they are, they are still offensive in my opinion; and I would like the Minister to justify them.  If a person has been acquitted by a competent court, then that particular person, should enjoy the benefits of that acquittal.  The DPP can appeal.  But he can only appeal for purposes of establishing the law.  He can appeal to a higher court, and the higher court can say, yes you are right it was wrong to acquit this man.  It was unlawful. But this should not go to say that this man who was acquitted should now be put in prison or be fined. Because it is double jeopardy.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. While appreciating the point which is very pertinent to the Bill made by hon. Abu Mayanja, I would like to inform him as to the circumstances why this provision was put in the law in the judicature Act previously. When the NRM Government came into power, the administration of justice was at its lowest ebb; and there was a great deal of unrest in the country that many people who were pertinently guilty, were being acquitted on some flimsy excuses on some technical grounds, and sometimes through corruption. Consequently, the law became increasingly in- disrepute, and members of the public begun to take the law into their own hands because they thought the people who were obviously guilty, were being acquitted.  Consequently Government brought in a law to say that, in an obvious case where the acquittal was contrary to the evidence presented, where it was adverse to the witnesses, then it should be open to the prosecutor to appeal against such unfair trial and, therefore, get a conviction if necessary. 

It is true that in other countries like the United Kingdom the same right applies, the crown can appeal against what they regard as an adverse verdict, but as hon. Abu Mayanja has rightly said, the consequence is simply to reverse the judgement without jeopardising the right of the accused.  We may consider that, but I think the decision to say that the prosecutor can appeal against miscarriage of justice.  Because we should always remember that even acquitting someone who is obviously guilty, is also a miscarriage of justice.  It is not always a miscarriage simply because you have convicted, it can also be a miscarriage if someone goes unpunished when he is obviously guilty.  So, we may consider saying that may be nothing should happen to the defendant but certainly the right of the prosecutor to appeal against an adverse verdict, and establish the rule of law, should not be jeopardized by other sentiment.  I thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, I am grateful to the hon. Member.  Hon. George Kanyeihamba is a man of great Learning.  These bad situations cannot be allowed to affect the principles of law.  If there are situations - and I know there was a case when I Attorney General and somebody were really acquitted in circumstances which were absolutely appalling.  Now, in those circumstances what you do, you do not change the law, but you can dismiss the Magistrate or otherwise discipline the Magistrate or the Judge, or if it has been the prosecutor, or the police, you take disciplinary action against all these perpetuators but you do not change the principles of the law. 

MR ONGOLA ATWAI: Point of information. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson for giving me this opportunity to inform hon. Abu Mayanja. I remember he was talking about lack of political commitment and also lack of disciplinary measures.  He will recall that in 1990, 10th December, an accident of the nature he is talking about took place in our University Makerere, and you and me were appointed on that judicial commission of inquiry; and we did our best within the specified period under the able guidance of Prof. George Kanyeihamba who was the Attorney General and Minister for Justice.  We produced our report and, there was Government White Paper to that report.  But because of this miscarriage of justice and because of the people who may broke actions from taking place, up to now, I have not heard what has come out concerning the report, what come out of the Government White Paper; and yet from time to time there was even -our report was produced to all the hon. Members; and Government White Paper with its suggestions and recommendations also circulated to Members. So, I think we need now to find who is sitting on such a thing because the public is waiting to hear.  Thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, that red force, the well known adage that the price of liberty is eternal vigilance; and that is why we the veterans continue to mention these things here.  We need to be always vigilant, and hon. Members should ask, everybody should ask why certain things have not been done.  So, I welcome this Bill. This Government, I have no doubt myself that there is total political commitment to establishing a just and decent society in this country; I have no doubt about that. Whatever other may people say.  But there are - it is sometimes very difficult to move as Diseleo** found. One day he wrote in one of his novels, he said, it is a difficult country to move; and you find-there was an incident which involved my wife when I was Attorney General.  My wife had her handbag snatched from her, and the man who snatched it was arrested then and there, and he was then taken before the car park police post and did not take him to the Central Police Station.  Now, up to now, we have not recovered the handbag, and no prosecution has taken place, and I was Attorney General. (Laughter)  

So, there are certain things where you can just push against the wall, push against the wall, and they are difficult enough, then you give up and say, let us lose the handbag and not create a lot of trouble.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am grateful for listening to this afternoon’s eminent lecture by Senior Parliamentarian and advocate.  I just wanted to assure him that actually yes, I agree with him this Government seems to have made a serious commitment towards the rule of law; and what he was fearing about the double jeopardy has already been taken care of in our constitution in Article 28, (9) and (10). If he does not mind, I could remind him because he was with us. A person who shows that he or she has been tried by a competent court for criminal offence and convicted or acquitted of that offence shall not again be tried for the offence, or for any other criminal offence of which he or she could have been convicted at the trial of that offence etc. It just goes on and 10 also emphasizes the point.  So it is just one of the points.  

What I thought he would point out for us in his wonderful lecture this afternoon, was the absence in the judicature Act in this statute, the absence of the participation of the people in the administration of justice which has been ordered by this constitution and which is now absent in this; and if we pass this law now, without addressing this participation of the people in the administration of justice, and we have been ordered by the constitution to do so, I wonder when are we going to do it, and which other law is there to do that.

 The other one is addressing us on the Field Court Marshals. They have also been directed in the constitution; and I think that, these are areas where this statute should have also addressed.  But I would like to know what our Learned Brother and Senior Council would like to advise us.

MR ABU MAYANJA: I am grateful to hon. Karuhanga. I think this judicature Act is not dealing with the judiciary below the High Court. Except only as a matter of appeal.  It is not dealing with Chief Magistrates, Magistrates Grade I, Grade II what, and in LC III. That is what I thought, and I think that may be the hon. Minister will bring in a statute if he wants to amend the system of the administration of justice below the High Court.  I am grateful nevertheless, the hon. Member for Nyabushozi, for bringing out this matter; and I would like to appeal to the Right Honourable Attorney General to seriously consider whether the provisions of certain Clauses are in full consonance with that provision of the constitution.  If they are not, then something should be done to bring the two in consonance. I know that it was behind my back; it is something which should be there, and which is good.  There are very good reasons for making such a provision.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you very much for your patience, and with those regards, I support the Bill.


THE CHAIRMAN: With that, we have come to the end of today’s session.  We adjourn until Tuesday next week. 

(The Council rose at 4.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 April 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)

