
Tuesday, 20th April, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The Council was called to order).


BILLS

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I am sorry to inform you that we do not form a quorum, I therefore adjourn for 15 minutes.

(The quorum formed).

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE


THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

Rule 24

THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, I propose that for ease of reference, re renumber all these numbers from 22, which becomes 24 up to the end, so that when I make reference to a Rule, it could cause less confusion.  Now the original Rule 22 becomes Rule 24 and you continue numbering until the end.  Rule 22 which is now 24, which is on page 32, we delete - I propose to delete and the following words in sub-Rule 3 and accounting agents.

It had been originally anticipated that these agents who are agents of candidates that they should take part in the counting of the votes.  Later it was realised that this will cause more confusion.  They should not take part in the counting but they should stay there as observers and that is why we propose to delete them.  

Sir, again on 22, which is now 24, page 33, originally 22 now 24, we are proposing Sir, to incorporate a new sub-Rule 2 to read as follows:  No votes shall stay overnight uncounted and where required the presiding officer shall provide lantern for the purposes of counting votes.

Providing, Sir, a safeguard against possible float and manipulation where the county there was for example, a disturbance then they delay in starting and at the close, we are compelled to keep the vote overnight.  This is the situation we are trying to avoid.  We shall provide lights, lamps to duly counting with the assistance of some lights so that no votes will stay uncounted overnight in order to avoid any possible interference by wrongdoers.

Then Sir, I propose that we re-number from sub-Rule 2, which becomes Sub-Rule 3, 4 and 5.  

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I am requesting the Minister to make some clarification where the voting is not over within one day, what happens to the votes?  Do they count those who have voted and then wait for the following day for those who have not yet voted so that they are accounted separately because this Clause shows that whatever has been voted should be counted within that very day.  I want some light over that.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member should have read Rule 23 which was original Rule 21 which deals with adjournment of polling in cases of some problems.  This particular Rule we are now looking at, is providing where there has been some delay but the voting has been completed, it is the counting now we are catering for.  So there are two differences.  The earlier Rule provides if it is not possible to finish voting then there is provision for adjournment to another day or to another time and he will not fire the Returning Officer and the necessary arrangements could be made by the Presiding Officer.

In Rule 24, we are dealing with the situation where voting has taken a place and completed but counting runs beyond the hours of the day and we are saying we should not allow a situation where the votes will be locked up somewhere and giving the chance to some wrong doers to interfere with them.  Thank you.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Seeking further clarification from the Minister on when we last adjourn, we had a problem of when we would stop voting and that one, Mr. Chairman, does not seem to have been resolved yet.  Now, we have moved to counting the votes some of which will not have voted for.  I am wondering whether the Minister can elaborate whether he resolved between himself and the officials as to when the voting stops, especially in light of when there is violence as it was provided in Clause 21.  Because it looked to some of us that there was going to be a problem, we are going to penalise those who are peaceful but the line for voting is too long and then it get stops at 5.00 p.m. because that also we did not resolve.  Can the Minister tell us exactly the duration of voting itself before we come to the counting itself the votes?

MR. NJUBA:  I do not see the problem the Member is referring to.  If he had cared to read the Rule 22, the originally which is Rule 20, it provides and marginally not the earlier Clause of polling station.  And in Rule 22, which is now Rule 23, provides for adjournment of polls in case of disturbance or any other event.  Now, if you read these two Rules show clearly what happens as I said, the present Rule 23 is dealing with an adjournment.  What do you if there has been an adjournment, there has been a riot, how shall we handle it and I think it is self-contained.  What we do, we go back to Rule 24 originally Rule 22 which deals with counting.  We have finished the voting.  Rule 21 originally, now Rule 23 provides power for the presiding officer to adjourn, to put off the elections and the provisions are very clear on it.  Rule 24, which is originally Rule 22, deals with counting of votes where time has run into darkness.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, if the Minister looks at the former Clause 15 sub-section 3 in the original Bill, at that we were supposed to close at 5.00 p.m.  Now in the Rules before the - in Rule 21 which he has now changed, during the course of the debate, he told us 6.00 p.m.  Now, I wanted to -(Interjection)- that one before the - when the voting stopped because of riot.  He said, you could be allowed to continue or it is broken off.  So, what I really wanted to know was what is the time that the voting is stopped?  Because those who are peaceful will end voting at 5.00 p.m. even if there are still voters. (Interjection)- Yes; according to Rule 15 sub-Rule 3, yet the provision in former Rule 21, there is an area which the Minister needs to clarify.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, these rules were not made out of the air were based on calculation of people who were likely to attend a polling station.  Rule 15 provides that all things being equal we shall stop at 5.00 O’clock.  Rule 21 which is now Rule 23 provides for eventuality where there is disruption by riot or some other interference or some other delay and if the Member had cared, he will say that in that case we deleted the limitation in order to accommodate if we adjourn to the same day when we will not be restricted by time.  We can adjourn to another day or to another time but if we go back on the same day, then we will not be bound by 5.00 O’clock to accommodate - you have, for example, if they have done - the majority of voters have come and when there is riot, you put it off but it is being contained then you are allowed to continue and finish if in the opinion of the Returning Officer it is possible.  If it is not possible, then he goes or he adjourns for another appropriate day and advise the necessary authorities.  In other words, Rule 15 is handling the normal day while Rule 21 or 23 now deals where it is necessary to adjourn for a long period.

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, the Minister has not assisted this House because when we last adjourned this was a matter of contention, after a riot has taken place and you are asking people to vote at night, that was our concern.  So there must be even after adjournment and people have - there is need to continue and the voting has not ended then either we adjourn on another day but we cannot see a situation where a riot has taken place, the tempers are high and you are saying they should continue voting after 5.00 p.m.   I thought this was a matter, which the Minister had gone to consult and inform this House, but the position is still as it was when he informed this House.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the Member that this Section 20 or what is not 22 does not deal with riot alone.  It deals with several factors that can interfere in the voting, for example, okay, riot.  If you read Rule 21(i) in the event of any polling at a polling station being interrupted by a riot, violence or any other event while there remains in the voters’ register, voters who have not completed the polling process.  The presiding officer shall adjourn the polling to the next day or to any other time of the same day.  Now it will be unwise for a man after a big riot to adjourn the same day.  He is to get discretion if for example it has been the rain that has interfered and it has stopped.  Now here we are providing that if he could resume the voting but if there is a riot or something like that, the interference, which is greater than what can be contained on that day, then you adjourn to another day.  That is all.  That is why we said, if for example, it was the rain, it would be unwise to say the rain has stopped at 4.00 O’clock, let us vote at 5.00 O’clock.  So we are removing the restriction on that day where it is possible to resume the polling.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, the hon. Minister is not hoping this House because he has not told us precisely what would happen if you had many voters and everything is normal that the voters are very many and 5.00 O’clock they have not all voted.  What happens?  The Minister has not told us that one because that one is a normal thing that can happen.  It is not abnormal.  Can the Minister explain that one?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  What we thought the Minister was going to do when he comes back was to look at Rule 16(3) and change 5.00 O’clock to 6.00 O’clock and then all these other matters would fall in place.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, we passed 15 but if the hon. Member had cared to look, under these Rules, we have even provided that if an electoral area is too big or the parish is too big, it can be sub-divided and it has been worked out in such a way that by 5.00 O’clock all voters will have finished voting, those who want to vote.

(Rule 24 sub-Rule 2 as amended agreed to).

(Rule 25 put and agreed to).

Rule 26

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I propose my Amendment from Rule 26 sub-Clause 2 to the effect that within three months, I think facts will be readily available.  There is no need to delay the disposal of the petition lodged by the complaint.  The fact will be known.  There is no need to wait for that time and should be rapidly enforced. 

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I send the proposal moved by hon. Obwangor.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Rule 26 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Rule 27 agreed to).

Rule 28

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, now that all this 26 is changed, I beg to move that the deletion of the three months, there is, so that the rapid disposal of the legal aspect of the complaint, it can be done in order to make sure that those who come to the Constituent Assembly rapidly be elected or getting to the Constituent Assembly.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am seconding hon. Obwangor. You find that under Section 8, the Constituent Assembly must vote for the Bill within four months as provided.  So, if the petition is not handled expeditiously to be within say, six weeks or a month, it will not be just but rather just delayed.  I therefore beg to second the Mover.  Thank you, Sir.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, knowing how the Courts move and knowing the amount of work involved and how lawyers move, probably three months is what you can prescribe as the maximum period.  But if you prescribe one month, then you are saying that if one month has passed the case is dropped.  So, it is counter productive to the intention of the hon. Members, I can appreciate his interest, because we have history in this House of election especially, in the case of Kitariko versus Attorney General where when he challenged the elections in 1980 up to 1985 when the next elections were taking place, Justice Oteng was still about to entertain his case in the second term of Parliament and I think this is the reason why they have put a maximum period of three months.  If you say within one month and the month has passed before judgement, what do you do with your case?  It is dropped.  So, you are trying to make a mistake and I am asking the hon. Mover to leave this one in.

MR. OBWANGOR:  You see, we are now in a progressive legal country like Uganda -(Laughter)- our laws are so good, wall we want the Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs is just to get organised through the law of courts and disposal of the pledge can be done within 14 days, what is really there - the facts are already known.  Those who are lawyers can approve -(Inaudible)- with men and women of practical affairs.  There is no use waiting for three months, 90 days!  The facts are already known, and so this House’s wisdom is to face the brains to get in the Constituent Assembly, should support me to get them as soon as possible within a fortnight.  There is no use, why wait?  What is there? (Laughter).

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I support the proposal of hon. Obwangor but in a different way.  I think it is conceived that the Constituent Assembly will be deliberating and completing its work within four months and if it is so desired the Ministry may extend that period, but we hope that within a period of six months, the Constituent Assembly would have completed its deliberation, that means that as you all understand, the Constituent Assembly is not an ordinary Parliament which is going to be there for four, five, six years, it is a very short special type of House and therefore, everything that is going to be petitioned should be handled very expeditiously.  So, if you look at the powers given to the Government in Section 30 of the Constituent Assembly Bill, which we are proposing, and also Section 32 that is, the power to make rules and regulations and also the power of the Attorney General to - that the Attorney General may make court rules regulating the procedure for the determination of any application and then (b).  

So, if you look at these substantive provisions, 30 and 32 and then the on regulations 26 which I think is now the new regulation 28, the Mover of the Bill is talking of court of competent jurisdiction.  If I see this, it means that it is ordinary courts which will handle the petitions which are going to be filled, and my view is that if we give these petitions to the ordinary courts, it is going to take a very long time as my Learned Friend hon. Karuhanga has already said and our experience in this country shows how this type of court can be abused and take a very long time, but the time the Constituent Assembly has finished deliberation the case might still be going on.  It is with this Bill pointing in my mind, that I would ask this House together with the previous Mover if they can look at my broader Amendment which will encompass the proposal of hon. Obwangor that we should be thinking of a special court and that if the Minister can appoint this special court with the regulations that we are going to make, this court will specifically empowered not to handle ordinary cases of theft of traffic of what, but they will be told that you must handle elections petitions and complete it within the shortest possible time, and if this Amendment which I have already filed about a month ago is accepted, then that of hon. Obwangor will be definitely contained within.  So, I beg to make the proposal.

MR. ABU BAKER MAYANJA:  Mr. Chairman, at page 4, court of competent jurisdiction means a Chief Magistrates Court or a Court presided over by a Magistrate Grade 1, that means that there will be a very many courts to handle these election petitions, and this is deliberate.  Two sub-Rule 2 says, every petition filed under sub-Rule 1 shall be determined by the court expeditiously, that is directly, and in any case not later than three months from the date of the petition is filed.  Now, three months is the maximum period, if a court goes beyond three months, it would be acting illegally, considering that we have got very many courts, hearing these petitions.  I do not see any problems anticipated by my hon. Friend hon. Cuthbert. J. Obwangor.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I accordingly wish to reject the proposed Amendment and keep three months.

(Question put and negatived).

(Rule 28 agreed to).

(Rule 29 agreed to).

(Rule 30 agreed to).

(Rule 31 agreed to).

(Rule 32 agreed to).

Rule 33

MR. NJUBA:  Rule 33, which was previously Rule 31, I beg to move that we insert sub-Rule 1 between 31.  There we begin with the Rule and any from 36, where there is the old Rule 31, we put there sub-Rule 1, in other words, the present provisions in sub-Rule 11, to read as follows:  ‘a person who registers as a Voter more than once or in more than one electoral area commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment not exceeding Shs. 100,000/= or both.  That is sub-Rule 11 and then we add 3, ‘every election officer shall execute the functions entrusted to such an officer under these rules; efficiently and diligently and with impartiality’.  And four, sub-Rule 4, ‘any electoral officer who (a) neglects the duties entrusted to that electoral officer under these rules or by willful acts, omissions for negligent delays the commencement of voting on a polling day or by any willful or negligent act or omissions disrupts the voting process or does or omits to do any acts or conspires with another person to do or omits to do anything which such a person is by these rules is required to do with the intention or according to an advantage or disadvantage to any candidate commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to term of imprisonment not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding Shs. 300,000/= or both’.  Mr. Chairman, these are the provisions that I have intended to tie up reckless or negligent officials at the elections.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I fully support the proposed Amendment which introduces additional offenses, but for purposes of consistence, I would have asked my Colleague that instead of prescribing the penalty in the additional sub-Sections, he leaves that to be picked up at Rule 36, like if picks up all the others, in other words, you do not say that penalty and then we come to 36 it says, if you have not said so, automatically it is three years or Shs. 300,000/= so that it is neater and consistent, but it is really up to him, I just wanted to make a proposal.  Thank you.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Can you repeat your Amendment?

MR. WAPAKABULO:  The Minister just read out by re-numbering one, I mean 33, by introducing one and then adding three others, it would appear that on that occasion in respect of two sub-Section or sub-Rules, where he is prescribing punishment, he goes ahead and adds that the punishment will be three years, not more than three years and says, Shs. 300,000/=.  But if you look at the present provision, it only ends with the commission of the offence and then you go to the proposed, we shall come to 36 which says, where no penalty is prescribed for an offense under these Rules, a person convicted of such an offense shall be liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding three years or to a fine not exceeding Shs. 300,000/= or both.  And I am saying that instead of stating these in the new sub-section, he should leave it so that it is picked up by 36.  Thank you.

MR. NJUBA:  I concede, Sir, it is much smarter presentation.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I will also ask the Minister to drop Rule 31(iii) as proposed by him which says that every electoral officer shall execute his duties efficiently and bla, bla… yes, 33(i).  You see this Section 33 as amended; it is for offenses by registration officers.  So, this 33 is not an offense, it is mixed up, and it is irrelevant there.

MR. NJUBA:  I am not persuaded, but okay, we shall delete that one.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Rules 33 as amended agreed to).

(Rules 34 agreed to).

Rule 35

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like the Minister to clarify on Rule 35 in the sense that what would happen if newspapers would literally campaign for other people or try to tarnish somebody’s name?  (Interjection)- no, to clarify because it is something which should be included in the Bill, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, that is not part of an Amendment or indeed part of this law, but if a newspaper campaigns on behalf of an individual, several individuals and thereby breaches the law, then the law will take its course.

(Rule 35 agreed to).

(Rule 36 agreed to).

Form RV

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I received representation from the Minister for Women in Development that on this form, we omitted the sex and the signature of the voter, so I propose that after age, we insert ‘sex: male or female’.  I am persuaded because they want to keep their statistics -(Interjection)- among other things.  On Form RV, we are on after age we put sex male or female, this is for statistical records and you must remember that we are trying to promote ladies, our women and interest them in this exercise.  On the first line, it is name, next is age, then you move forward a bit and put sex.  I think it is only fair for our records, if we are going to be consistent with what we preach that we keep our statistics correct.  At the end of the form, before you get the registration officer, above it immediately there should be a space for signature of the voter or his thumb mark to avoid any forgeries.

DR. LATIGO:  Mr. Chairman, thank you.  It is feared when you say sex, but as a teacher, I think those details are necessary, I could for example have, B. Okello, what is B standing for?  Bernard or Betty?  But we can then come down and say male of female so that we can then think this is Betty or something like that.  So, I think adding the sex there, it is also appropriate, it is okay.  I also support that.  

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I think we should not go into expense of a stupid sentimentality and emotions because, our laws of elections refer usually to a citizen and a voter.  Now, a voter is a voter whether a female or a male, but in our law defined and constitutionally so by Article 20 of the Constitution a person is anybody in Uganda and including - I think this august House should be the best of intellectuality, it should not succumb to this thing as to be sectarian to my way of looking at it politically.  Because it is wisdom to say that a person, I think we should not split the hair, I think the Mover should listen to me although he is speaking to the Minister of Finance. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I am not funny about it because the House is a cross-fertilisation of this wisdom.  We should not be as we were, young people who are not intellectuality for the common good and the sole of the nation as a Parliament, making good laws not just thinking that somebody happens to be a female or a male.  We are here legislating a law for the nation not for individuals.  So, in this respect, we should compute in my view, people who will be carrying out the elections, the time and the papers and what not but, although the hon. Mover is keen to listen to the Minister of Finance, I am submitting to this House, is to stop more costs in printing, Mr. Chairman.  So, on this I oppose it.

THE MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I come on a point of clarification to really show why it is important for us to how which sex is participating in whatever exercise.  One of the reasons why our policies and the planning sources is not targeting the right people to do the right job because our date has not been desegregated in forms of gender.  In other words, you find that when you go down to agriculture, to know who is actually weeding the field and you do not take the women and what time they do it, then, you are likely to end up with a project which actually are meant to target these women, but the exercise is done at the wrong time.  I think democracy is participation by all.  Everybody must be given equal opportunities but how are we going to know whether women, as women, have actually registered for this exercise?  If women do not register for this exercise, then as a matter of democracy we should go out to find out why they have not registered for this exercise, we should actually know whether they have actually voted and in this way, we shall be mobilising the whole population at the same time for the same purpose.  Thank you.

REV. YEKO:  Mr. Chairman, we are now in the saddle.  We have understood all along where women would like to be represented.  We have gone ahead and rectified, I do not know why at this point when we are now finishing, that women should begin to want even simple areas to be included.  Kiboga as a district has no male representative. Two women are representing it and men have never complained.  So, I think it is just normal that we take it as any person.  We only take it that any person, any citizen is enough.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  I would like to support the Amendment by the Minister and actually challenge on intellectual ground the position taken by Mzee Obwangor.  The hon. Member referred to the proposal as a mere - in fact, stupid mentalities, overlooking the struggle against ignorance by this Schedule, that in fact this Form is seeking for information which may be very useful to fight against ignorance that bedevils us, that in fact when you already have a name, you are not hiding any person anymore anyway, but you want to facilitate the easy collection of information about this voter so that you have also a female, I mean male or female.  The information can feed in a computer very easily because ultimately, if you were to establish how many of your voters are men, how many of your voters are women, if you have no input, the computer will not give you any information.  So, Mzee Obwangor should withdraw his statement of stupid mentalities.  This is hard science, hard information, collection which is very useful for every purpose.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The question that Form RV be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Form RV as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Form RV as amended agreed to).


Form CR.

(Form CR agreed to).

(Form BQ agreed to).

(Form NP agreed to).

(Form BP agreed to).

(Form BR agreed to).

The Title

(The Title agreed to).

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The Council Resumed).


REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to move a Motion for Recommittal of Clause 18(4) and 18(5) of the Constituent Assembly Bill whose Clauses we have just passed in the Committee Stage.

I beg to invoke Rule 65 of the Interim Rules of Procedures of the NRC to move the following Motion; ‘that the Amendment under Clause 18(4) and 18(5) of the Constituent Assembly Bill, 1992 be recommitted for the following reasons’.  Mr. Chairman, the Amendment gives the President unlimited powers to cause a referendum on any issue at any time before, during or after the deliberations of the Constituent Assembly and if he so wishes in complete disregard of the decision of the Constituent Assembly.  The Amendment should be rejected because it renders the Constituent Assembly absolutely irrelevant by empowering the President to do the work meant to be done by the Constituent Assembly thereby transforming the President in some type of the Constituent Assembly.  The Amendment is against the principle and the object of the Bill because in Clause 4(1) states that the Constituent Assembly shall deal with all matters of the new Constitution.  This Amendment adds in another body and that body is the President to decide on the new Constitution and give him powers to deal with matters outside the Bill.  That is, any issue could be an issue outside this Bill.  The Amendment gives the President more powers than the powers of a Constituent Assembly because while the Constituent Assembly can cause a referendum on contentious issues only as provided in 8(1), the President can cause a referendum on any issue at any time even if that issue is not of national character.  The President can anul, disregard, reject or even veto unanimous decisions of the Constituent Assembly.  Mr. Chairman, -(Interjection)- I am still moving my Motion, can I finish?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Point of order from the Attorney General.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE/ THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. A.K. Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I am moving that under Rule 65 if any Member desires to delete or to amend any provision contained in a Bill as reported from the Committee, this Bill has not been reported, therefore, is it in order for the hon. Member for Igara to move this Amendment? 

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is not in order, but let him go on.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The amendment represents a willful disregard of the role of an elected Constituent Assembly and provides a legal platform for defiance of its decisions, Mr. Chairman, the Amendment legalises his decisions that may be based on the President’s whims, personal biases and prejudices.  It represents a sophisticated intimidation of the peoples representatives.  

The Amendment should be rejected and deleted so that the Constituent Assembly remains the only body which can decide on all aspects of a new Constitution including the referendum without the influence or interference by the President or by the Government.  If there is need for a referendum, there are adequate provisions in Clause 18(1), Clause 18(2) and Clause 18(3) for the Constituent Assembly to cause a referendum on all matters that cannot be resolved conclusively during the deliberations of the Constituent Assembly I would have liked to give powers to the NRC to advise the President to call a referendum but as you know, the NRC which includes the President and the Cabinet is already discredited and we have to go back for fresh mandate -(Interjection)- Mr. Chairman, the Amendment gives the President -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Point of order from hon. Rutaro.

MR RUTARO:  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Dr. Adoniya Tiberondwa who says that he has been discredited as a member of NRC here to continue to sit in this House and keep the Members busy in view of that fact that he is actually discredited, is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is not in order but let him continue. (Laughter)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, with respect to the tested combatant hon. Tiberondwa, under Rule 38 a Member is not supposed to read his speech but to refer to the notes.  Is it in order for the tested veteran politician to defy Rule 38 by reading his speech in total?

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order, but let him proceed -(Interruption)- order, order please, hon. Tiberondwa please.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  I want to thank you for allowing me to continue because I am not actually making a speech, I am reading the Motion.  Mr. Chairman, at a professional level -(Interjection)- no.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, it is disturbing to know that the hon. Member from Bushenyi -(Interjection)- from Bushenyi District, Igara County, thinks that this House is discredited, and I want to know from him how much he has contributed towards that discreditation. (Laughter)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I thank the hon. Member for that point of clarification and I would like to inform him very sincerely that, I have contributed to this House by pointing out some of the problems in which this country may fall if we do not take care.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give the hon. Member some information.  The Member holding the Floor, that the ability of this House has been put in disrepute and you know it that the reason given as to why we could not debate the Constituent Assembly Bill -(Interruption)- yes, this was said and it is known that you have no mandate to do so.  If you do not know it, you better know it now. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I am just about to complete.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Babu please.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that the reasons up to now that have been given fir this House to effect the Constitution had been because of the way it is constituted.  Secondly, the people who have destroyed the reputation of this House include now the very speaker on the Floor having agreed with us in this very house, walked outside this House and denied what we have passed in this House. It is people like hon. Tiberondwa who give this House such a bad reputation because we come here and discuss, the majority take the day and hon. Tiberondwa says, that is not democracy.  It is with that, that people like hon. Tiberondwa should not only withdraw and apologize to this House and to the people of this country for making a fool of all of us.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. (Laughter)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I would like to ask you to protect me so that I can complete my message.  The amendment gives an impression of having been drafted in a manner that suggests desperation, recklessness and short sightedness.  So how can a delegate in a Constituent Assembly deliberate confidently on any matter when he knows that there is a Bill passing working over him, already can do work if that work does not fall in line with the wishes of that.  You will recall that this Amendment was distributed at about 4.00 p.m. and was passed at 6 minutes past 4.00 in this very House. If the Amendment shall have to stand, it can provoke resentment and consequential instability.  I, therefore, move that Clause 18(4) and 18(5) be deleted so that Clause 18 remains as it was in the original Bill as 18(1), 18(2) and 18(3).  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Bill be recommitted.

(Question put and agreed to).

REPORT STAGE

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S.Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has carefully considered the Bill entitled Constituent Assembly Bill 1993 and passed it with several Amendments.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I am moving on the point of order with difficulty because we have not in the Committee Stage discussed the memorandum of this Bill nor did we pass the memorandum of this Bill.  May I, therefore, move under Rule 64 and 65 that we did not vote on the memorandum?  I think it was a mistake from the Clerk.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You mean the Title or the memorandum?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Neither the Memorandum nor the Preamble.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With due respect to the hon. Member now holding the Floor, the memorandum, is never part of the Bill.  It is only the Title and the long Title that are passed but not a memorandum, Sir.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, that this is coming from the former Attorney General who consistently introduced a memorandum on each Bill that is brought in this House including this one and to say that this memorandum which has been intention of the Bill is not part of the Bill to me, is a source of surprise and I do not think the practice we have had in the passed in this should be avoided now for an important Bill like this one.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I find it very difficult but I also like the former Attorney General did, I must add to his voice and I am surprised that hon. Karuhanga, one of our most experienced on procedures here should in fact have brought up this point.  The point, is this, that what we pas here is what stands part of the Bill which will become the Act.  The Memorandum is only to give reasons and objects for purposes of assisting discussion.  At the end of the day, we do not make it stand part of the Bill.  It does not become part of discussion.  What becomes part of discussion is the long Title.  In this case, the long Title plus the entire Preamble because that gives the confines within which we can interpret the statute for those who will come many years after us.  In fact, to go beyond that in interpreting this Statute, courts do not even take into account the Memorandum.

HON. MEMBERS:  What about Preamble?

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Even the Preamble they do not, unless we have specifically said so in the Act itself that in interpreting this Statute, courts are bound to take into account the pronouncements made in the Preamble and in the memorandum.  The Memorandum, therefore, is only to guide the House here during discussion.  The Preamble is of similar importance although it stands part of the Bill but at the end of the day, the interpretation of this Statute will be in accordance with rules of common law of interpreting the Statutes as well as the Interpretation Act which if the hon. Member read would specifically tell him what is to be taken into account for interpreting this Statute and for that reason, the Memorandum is not part of it.  What we do is, we go through the Clauses first, then we go to the Schedules, and then we come back to the Title that we did.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has carefully considered a Bill entitled Constituent Assembly Bill 1993 and passed it with several amendments.  I beg to move.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT

MR. S. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Constituent Assembly Bill, 1993 be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Bill read a Third Time and passed).


The Title

(Title settled and Bill passed).

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that a Bill entitled the Bank of Uganda Bill 1993 be read a Second Time.  I am confident that hon. Members have read this Bill and I shall now highlight the major objectives of this Bill.  I would like to say it at the outset Sir, that hon. Members can do well particularly on Clause 5 and 6 of the Bill, Clause 8 to 11, Clause 15, Clause 18 to 19, Clause 28, Clauses 30 to 32 and more particularly Clauses 33, 34 and 36 and then to take notice that I intend to move an Amendment to Clause 33(3), Clause 49(2), Clause 49(3) and Clause 53.  I will therefore, Sir, request hon. Members when they stand up to argue in this Bill to discuss it, they should discuss it even before the Committee Stage in terms of the Amendments which I have just already circulated.  You will recall that in my budget speech, I highlighted weaknesses in the Uganda’s financial system and promised that at the beginning of this fiscal year, we are seriously going to deal with them.  The principle weaknesses include the following: lack of monetary debts in the financial system, weaknesses in the authority in the technical capacity of the Bank of Uganda to effectively design, implement and enforce monthly policy, weaknesses in its banking supervisory powers and other policies directed at financial institutions.  

Then there is financial intermediation and inefficiencies in credit allocation, potential financial system instability created by the insolvent problems in some banks and lastly on this, the lack of a variety of financial instruments and markets that could respond quickly and efficiently to the change in need of a growing economy. The Government recognises that major weaknesses are not addressed. They will continue to increase progress in the economy and constrain the response to the economic agents to incentives already provided.  For that reason, the Bank of Uganda Bill and Financial Institutions Bills could be debated like that by this hon. House, and to provide a legal framework for implementing forms in financial sector.  Sir, there are a number of features of the existing framework which weaken the authority of the Bank.  For example, the division of responsibility between the bank and the Ministry of finance and Economic Planning for the formulation and implementation monetary policy and foreign exchange management.  It is not adequately defined.  Again, the bank has no autonomy over matters of internal administration. For example, the appointments of departmental heads to be approved by the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning.  Sir, its own capital structure is still inadequate.  

For this reason, we have decided as a government to bring to this House this Bill.  The objectives are the following: the fundamental objectives of this Bill is to ensure that primary responsibility for the formulation and implementation of the monetary policy rests with the Bank of Uganda and that the Bank of Uganda has adequate powers and technical capacity to fulfill its regulatory and supervisory functions in relation to banks and other financial institutions.  

The Bill, therefore, seeks to achieve the following; first, classify and strengthen the Bank of Uganda’s role.  Second, to specify clear legal limit on Bank of Uganda lending to government particularly by ways and means, third, ensure that the Bank of Uganda controls over its friendly banks to bank, fourth, specify minimum foreign exchange reserve requirements and provide the Bank of Uganda with power for the investment of foreign exchange reserve, fifth, to give the Bank of Uganda authority to ensure that all the clearing and payment arrangements are effective and on a firm basis, sixth, to provide and increase the Bank of Uganda’s capital in the future, and provide the Bank of Uganda autonomy with regard to its internal administration including on such issues the appointment of executive directors and heads of department.  Hon. Members, I believe that once this Bill is passed and other administrative forms being undertaken crystallised, the Bank of Uganda will become more a Central Bank that is a necessary condition for good monetary management in the financial sector development.  

I would like at this juncture to revert particularly to the amendments I have referred to.  The first one is section 33 sub-section 3.  The present sub-Section 3, Sir, I intend to ask the House to delete it and replace it with the following section; ‘The Government shall seek advice from the bank on monetary policy and it shall be the duty of the bank to formulate such monetary policy and advise government accordingly’.  The present section and sub-section which I would like to replace reads as follows; the Government shall when formulating monetary policy seek advice from the bank and it shall be the duty of the bank to formulate a draft monetary policy and advise government accordingly’.  The draft monetary policy does not sound so -(Inaudible)- and I thought it should be changed.  Sub-Section 94(2).  Now the present sub-Clause 49(2) reads as follows as hon. Members will know.  The government may with the approval of Cabinet and after consultation with the governor, issue directions to the bank as it may consider to be necessary in the public interest.  I have considered this expression, ‘public interest’ I have thought it necessary to delete that section to that Clause and replace it with the following because of difficulties of interpretation.  If after consultation with the governor, the Minister is of the opinion that policies being pursued by the bank are not adequate for or conducive to the achievement of the functions of the bank, the Minister may with the approval of Cabinet, by directive in writing, determine the specific policy to be adopted by the bank.  The bank shall therefore effect the policy while the directive remains in force.  49(3) for any direction issues under sub-Clause (2), the Minister shall as a duty call to be laid before the legislature within 15 sitting days after he has issued such directive to the bank and a copy of such directive shall be laid before the House.  

Now Sir, these two sub-Clauses are aimed to advise certain situations which in the normal run of trend might not be necessary for the Minister with the approval of Cabinet to intervene in the ordinary management of monetary policy by the bank.  For example, if you examine Clause 34(3), that Clause reads as follows: ‘The total amount and marginal notice temporarily advanced by the bank to government.’  34 sub-Clause 3, ‘The total amount of advances may under sub-Section 1, shall not at any time exceed 18 per cent of the recurrent revenue of government.’  Now, there might be circumstances when it is in the public interest for the general good, for such advance to go beyond that percentage.  At any time this can happen.  Recently we had a problem of feeding refugees and we never knew that point, already we have taken it in percent of the revenue from the bank, then of course, unless there maybe a sort of escape Clause, it will be very difficult for the government to solve this sort of problem.  

Another point might be for instance, a question of general management.  The bank could pursue a policy for instance, which could be basically deflationary, for instance, prohibiting investments in general.  I could follow a policy of having high levels of interest rates.  Now, if this is persistent and the government thought that in the general interest of the economy, it was necessary to give a direction to the bank to alter a course in the management of monetary policy.  Then with the approval of Cabinet, I say the Minister should have that right to issue a directive to the bank.  The reason behind that is that ultimately and this is a point why we have put in another section for such directive laid before the House.  Ultimately the government is responsible for all policies including monetary policy.  So, when the Minister brings before the House such a directive, then the House will be able to know in such transparency, what the Minister has done and then to be able to debate the issue if they think that the monetary policy being directed is not a proper one.  

Now, the present Clause 53 deals with internal matters of administration to the bank.  And it reads as follows: ‘The Minister may, after consultations with the Governor make regulations generally for the better carrying out or into effect the provisions of this Statute’.  I would like that o be replaced by the following formulation.  The Board of the Bank or the Minister may, after consulting the other part, in other words, if it is started by the Minister to consult the Board or the Board to consult the Minister, make regulations, generally for the better carrying into effect the provisions of this Statute.  This one brings into partnership the dual responsibility of the Bank and the Minister to ensure that this Bill, this Act, these provisions will become law, well administered, well put into effect.  The reason that if you leave it just the Minister might not all the time be aware of some internal problems relating to the implementation of the Bill.  This is why I have decided to put in this change of the phrase.  I have a feeling that hon. Members have got an urge to discuss the Bill and I think I better not say too much more than this.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question and invite Members to speak.

BANK OF UGANDA BILL, 1993

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA (Nominated Member):  Mr. Chairman, we had to handle trade unions, and we had come with that, and when we came today, the notice came very late, the notice of business.  None of us carried this, and we were taken by surprise that we now have to debate something.  I would suggest if it is with your permission, that we adjourn until tomorrow when we are ready to debate this Bill.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am seconding hon. Wasswa Nkalubo’s Motion in the sense that we have not got before us, the Bill and this is a technical point, because it involves our finances and, therefore, we just cannot debate it out of the blue otherwise, we would not do a good job of it, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  With those in support of hon. Wasswa Nkalubo’s Amendment say, I to the contrary no.

(Question put and agreed to).

ADJOURNMENT

(The Council rose and adjourned at 6.00p.m. until Wednesday 21st April, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)

