Wednesday, 26 April 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INSURANCE BILL 1995

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT BILL 1994

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Amendment on Clause 2:

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Henry Kajura): Page 9; on Environment Education.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we include another Clause entitled ‘Environmental Education’. Another definition after environment audit on page 9, right down you have between environmental audit and environmental audit as one of the definitions environmental education includes the process of recognising values and clarifying concepts in order to develop skills and attitudes necessary to understand and appreciate inter-relatedness among man, his culture and his bio-physical surroundings.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2 as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 3:

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Henry Kajura): Page 11, of the Bill well is it two, page 11 - still on Clause 2.  I beg to move that a new definition between Agency and the Minister at the top, be inserted to read as follows: This is meant to clarify the role of the committee in the lower councils.  Local Environment Committee means a committee on the environment appointed under Section 17 as a Municipal town division/county and sub-county committee or such lower level of Resistance Council as a Local Government may determine.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 2 sub-section (b) be amended as proposed by hon. Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAJURA: Mr Chairman, this is on page 18 -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we have not reached there yet.

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Henry Kajura): That is on -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you have an Amendment on Clause 3?  Hon. Minister, please, we are on Clause 3.

(Question put on Clause 3, as amended and agreed to.)

(Clause 4 agreed to.)

Clause 5:

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the word capable substitute for the word ‘able’ in Clause 5, sub-clause 3.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question put on Clause 5, as amended and agreed to.)

(Clause 6 agreed to.)

Clause 7:

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, I would like to make an Amendment on Clause 7 (j).  I would like to substitute the word ‘gather’ underline the word undertake research.  I am saying that a gather is just part of research and we would like the environment authority to do research and learn from what they have done other than just gathering and analysing.  So, I would like to move that we substitute gather, analyze it with the word undertake research.  I beg to move the Amendment.

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Henry Kajura):  Mr Chairman, I accept the Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question put on Clause 7, as amended and agreed to.)

Clause 8:

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Chairman, I beg to move the deletion of the word ‘management’ in the Title; so that it reads the board.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 8 as amended.)

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an Amendment to the effect that Section 8 of the Bill be deleted.  I have reasons which I would like to advance or this Amendment. The word authority means what we are escaping here; it is not what the sub-committee of the Cabinet we are creating.  If the President decides to give the portfolio of environment to a Minister, it is better and it is fitting for the Minister to be evaluated according to the assignment other than the Minister being hampered by the - another structure of the Cabinet which may not allow him to perform the work of the Minister satisfactorily.

When it comes to the functions of the sub-committee being created, these are the functions which should be looked into and decided upon by the Cabinet but not the authority; all these are policy issues, they can either be done by the Civil Servants or if they are at a political level, they should be handled the Cabinet. 

Experience has also shown that when you include Cabinet as a section of a Bill, you find that the quorum will never be late and you find that the whole exercise is bogged down.  So, we should really allow the authority we are creating with the job of implementing or making policies and making the work of the authority.  In any case, we may not have a Prime Minister, but when we have the President or the Vice President, they may not be in position to be chairing this.  In any case, you create a sub-committee of the Cabinet from time to time that will do the job, which will like the authority to be.  With those few remarks, I propose that we remove this section, which creates the committee on the environment.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I truly support the Amendment as moved by hon. Opio.  We have seen committees of the Cabinet literally doing nothing. In fact, it takes a longer time for the Minister to make a decision as opposed to a committee.  What is on the ground is the Custodian Board Committee; it really did not move until sometime when now, we have got a Minister in charge of Custodian Board. So, the question of a committee and getting the Ministers to assemble and meet should be out of question if we are to get anything to move quickly.  I fully support the Motion. Thank you.

DR MAGEZI:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I stand to oppose the proposed deletion of this policy committee as composed.  The functions, and the distinguished Members of the Policy Committee are clearly outlined and we have explained to the Members here, that the matters of environment are:

    (a) Multi-sectoral and they need a political decision, a political forum which is very powerful that is going to ensure compliancy. The next problem with environment which you have noticed before is in the enforcement of the decisions affecting the environment.  It is not like an ordinary authority, but this environment which affects everybody and you need a concerted effort to be able to enforce compliance; especially, by the Ministry that may be directly involved, with the degradation of our environment.  

The Committee - your sectoral committee took a very long time to make this decision to trim down what in fact, what had earlier been proposed in the way of the policy committee and this is an agreement in good faith to ensure that anybody who is going to be seen to ignore the decision of the authority on the environment can be brought to book but no other, but by a policy committee shared by the Prime Minister or whomsoever who will be given this role by the new Constitution we are making and this policy committee Mr Chairman, and distinguished Members of the House, sits quarterly - every three months we are proposing that this Policy Committee can meet and that the quorum of this committee is five out of 10.  So, we are not really adding a very big burden and the fact that it is chaired not by a fellow Cabinet Minister, but by the Prime Minister means that a member of the Cabinet who would be out of step will be able to explain himself to his colleagues under the authority of under this guidance of a more senior member of cabinet. 

Youths would have a reason to compare this matter with Custodian Board, but you know the circumstances under which the Custodian Board - performs  It was the Deputy Minister who was supposed to chair Members of Cabinet; we have reversed it and we are doing this fully aware that Ministers yes, have a very busy schedule more so, if we were not decentralised, but with decentralisation, many of these Ministers are going to be left to attend to matters of this nature, it is not going to be the system as it has been before; and I urge you, we as the committee, are standing together on this matter that we have reached a decision having considered it fully that we support the policy committee.  I thank you very much.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Like I have said before, it is a question of where the power lies.  I would hate a situation whereby an inferior body makes some recommendation and then these recommendations are not implemented at all.  Like the previous speaker was saying here is a policy committee which is going to be chaired by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the Head of Government Business.  I would not imagine that actually the Members, the hon. ministers who fall on that committee would cause that committee to subsequently have no quorum at all; so as to implement this particular work.

I would, therefore, in conclusion say, that since environmental degradation has been on for a very long time and this is something we are longing to curb and be solved within no time so as not to worsen on the environment, I would urge my colleagues here to stand very firm and agree with us, the committee that the policy committee is constituted as we have presented to you.  Thank you very much.	

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose the proposed Amendment; that is to say if you look at the functions of the committee and then compare it with the that of the Management Board, you will find that the Management Board will be charged with responsibility of over-seeing what has been put in place by the policy committee; So, for this reason, as has earlier been contributed to by the sectoral committee chairman, the Custodian Board could not function fully because of the priority which the Cabinet Ministers would from time to time accord the Deputy Minister and by so saying, we see that - I would like all the hon. Members to look at the function of the committee and compare it with the functions of the Management Board to be put in place and this Management Board will be composed of people who have got discipline in this particular area and in that case, if the Management Board carries out debate - today’s work to surviving, those we implement. I see no obstacle in this Mr Chairman. I beg to disagree that proposal.

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Henry Kajura): Thank you Mr Chairman. Yesterday, I did dwell at some length on the need of the Policy Committee and I did explain that the sectoral committee had arrived at this decision because of the evidence that they considered.  As I pointed out, environmental issues are indeed very great and severe at the moment.  Now, they involve many ministries and there are already indications of conflict, because once you try to solve one problem, this impinges on another one.  If for example, someone wants to establish a big industry, you find that the Minister of Industry is very keen on it and all those generally interested in investments, very keen on it, but then, the argument, one day - environment impact has been carried out, it may be found out that there are indeed very heavy costs to this factory which have got to be taken into account; and this one becomes necessary to have a body which proves the Ministers concerned under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister to try and resolve these matters -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister and the House that the fact that the Prime Minister is going to chair the meeting of the policy committee does not necessarily means that the are going to be efficient.  We have had the recent example, Mr Chairman, of DRIK, where the Prime Minister was the chairman, and the President had to intervene to scrap the whole thing to make it work.

So, I think we should not lulled by the fact that the Prime Minister is going to see that a very powerful boy - in fact, he may mess up the whole thing. Thank you Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, while I do agree with the Minister’s observation that all the Ministries will be involved, it is the normal working of Government that any decision taken, involves everybody in the country; so that the fact this one deals with Agriculture, deals with Animal industry, for example, the most endangered species now in Uganda looking at what happened in Atiak, is the human species, are we going to put the Ministry of internal Affairs on this particular committee? I think really, the whole question is not just opposing this for the sake of it; if you put this Committee -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: That is not information; it is just an argument, hon. Member.  Take your Seat.

DR TIBERONDWA: I was going to finish Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no take your Seat.  Continue hon. Minister, please.

MR KAJURA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to indicate that the reference to the Prime Minister then; he was a different Prime Minister; we now have a different Prime Minister.  If one Prime Minister does not succeed, it does not mean that every Prime Minister will fail.  So, that argument does not hold. (Applause)

So, that is why it is necessary to have those Ministries that are immediately concerned with the environment to be able to meet, discuss and resolve their issues, the problems under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister.  If you look at the terms of reference of the Policy Committee, it says, provide policy guidelines, just to say, well, we think we should be moving in this direction.  This does not take away the responsibility of the Board.

ii)	To liaise with the Cabinet -(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I would be glad if the hon. Minister can clarify to me whether this office of the Prime Minister is going to continue under the new Constitution.  First of all, this office has been debated and it has actually been found that it is not one of those offices which may survive after the promulgation of the new Constitution.  So, if this environment law is being made as a law to continue in our Statute book, I am just wondering whether in view of the office of the Prime Minister, which may not be a constitutionally accepted office, the establishment of this Policy - committee, may not be acceptable.  Thank you.

MR KAJURA: Mr Chairman, I do not think this House can stop legislating because there is -(Applause) There is a CA which is looking into the future Constitution of this country; and in any case, there will be arrangements for - if indeed there is no office of the Prime Minister, there will be legal arrangements which the hon. Member should, being a lawyer - which will make it possible to transfer those functions to another office.  So, really, I do not think this is an issue. (Applause)

Surely, this coming from a lawyer, I think is very disappointing.  It should have come from lay people like ourselves. So, I think the need of the Forestry Committee is there, it will resolve those big problems Otherwise, the day to day running of the authority will be in the hands of the Board, and for that reason, Mr Chairman, I strongly oppose the Amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

(Clause 8 as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 9 agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you have any Amendment on Clause 9?

MR KAJURA: No, on Clause 8.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have finished Clause 8, we are Clause 9 now.

MR KAJURA:  Alright, thank you, Sir.  Clause 10, 9(i) - let me repeat it again, by the word deletion of the word management between the and the ‘board’ and at the very top.  I beg to move.

MR WANENDEYA:  Since it is the Minister moving the Bill, could he be given the opportunity to go back to Clause 8, Mr Chairman  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we are on Clause 9, I am the Chairman, take your Seat. (Laughter)

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 9 as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 10:

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Henry Kajura):  I beg to move that the word ‘and functions’ be added after ‘policy of the authority’ so that, it will read: to oversee the implementation and successful operation of the policy and functions of the authority. I beg to move.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose that Amendment on the ground that it is repetitive, because 10(i) says, the functions of the Board shall be; then you cannot add (a) the functions.  So, it will be repetitive and ridiculous and is not the correct drafting, I do not know why the Minister, of all the things, he thought he should make Amendments, he thought he should bring that one.

MR KAJURA:  Mr Chairman, the whole functions is used at the top but when you include and functions, after policy it makes the whole matter comprehensive, because when you talk about the functions at the top, you still come here and talk about policy but from that you think you also want to include functions.  I oppose the Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 10 as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 11 agreed to.)

(Clause 12 agreed to.)

(Clause 13 agreed to.)

(Clause 14 agreed to.)

(Clause 15 agreed to.)

Clause 16:

MR KAJURA: Thank you Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the word Service Commission be substituted for environmental officers.  I beg to withdraw the Amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: He has withdrawn on Clause 16.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, it is not very dear me what, although the Minister has withdrawn, what 16, 15, 14, 13 and 12 which is all coming under the staff of the authority is.  It is not clear to me, are we retaining the staff of the department of environment or are we getting rid of them?  And then there will be a new team, is it not very clear to me.  I would like to known what is the fate of the people in that department of environment is.  It is not clear?

MR KAJURA: Mr Chairman, can I reinstate my wish for an Amendment 16? The idea is of course to - that the Service Committee which will be appointing people and the districts rather than the Public Service Commission.  So, it will be in order to change - that the authority shall on the advise of the District Service Committee, so, we delete commission and substitute it with committee. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are moving the Amendment now? Hon. Karuhanga’s question, he wanted you to clarify whether you are removing everything or not.

MR KAJURA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Well, we call it the fate of the department; we are now in transition stage, between the establishment of the authority and the current arrangement.  As I did inform the House, yesterday, environment is a decentralised service and earlier on, we had trained officers not knowing it will be a decentralised service.  So, what happened, the Ministry of Public Service advised the Minister of Local Government to say that these officers would have to be recruited by the districts.  

So, what we have done is to refer particularly the 39 that were recruited to the districts; with a request that we appoint, we cannot force them to appoint them but we have requested them to appoint them; some have already done so, others have not yet done so.  But this was a decision which was taken elsewhere as part of restructuring which is going on.  We are hoping that since every district will have one environment officer, that the 39 will be absorbed. We are urging the districts to take people who have already received by the Ministry of Environment.  We have also agreed that the very senior people would remain at the Ministry to coordinate what will be going on and offer any guidance that is required because they are people of experience.  So, the overall - all these officers are taken care of and we hope that nobody will be left hanging.  In any case, the authority will require many of them to be working for it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 16 as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 17:

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 17 be amended so that every District Environment Committee should read Service Commission.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you circulated your Amendment to the Members?

MR WANENDEYA: I do not have a separate one, Mr Chairman, but it is here. (Laughter)

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 18 agreed to.)

(Clause 19 agreed to.)

(Clause 20 agreed to.)

(Clause 21 agreed to.)

(Clause 22 agreed to.)

(Clause 23 agreed to.)

(Clause 24 agreed to.)

(Clause 25 agreed to.)

(Clause 26 agreed to.)

(Clause 27 agreed to.)

(Clause 28 agreed to.)

(Clause 29 agreed to.)

(Clause 30 agreed to.)

(Clause 31 agreed to.)

(Clause 32 agreed to.)

(Clause 33 agreed to.)

(Clause 34 agreed to.)

(Clause 35 agreed to.)

Clause 36:

MR KAJURA: Thank you Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the words the statutory instruments being inserted between ‘may and declare on the 36(iii) which will read: The authority may issue statutory instruments to declare protected zones.  I beg to move.

MR KARUHANGA: I am sorry, Mr Chairman, but the authority Amendment of the Minister reads: The authority may by statutory instruments declare protected zones a long the banks, bra, bra. The authority does not issue statutory instruments; Statutory Instruments are reserved and are to be issued by the Ministers.  

Now, I am not opposed to the Minister now says that, there is a revolution, and Ministers no longer have this authority and that the authority has now become Ministerial, this is not - I think he does not want to achieve that also.  I know he has shed off most of the jobs in this Department but the authority may ask the Minister to issue a Statutory Instrument, but not themselves.  So, I would like the - free advice.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Order.  He has not moved any Amendment.  Are you withdrawing your Amendment?

MR KAJURA:  First of all, Mr Chairman, statutory instruments should be included by then, I would like to accept the Amendment to the authority, so that we have the Minister. It will be the Minister by statutory instrument - the Minister may by statutory instrument.  There is no need, I have accepted  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KAJURA:  I have accepted the Amendment or suggestion from the hon. Member and I still as -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR KAJURA: Well, I still stand by what I have proposed that the Minister may by statutory instrument declared protected zones along the banks of rivers and shores.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you still insisting on your Amendment with the inclusion of -(Interruption)

MR KAJURA: With Statutory instrument but I am also accepting the proposed Amendment - may be Mr Chairman, could allow hon. Karuhanga to make the position clear. (Laughter)

MR KARUHANGA: My advice would have been if the Minister is agreeable to this formulation.  That for actually what he intends is that the authority should advise him to issue a statutory instrument that is what we want to achieve it is not that we want to give the Minister powers to issue statutory instruments without advice - technical advice of the authority.  So, we should say that the Minister, on the advice of the authority, may by statutory instrument declare something like that; and that should be able to achieve his intention.

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the proposed physiology by hon. Karuhanga in actual fact, takes back to square one, gives the authority to issues statutory instruments, for once you say, on the advice of the authority, it is the authority; we are saying, the power to issue statutory instruments should be by the Minister.  So, the physiology should be the Minister asks consultation with the authority, may issue statutory instruments. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, do you accept that? Now, the Minister has accepted hon. Butagira’s Amendment as modified. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 36 as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 37:

MR KAJURA:  Mr Chairman, this is really a correction of a typing error; so that the word -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: It is just a correction on an Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 37 as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 38:

MR KAJURA:  Mr Chairman, I move that the word ‘authority’ replaces ‘policy committee’ so that as to create a system right through - the powers of the authority rather than the policy committee in this regard.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 38 as amended agreed to.)

(Clause 39 agreed to.)

(Clause 40 agreed to.)

(Clause 41 agreed to.)

(Clause 42 agreed to.)

(Clause 43 agreed to.)

(Clause 44 agreed to.)

(Clause 45 agreed to.)

(Clause 46 agreed to.)

(Clause 47 agreed to.)

(Clause 48 agreed to.)

(Clause 49 agreed to.)

(Clause 50 agreed to.)

(Clause 51 agreed to.)

(Clause 52 agreed to.)

(Clause 53 agreed to.)

(Clause 54 agreed to.)

(Clause 55 agreed to.)

(Clause 56 agreed to.)

(Clause 57 agreed to.)

(Clause 58 agreed to.)

(Clause 59 agreed to.)

(Clause 60 agreed to.)

(Clause 61 agreed to.)

(Clause 62 agreed to.)

(Clause 63 agreed to.)

(Clause 64 agreed to.)

(Clause 65 agreed to.)

(Clause 66 agreed to.)

(Clause 67 agreed to.)

(Clause 68 agreed to.)

(Clause 69 agreed to.)

(Clause 70 agreed to.)

(Clause 71 agreed to.)

(Clause 72 agreed to.)

(Clause 73 agreed to.)

(Clause 74 agreed to.)

(Clause 75 agreed to.)

(Clause 76 agreed to.)

(Clause 77 agreed to.)

(Clause 78 agreed to.)

(Clause 79 agreed to.)

(Clause 80 agreed to.)

(Clause 81 agreed to.)

(Clause 82 agreed to.)

(Clause 83 agreed to.)

(Clause 84 agreed to.)

(Clause 85 agreed to.)

(Clause 86 agreed to.)

(Clause 87 agreed to.)

(Clause 88 agreed to.)

(Clause 89 agreed to.)

(Clause 90 agreed to.)

(Clause 91 agreed to.)

(Clause 92 agreed to.)

(Clause 93 agreed to.)

(Clause 94 agreed to.)

(Clause 95 agreed to.)

(Clause 96 agreed to.)

(Clause 97 agreed to.)

(Clause 98 agreed to.)

(Clause 99 agreed to.0

(Clause 100 agreed to.)

(Clause 101 agreed to.)

(Clause 102 agreed to.)

(Clause 103 agreed to.)

Clause 104:

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Kajura Henry): Mr Chairman, I would move that the word ‘Secretariat’ be deleted in the third line and substituted by the word ‘Board’ so that it would read, ‘no seat for other legal proceeding may be brought against the Policy Committee the Executive Director, the Board, etcetera.’ So we deleting the Secretariat and substituting it with ‘Board.’  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question put that Clause 104 as amended, 
do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

(Clause 105 agreed to.)

(Clause 106 agreed to.)

(Clause 107 agreed to.)

(Clause 108 agreed to.)

(Clause 109 agreed to.)

The First Schedule:

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that after (j) in the first Schedule, we add, ‘the Minister responsible for Trade and Industry.’ I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question put that the First Schedule as amended 
do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

The Second Schedule:

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Henry Kajura) Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the word ‘agriculture’ be properly spent with deletion of one ‘r’.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule:

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that on 3(b), it should ‘river,’ and then on (d) it should read ‘thermal’ It was a typing error.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title:

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Henry Kajura): I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The National Environment Bill’ should read 1995.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question put that the Title as amended do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled  ‘The National Environment Day, 1995,’ and has passed it with several amendments.  I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Henry Kajura) I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The National Environment Bill, 1995,’ be read the First Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Bill for Statute entitled:

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT STATUTE, 1995

(Title settled and Bill passed.)

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting.

The Council rose at 4.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 April 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

