Thursday, 20 April 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT BILL, 1994

MR WASUGIRYA (Kibuku County, Pallisa):  Mr Chairman, I stand to support this Bill, and being a scientist, I do realise that actually this Bill is too long over due.  There are a lot of things that have gone wrong in this country.  People do not seem to envisage the role of environmental protection in this country.  And because of that, we have had to face some problems. Let me sight a few examples. 

Sometime back there was an introduction of the Nile Perch in Lake Victoria.  Nile Perch if I may qualify has not been indigenous in Lake Victoria and therefore was introduced.  As we speak now, this fish happens to be carnivorous, and has feasted, has cannibalized on the rest of the species of fish and the like.  And now we are finding it very difficult actually to go fishing for other species other than Nile Perch in Lake Victoria.  

Secondly, we have had this recent problem of the hyacinth plant. It reproduces vegetatively and at a every fast rate.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Hon. Nekyon was the Minister who introduced the Nile Perch; may be he would be in a better position to tell this House what the Nile Parch was feeding on such that when it was introduced here, it cannibalized on the fish; the indigenous fish.

MR NEKYON:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Reverend and the rest of the House through you, sir, that the Nile Parch was introduced into Lake Victoria in 1959 when I was still at University and the original home of the Nile Parch was Rwitanzigye, the Lake Albert.  So, it is not a foreigner to Uganda, neither was it introduced by me because by that time I was not yet a Minister.  He should go to all those who are ignorant about history. (Laughter)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Correctly hon. Nekyon has stated correctly.  Nile Perch was introduced at the time when the person who a Minister was Mr Click a British, a Minister of Agriculture and Resources and I was in this hon. House.  Therefore, it is untrue for the hon. Rev. Ongora to state in this hon. House to misquote history to tell us that hon. Nekyon introduced the Nile Parch.

MR WASUGIRYA:  Thank you for that bit of information.  Mr Chairman, before I was interrupted, I was talking about hyacinth plant that has engulfed our waters of Lake Victoria.  We are facing that problem; it is acquiring proportions that we may not be able to accommodate.  And given that we slacken a bit, we do not move fast enough then we are bound to face that problem.  

There is also this question of haphazard destruction of trees.  It has been common talk that if one has ferried a tree, he should plant 10 or 15 or even more.  But I am afraid to say that this is not what is going on.  People are ferrying left, right and centre and there is no replacement.  I come from Pallisa, I know one person who has been given a licence to ferry Omuvule, and a lot of Muvule is right now down in Pallisa district.  And there is no conditionality that this person has got to plant more of that particular species.  

In this country, we tend to hesitate when we are trying to handle certain situation.  I can cite the example of the lack of planning for out city here Kampala.  Kampala as of now on the streets you see a lot of vehicles.  But these vehicles have - the owners of the vehicles have not been guided as to how best to drive along those streets.  You find a person who would be pursuing a particular lane immediately turning to left, because the lanes themselves are lacking.  

We have been to some of these places, we say to the nearest place here, Nairobi, and you see what is happening there.  I am afraid if this has to continue, then we are going even to register a lot more accidents, therefore, a lot more deaths and we shall just perpetuate the arrangement just like that not knowing that the population is growing, not knowing that there is demand for more room, for more planning for the use of our vehicle.  

Before may be I leave that particular point, I have to say this.  I have been of recent to few of these Scandinavian countries and I can assure you that when we say that these countries are developed, I think one of the criteria they use is the maximum arrangement they have made, they have put in place for protection of the environment.  Sweden is one of those.  

My second point hinges on the Policy Committee on environment.  A lot has been said about what the Members constitute that committee and who should be the Chairman of the Committee or the Chairperson.  I am saying that having a sub set of Members of the Cabinet, is well called for.  It is better we have the Members themselves who are part and parcel of the Cabinet to face this challenge.  As I started saying, people do not seem to envisage the importance of environment in this country.  If we are going to have people to constitute this Committee other than those ones who are at the top, then I think we are going to do a disservice to the environment.  

Already, if I may qualify that in our budgetary system here even when we have - even after we have passed a budget, there is what they call non-call and call programmes.  Now who decides on the non-call and the call programmes?  It is they, people in that Cabinet who have got to endorse some of these programmes and therefore anything touching environment, it should be they to blame if they have to let down the environment of this country.  

So, I am just too pleased that we have got the Chairman to chair that Committee in the means of the Prime Minister, let him chair that Committee.  I know there could have been some oversight to have led out Minister of Industry who is quite actually vital on that Committee.  But I still believe that, let us have a Committee which is a sub-set of the Cabinet so that if they do not deliver goods, if they do not actively participate in favour of the environmental protection, then things will be brought before us here.  It is our duty to fire also as Parliament -(Interjection)- Parliament is supreme, let us not use it as a simple language that Parliament is just there to be joked with.  If those ten Members of the Cabinet cannot deliver goods, then we can come here and fire them, a vote of no confidence and may be replace them. (Laughter)  

Yes, I am very serious.  This country is facing problems that I have enumerated; there is a lot of pollution going on.  Who should contain this, are we going to come here talk this day, talk tomorrow, talk the day after when actually, we should have put this thing in place some machinery in place so that the authority goes ahead to handle or to handling issues concerning environment.  I would have gone further, but as I said, a lot has been said, but I felt like saying whatever I have said.  Thank you very much.

MRS NKWASIBWE (Women Representative, Kabale): I stand to support the Bill and thank government for considering environment so vital which we have been waiting for, for a long time.  I think it is a great achievement on the part of government to have to set up a body whose structure I am sure will go down to the grass roots and make sure that every citizen is involved in matters with protection and promotion of our environment.  I support particularly the part of the Bill that states that there will be cooperation at International level.  

Environment cannot be seen; problems with environment cannot be solved by Uganda alone.  We shall need National cooperation with other nations particularly African nations.  There is need to strengthen the ties between these African nations because the African Continent as we know we are the most disadvantaged and most backward and sometimes we suffer manipulation by developed countries, we provide market for their military hard ware to kill each other, to fight each other and sometimes it makes it impossible for the African to pay the required attention to issues and problems of environment.  

So, I am sure this International cooperation will bring African countries together on a round table to prioritise issues that affect most lives of people.  

One of the disturbing problems is power struggle among African communities.  These problems we have passed through, we do not need to go over them we all know, we need to be addressed when there is peace and tranquility, when we are at peace with each other, because since government pays attention to peace and development and many nations which include Uganda share lakes, rivers, forests, valleys and such like.  We need a common strategy as an African continent, we need to pay greater attention to nature around us so that tomorrow we are not answerable when our grand children have nowhere to survive.  So, this is the time and the Bill has come timely.  

we need clear rivers as we have all seen already, we need clear lakes free of water hyacinth and we also need to pay great attention to conservation of our soils.  Looking at some areas in Uganda for example, a place like Kabale, which used to be known as the Switzerland of Africa for its beauty, it is now living in history.  It is not that the laws are being made today, by-laws have been there which the community could utilise to mobilise themselves to make sure that soil erosion does not make the hills bare.  Unfortunately, this has not been the case but I hope this time government having put offices in place will facilitate these officials with tools so that the activities as spelt out in the Bill are effectively carried out.  

At this juncture, I want to pay tribute to one lady, Ruth Mubiru who spearheaded the tree planting movement in Uganda.  She has been supported by some NGOs of course, but the impact of tree planting has not been effectively felt and this is because tree-planting activities have grossly suffered gender imbalance.  Tree planting when you go at local level is seen as an activity only for women, which is very unfortunate.  Men who have been trying to plant trees have been doing so as an economic venture but really not showing their awareness of the need to preserve the natural vegetation we so need to preserve and promote.  We need a two-wing effort in all issues of environment protection and soil conservation so that every member of the community as the Bill says, will have to be involved.  

The community needs mobilisation but they will need to work through or to be given a timetable of activities.  Maybe a timetable on daily or weekly or monthly basis, but this will be necessary in order to make sure that everybody is involved.  When the late Jomo Kenyatta was released from prison, if I may recall some history, he was asked by his colonial captures when he wanted Independence and he answered strongly ‘today.’  I wish a plan of action for community participation in issues of environment could come up today.  With those few words, Mr Chairman, I support.  Thank you.

MR BAKASHABA-RUHANGA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Motion.  I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to address you and through you all hon. Members here for the first time in my life. (Applause)  I believe such an occasion is traditionally important in one’s Parliamentary carrier and so, I take it in full measure.  

May I request your indulgence, Mr Chairman, and indeed of all Members here, to allow me on this occasion to make a few remarks which I deem appropriate for the occasion.  I propose to do that under three broad headings.  I must apologize that may be it is not honourable to appear to be talking on one self and if so, please, bear with me.  

Two hours ago, I discharged my last duty in the Civil Service of the Republic of Uganda.  I signed and posted a letter of my retirement from the Service where I have been for the last 30 years, one month and four days.  I did that in accordance with the laws of the land, as I believe that nobody has a more scared obligation to obey the law than those who make the law.  As a consequence, Mr Chairman, I can proudly inform you and hon. Members here that, I have law vested into it everywhere.  

Those of you who are familiar with the British Royal Family know the status of the Prince of Wells.  When the British Royal Monarch dies, the Prince of Wales automatically takes over as the King.  I want you to imagine a situation when the Prince of Wells receives the news that the ruling Monarch has died.  He may have tears in his eyes, I wonder, are those for joy or for sadness and so, I feel. (Laughter)  

When I joined the Civil Service of Uganda hon. Obwangor was a Minister and hon. Abu Mayanja was a member of the opposition, the late Balak Kirya was my first Minister.  Now, how I wish he was here to witness this unfolding drummer.  I admit without reservation that civil servants who were led by the late Mr Kalimuzo are different from those who are led by Mr Orech.  Certainly, there have been changes.  But whose face has not changed during the last 30 years?  I wish to recall a few episodes that I have met in the surveys of the Civil Service of Uganda.  

No. 1, was my first job; I was given an assignment to survey the border between Uganda and to survey a customs post at Bunagana.  For those of you who are familiar with the geography of Kisoro in particular, Bunagana is between Rwanda, Uganda and Zaire.  So, they had put up the customs post.  I went and then since I was young and a bit energetic, I decided to climb Mt. Muhavura and established where the border was.  In the process, I discovered that the customs post had been built in Zaire.  The mzungu answered me and said, “Iam surprised you did not carry out that survey.”  In reply, I said, you were surprised because I am a surveyor or Uganda and not a surveyor registered in Zaire; that was the first occasion, Mr chairman.  

The second episode I wish to recall to hon. Members, is when I was attending a meeting in the Ministry of Local Government and one of my assistants came running to tell me that the chairman of the then Uganda Land Commission had been abducted, that there was chaos at the land office.  I run to the Minister’s office who then was the late Erinayo Oryema and when he saw me, he asked why I looked shaken.  I told him that our chairman has just been taken.  The late Oryema looked at me and said, Paul, some of us have reached the end of journeys.  That I cannot forget.  

Mr Chairman, if I may recall -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But be brief.

MR BAKASHABA-RUHANGA: I am very brief, I shall be very brief.  Mr Chairman, I wish to thank members of the Public Service of Uganda for the work they have rendered this country, I think they have been exemplary under very difficult conditions. (Applause)  

Some quarters may have expressed fears that my departure from the lands department may affect that Ministry, that is unfounded, because the land office was established in 1900, while I joined it in the year 1965.  After all, I do not believe in indispensability, and assurance if anybody any organisation can be served by one man, then it is not worthy to serve it, and I believe the land office will continue as it has been performing. (Applause)  

I come to No.2 point -(Interjection)- I bring warm greetings from the Banyakashari who are happy now that they had their cries of low taxation without representation heard.  Kashari is a credal of Kaaro Karungi and is the home of Matooke and Milk.  Its inhabitants have sent me here to deliver to you a message wishing you, Mr Chairman, and all hon. Members in this august House peace and unity. (Applause)  It is indeed fitting that this message of peace should be delivered during the traditional week of Easter when peace if on everybody’s mouth.  Hon. Members, you have wealth of experience in civil matters.  No doubt, therefore, you are ladies and gentlemen of good judgement.  However, good judgement is usually a result of experience, although experience is often a consequence of poor judgement.  The Banyakashari wish to affirm that of all tasks of government the basic one is to protect its citizens against violence. (Applause)  

But violence is like liberty, it is one thing you cannot have unless you give it to others.  So, we are saying, therefore, our message of peace to you, Mr Chairman, and this august House is that this country will be a good - if you want this country to be good for us to live in - for you to live in, you must make it a good country for all of us to live in. (Applause) Please, remember that those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it and the Bible also tells us that whoever digs a pit shall fall into it.  

Lastly, I now turn to the subject now under discussion.  Uganda lies at the heart of the Equatorial Africa.  It is endowed with natural resources, it has four fundamental biological vegetation.  There is Victoria in South and the dry Sudanic in the North and in the North East, the Somali, Masaai plain.  To the West, Mountains of the Moon.  It is heavily populated with 18.8 million in 1992, which makes No. 44 globary.  Uganda has an area of 91,000 square kilometres.  So what we are talking here is environment for that area.  And to me, I see three basic points which concern us here as far as environment protection is concerned.  No.1; the wetland protection.  Because it is endowed with a number of rivers and waters and since these rivers and waters sometimes are the source of malaria, there has been a tendency to indiscriminatory destroy them.  Consequently, our environment has suffered, been degraded, I think there is need and indeed it is addressed by the Minister here in this Bill, that is No.1, why I support this Bill.  

No.2 concerns forests and wild life management.  These because of lack of protection have also been destroyed to a very large extent.  I am happy that the Ministry of Natural Resources is taking serious steps to address this sorry state of affairs.  I wish to submit that the 3rd important issue on this subject is the tsetse fly control, because over the number of years, in the recent past, tsetse control have not been properly controlled.  The area of Uganda has suffered the consequences.  It is important that this Bill gives prominence to control and eradication of tsetse fly thereby improving the health conditions of the people and of domestic and wild animals. 

Some Members have expressed concern about the numbers of ministers on the authority.  I wish to state that the subject under discussion is cross-sectoral which necessitates that Ministers responsible for those sectors should indeed have a key role to play in addressing this situation.  I therefore, support the Minister in - in his submission and the Bill to stipulate that it should indeed be cross-sectoral.  

I wish to conclude my few remarks by reminding hon. Members of NRC that from time immemorial, man has never planned to fail.  However, on numerous occasions, he has failed to plan.  I believe the idea that we shall fail to plan for our country when the 25th Century is just around the corner.  I support the Motion.  I thank you, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, for being so kind to me on this first occasion.

MR MORO (Koboko County, Arua): Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Minister, Agard Didi to call me -(Laughter)  Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  I stand here to thank the Minister for bringing this Bill before this august House for discussion so that we can pass the Bill for implementation.  I understand the objective of the Bill is to set up an autonomous body to be charged with the supervision and coordination of matters related to the environment with the view to promote a sustainable social economic development through the sustainable utilization and protection of environmental resources for present and future generation.  

This is why I stand here and I support the Bill, and I appeal to my colleagues to pass the Bill.  Unfortunately, this Bill to me has come almost too late for my area.  As stated earlier by my colleagues, it is true that Uganda is a very lucky country only situated in the heart of Africa, it is endowed with a lot of natural resources.  

But unfortunately our governments did not care to manage these resources, most of these resources have been destroyed, others degraded and others have come to extension, they are no longer there.  You find a county like mine which has got large forests, which has got large rivers, which has got lakes, grass, trees, mountains, anti hills and everything.  Unfortunately, if you go there today, some of these things cannot be seen.  

One of our colleagues hon. Aruna stated that if you stand 30 miles away from Koboko, you see Koboko.  I think I agree with him that that statement is true although it has not been there for quite a long time.  And you stated that I will work 20 miles away.  But I must assure you that Koboko unfortunately being near the border, most of the natural resources which were there, have been destroyed.  The trees have been cut, the animals which were there the elephants, the buffaloes, the lions, the snakes, the guerillas, are nolonger there.  It is mainly because of the negligence of the former Ministers they did not plan anything, they did not tell people how to manage things.  If this came very early, I am sure some of those things would have been saved.  

The enemies, the people who destroyed these things are as follows.  Number one, is the Ministry of Environment Protection headed by the Minister of Environment Protection who is in front of me here.  Number two, are the line Ministries; the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Works, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Defence, although I do not want to mention all of them, these are the enemies.  Number three, Women in Culture.  Number four, are the men including myself who is speaking here.  Number five, are the animals like baboons, monkeys and other animals, these are the enemies of our resources.  I say enemy number one was the Minister himself because in the first place, he did not bring the Bill in good time, secondly if Koboko today can be seen 30 miles away, it is because of him.  Koboko had got electricity by the time the trees were there.  So after the wars, the electricity has never been re-installed that is why I said, he is enemy number one.  

It was because lack of electricity that the people who have now come in large numbers after their coming from exile have no other means of lighting their premises, so they go on cutting trees.  The Local Government brought the refugees and put them near the town and the refugees also went on because there were no other means of cooking, of building their houses, they also cut many trees.  

Ministry of Works where it begins to construct roads, it does not care about the trees, it goes on clearing the trees, it goes on making large holes which are never covered, these holes produce mosquitoes, this malaria which was talked of.  This is originating from the Ministry of Health; there are some swamps in Arua Municipality probably Aruna was talking some of those swamps, what they call wetlands were cleared because of these mosquitoes, they drained all the areas and let them dry, planted the trees instead of getting other means of destroying the mosquitoes, that is why I said those were enemies number two.  

Number three as I stated, the women have no other way of getting firewood, so their only alternative was to go and cut the trees.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that actually women do not use trees for cooking; they merely use twigs.  The trees are being cut by charcoal burners and those are men not women.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Additional information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, he seems to not know what he is saying because, the women use the dry wood which has already fallen down by men.  They do not go in for live wood.  So, I do not see why he says that it is women who have been destroying the environment.  On the contrary, it is the women who have been spearheading environmental protection by planting trees while the men destroy.

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, thank you.  The fact is that whether the trees dry or not, to get a dry tree first of all, you have to cut it, may be you make it dry and then you can make firewood out of it and I am sure even if she is denying it, she is one of those cutting the trees in those areas. (Laughter)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that under forest Act chapter 246 revised Edition 1964, Clause 15 and I quote reads as follows; “Subject to and in accordance with any rules or exemptions made under the provisions of this Act, Africans may in any forest reserve, village forest or open land cut and make for their own personal domestic use in reasonable quantities any forest product.  So, as long as this law is still in place, the Africans are acting in accordance with the law. (Laughter)

MR MORO:  Thank you for that information.  That is why I was accusing the Ministry of Agriculture, I think Agriculture combines Forestry, I think that law is still there and you are right to say so.  But unfortunately, this law was enacted when the Ugandan population was not as large as it is today, the population is so large that if we continue using that law, all the trees will be cut.  So, Mr Chairman, after enumerating the elements or those people, the enemies of our environment -(Interruption)

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. speaker on the Floor that, to get a tree of a 6-inch diameter eucalyptus in particular, and with reference to West Nile, you need a rotational period of 5.5 years.  And one hectare will produce 53 cubic metres of wood.  I think the Members has not certainly helped the House to tell us what happened actually in West Nile with regard to afforestation and the dangers that caused so much deforestation.  Because in 1972/3, I supervised in West Nile the planting of afforestation of one thousand and two twenty three hectare of land and I am really saddened to hear that you see across West Nile 30 miles without tracing a tree, what happened.  Tobacco was always there.

MR MORO:  I thank the hon. Member for asking me to tell him the reasons and it is good that this question is asked by no other person other than our hon. Member who is the Chairman on Economy.  In fact, he is one of those who caused the shortage of trees in West Nile because he was employed in BAT and encouraged the cutting of trees at the sametime I agree with him that he did plant some eucalyptus trees.  But the eucalyptus trees are not indigenous trees like our indigenous trees, which he destroyed.  The eucalyptus trees grew up, okay, unfortunately they sucked a lot of water and also they destroyed part of our lands.  

Secondly, he knows very well that since that time, if the Minister of Agriculture is around or his Deputy, he should take a very careful note that when BAT started its industry in West Nile, it was using fire wood out of the original trees and the eucalyptus trees which were planted by the Minister of Forestry.  Unfortunately, they bought a lot of cubic metres of wood paid off the money, the money was sent to Entebbe, the money remained here, it was not sent back to plant new eucalyptus trees.  Secondly, when this was came in 1979, the people ran into exile and stayed there long, there were no fire lines as a result most of these trees were also destroyed.  

Then the third one, as I told you, because of the refugees and then also when people went into exile, they needed to learn new techniques, they became killers in lumbering most of the Mahogany trees were cut.  These are the reasons why the trees are not there.  As a result of destruction of these natural resources, some of our water lakes, we had some lakes also in Koboko - about two lakes were - the Kochu, these were lakes but because the trees were not there and because of not properly proper planning to look after them, some of these lakes have now dried up, they are now very narrow, small things.

As I stated earlier, the measures taken by the Minister are the correct ones, I am now appealing to the Minister that whatever is put down should not be left in the papers and all of us here the hon. Members of Parliament should go home and become good educators, the administrators.  We should educate our people the use of these natural resources.  Because as I stated earlier, if we had elephants, I think, when you were in West Nile there were elephants in Ajai Reserve, Kayi and you saw them.  If you go there you will believe that those things were not there.  But now the young generations cannot see them.  

So, the people did not question, we have got also this rampant burning of grass, I think if all of us can join hands together and educate people to avoid burning grass at random and also ask the Ministries concerned to provide people with a sufficient ammunition to get rid of some of these animals which destroy food stuff like baboons and monkeys, these ones should be destroyed.  

Another point which I would like the Minister and all the Members to note is, in some areas of Uganda up to now, some of the animals particularly during the dry season are left widely loitering, they are not tied.  This refers particularly to goats.  In our area - some areas goats are left to just to loiter or wonder about.  As a result during a dry season, they destroy a lot of our vegetation including cassava, and I do not know whether there will be a by-law enacted to cater for that so that at least, these animals are not left to wonder at random.  Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Perhaps it is not superfluous for me also to welcome back my colleagues and especially you, Mr Chairman, to this new sitting, and the new members who have joined us.  I thank you very much for allowing me to make some observations about this Bill regarding the environment.  Because, as you know, the rate at which the world environment has been destroyed in the last 100 years, has been greater that the destruction that took place ever since man was created; and if we went on at the rate we have been doing, I think, man would not have long to exist on this planet.  So, it is important that man addresses the issue of the environment, though belatedly.  

However, much as I thank the Minister for bringing this Bill, I fear that one of the problems this Bill has, is that it is going to be symptomatic treatment, we are not treating the causes of environmental destruction.  The real causes of environmental destruction, therefore, the number one enemies, different from what my colleague from Koboko was naming as the number one enemies of the environment; in my own view, the number one enemy of the environment is poverty; number two enemy is ignorance, they go together; and I wished this Bill - I am advised by my hon. colleague here who is a medical doctor that disease is a problem number three, I do not know how.  But if this Bill addressed itself squarely on how we shall fight poverty in this country, and how we shall fight ignorance in this country, the Bill probably would have a chance to succeed in its -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and the hon. Member to give way for information.  I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the biggest enemy of the environment or enemy number one, it is not poverty, but the rich.  When you go to Kabale, you will find that Kabale was really a beautiful land; but who destroyed the environment in Kabale?  The rich people; they spoiled the swamps; they are busy ferrying trees, while the poor peasant is busy planting.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for his information, but if he had gone further than the rich, he would have discovered that by and large, these rich are totally ignorant people.  So, still ignorance is a great enemy of the environment.  I agree with him that industry, by and large, has been responsible for environmental degradation, and by and large, it is the rich who have the industries.  But if you go beyond that one, it is the ignorance of these rich that actually, is the real enemy.  Because when the environment is destroyed even the rich will go with it; if they knew they were piling their despair, they probably would not do that.  So, ignorance is a very important and a serious problem.  

Therefore, it is almost idle theories about what we need to do in order to protect our environment when the people are poor.  There is no way families are going to sleep without any food, because they are protecting hon. Kajura’s trees; they will cut the tree and use it to cook.  The only thing we could stop this tree being cut, is if we are sufficiently wealth to be able to provide energy that is not as destructive as burning charcoal or timber in cooking our food.  This country is endowed with the wealth of hydro energy, but of course, I recognise that it needs money to be able to harness this energy.  

Therefore, if anybody in this world is interested in helping us people in the third world to participate in protecting the environment, they must help us vigorously to fight poverty in our amidst.  Therefore, I am advised by hon. Sebaana Kizito that we need entandikwa from these people; we do!  

Now, these people from the developed world have contributed greatly to the destruction of the environment while they became rich.  It is only fair, and absolutely fair, that they should spend some of that wealth to correct the mistakes they made.  What is worse, some of the toxic products from their industries, from their growth, are being shipped back to the third world, and unless this kind of hypocrisy stops, you are not going to convince some of us who know better, that it is our duty to protect the environment when someone else is destroying it for you.  

I would like also to say this about protecting the environment; if you look at some countries of the world, take for example, Germany. Germany has probably a higher population density than Uganda, but in some states, I know for sure the state of Baverior is 60 per cent forest.  The reason why they can afford this is because of the economic structure.  They are capable of effective urbanisation; if you take the State of California, I think, three quarters of the people in California live in the San Francisco as well the Los-Angeles, Metropolitan area, and therefore, they can afford to protect the forest; they can afford to protect the lands.  

But in Uganda, even in the most sparsely of the area, the homes are scattered all over the place.  Therefore, when you are talking about protecting the wild animals, you are talking about contradictions.  Unless the people have got their own territory in which they can afford to live and reasonably comfortably at that, they will always go after these wild animals; and there is nothing you can do to stop them; absolutely nothing.  

So, we have got to address the real fundamental problems of the third world before we can just - you know, I do not want to make allegations, but it is important that we address the real causes of these problems rather than symptomatic treatment.

The other point I want to make is when I was going through this Bill, it seems to be more of the policy statement than a law because it is too general and, therefore, when it comes to prosecuting people who brake this law, you are going to have serious problems For example, when it talks about the definition of wetlands - you look it up, those who are interested in it even will suggest that if there is one square metre of water in your compound where some animal or plant material has adapted itself, you drain that one and you are liable to prosecution.  Because that is wetland says, it does not say anything about its size, it does not say anything about where it is.  If you make a dam on your land and some water plants grow there, and tomorrow you decide to open for that water to go away, you will be prosecuted under this law.  So, there is a serious problem there.  I think it would have been better if the law became more specific about some of these issues.

Lastly, let me make two observations.  Now, when you are talking again about wetlands, there are some places that are going to be in serious trouble with this law.  For example, there is one place in my county Rubabo, a sub-county called Nyakihini, every ten metres of it, it is a bit of tiny swamp, and the rest of the county is rocks.  These people have no choice but to invade these small swamps to be able to survive.  I fear when this law is passed, you are going to build huge prisons or else you will have to turn a blind eye -(Interruption)

DR BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, there is another section where the officer in that locality, the environment officer, will have to bring that to the attention of the district authorities and National Environment Management Authorities.  So, these areas will be gazetted and I do not think really anyone will go to prosecute these ‘wanainchi’ who are trying to survive, after all, the whole thing really starts at the base and that is the people.  So, the people there working with the environment officer will definitely survive into account.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, the rice production in Uganda may decrease because areas like most parts of Busoga or JIK, then you find Tororo, Pallisa, part of Lango, they grow the rice in swamps.  So, if they drain some of those swamps for more production, are they going to be prosecuted or not?  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, if I can respond to what hon. Byaruhanga said, if he had listened to me carefully, I said that this law is more of a policy statement than a law.  When you are going to call upon those RCIs, start making laws, start defining for you what a wetland is, you are in absolutely a serious trouble! because what these people are going to do, if I go to him, in fact, he is going to be a field day for some of these people to make money!  If you want this swamp to be drained, you go and see him.  So, the whole thing is going to be very complicated, unless you have got specific definitions within the law.  Even the prosecutors will have serious problems -(Interruption)

MR KAJURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  If you look at the Bill, you find that the proposal is that each district will work out - there will be a development committee in the district, and it will work along with land use committee, they will then prepared their programme which will then get the approval of the DRC.  So, there is room to handle or to deal with problems that are peculiar through these programmes, which will have to come right from the grassroots to the DRC and then to the authority.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KANYOMOZI:  I am seeking clarification, Mr Chairman, from the Minister.  Under Section 17, which is I think the problem which we are faced from the hon. Member, I have been trying to look through the Bill and I do not see where these committees at lower level are defined, and who is going to compose them and how they are going to be composed.  I am having a problem, if for example, you throw it to RCs or to adhoc committees, then they will use that position as has been the case elsewhere, to make it very difficult for some of the citizens to survive.  I would like to know, exactly how the Minister wants to approach that and, maybe, it will help us.  

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  At least, I think Members and including the Minister are beginning to see that there are serious flows in the implementation of this law if we establish it, and the Minister has inadvertently admitted that there will be different laws in different parts of the country depending upon how the people feel about that law; and that is going to be a serious problem for him.

Now, the last thing I wanted to say about this, with regard to this generalisation of this law is that, one of the biggest problems we have with pollution especially in cities is the use of hosil oil in internal combustion engines.  In most other countries there are very specific rules or laws regarding the introduction of less harmful sources of energy in the internal combustion engines.  

I am aware that in this country because of various considerations, there are some quarters where the introduction of less harmful sources of energy in some engines is greatly revisited.  Now, what I am talking about is the introduction of alcohol as a source of energy in our motor vehicles.  Two things, one, alcohol is a carbon dioxide and water.  Although carbon dioxide is harmful but if we have sufficient plants, they can convert it into oxygen and energy as well.  

But also equally important is the fact that this country by nature is endowed with the ability to convert the sun’s energy into convertible energy in the form of plants.  While we spend sums of money on importing fuel of hosil origin, we would not only be saving on foreign exchange, but would also be employing a lot of Ugandans in the production of this energy.  

Now, we know very well that in countries like Brazil today, there are cars which operate a hundred per cent on fuel that is of plant origin, and I hope that the Minister will take - I know that hosil oil is also part of plant origin, but I mean conversion of sugar into alcohol which alcohol can be used in cars.  

I am hoping that the Minister will make or take very serious steps to make sure that Uganda will reduce what is available to her before we turn to the use of sources of energy from other parts of the world thereby protecting our environment as well as saving foreign exchange.  I will take the information while I sit down, Mr Chairman.  

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  In Uganda, I think the Madhvani group is trying to convert molasses into alcohol for eventual mixing with fuel, which is imported.  However, there is a problem in that the oil companies seem to be resisting this, because they make less profits by mixing with alcohol made locally, and I think, it will therefore, be in the interest of the country and in the interest of the Minister to ensure that the companies do accept to mix up to 15 per cent of alcohol in their fuel.

MR KAJURA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Cabinet recently approved that policy that is being discussed now and we already have proposals for gas oil, gas oil is when you mix what he calls the alcohol with premium.  Now, Kakira, Luganda and we hope in the next few months, Kinyara will be starting on this process.  As I said government has approved the principle and what remains are consultations between the oil companies and the producers.  So, the matter is on, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, lastly, everybody knows that the oil industry all over the world is a very powerful industry, and the Minister has just told us that they are going to hold mere consultations.  We know that these consultations have gone on for too long and have yielded absolutely nothing.  What we want is legislation that has been done in other countries of the world. (Applause)  We want legislation that will force these companies in order to have any of their fuel pumped on our pumps to a certain percentage of energy in the form of alcohol, and unless we do that, if we want to depend on gentlemanly behaviour by these oil companies, I do not think  that we shall achieve much.  What we want is legislation.  I have finished, Mr Chairman, thank you.     

MRS BYEKWASO LUBEGA (Women Representative, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  Before I go to the Bill, please allow me to make some few observation.  First of all, I wish to thank through you, Mr Chairman, the hon. Members who dug deep in their pockets and traveled to South Africa for the Eastern Land Show.  This group comprised of several hon. ladies from here and two males.  I wish also to thank the Business Community, which is striving hard to develop a business relationship with South Africa.  I wish to inform the Members that a lot of activities are going on in South Africa, and I recommend each one of you, if you have a chance please, try to travel there and see what is happening.  

One of the problems we have in Uganda is ignorance and once you are not exposed, you will remain ignorant.  I wish to thank in particular, hon. Basoga, for his leadership of the delegation from this House and the Business Community, not as a government Minister but as a representative from Busiki.  He did a lot of mobilisation from all over the country for people to go to South Africa and develop working relationship with those people.  

I wish also to thank embassy in South Africa for the hard work it is doing to promote the image of Uganda, because we were told that within a year, a hundred embassies have been opened; so there is a lot of competition as far as investors are concerned.  We want Ugandans to know this, because if you are just enclosed here, you do not know what is happening.  So, what it needs is financial assistance and capacity building.  Mr Chairman, lastly on the observations.  

A lot of comments have been raised from the various Members about how some things are handled in Uganda.  I happened to be a Minister one time, I have been on government delegations; one thing I have observed and I have been observing - that is why you find that we are facing a lot of problems because a lot is left undone.  

I am sorry to say, I am seeing some top officials when they travel out, they do not, for example, attend conferences or workshops or seminars.  People from third world countries do not seriously attend these conferences.  They will be there for the opening, and the following day, you see empty places, and those are the places for people from third world countries, and probably, Uganda inclusive.  So, you find that a lot of information and knowledge is missed by our country, which could be brought back home.  

I want to quote one example, without mentioning the names, there was one top official who traveled to some country with a big delegation; he attended a very important conference for just one day.  The following day he took the nearest flight to another country to meet his former girlfriend, and then he came back in time to this country.  So, what sort of knowledge -(Interjection)

Mr Chairman, on this note - I am coming to the Bill and I will be very brief.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Hon. Lubega, please turn to the Bill.

MRS BYEKWASO LUBEGA:  Yes, Sir.  Coming to the Bill -(Interruption)- 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, the Members were not informed of that trip, if he had informed me about it, I would have given him one man to go with. (Laughter)  So, turn to the Bill now.

MRS BYEKWASO LUBEGA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Coming to the Bill, the moment you mention the protection of the environment, you are touching the hearts of women and the youths.  The women are the best conservers of the environment and at the same time, because of circumstances as already mentioned by some hon. Members, are the worst destroyers of the environment.  So, in this Bill, when the Bill is passed, we would request the Minister to give ‘entandikwa’ to women for tree planting.  

In Masaka, we are so active in tree planting that we feel probably we are ahead of everybody in Uganda, and we get plenty of rains  - these days we rarely get dry seasons, that is why we are feeding Kampala with a lot of matooke.  So, Mr Minister -(Interjection)- it is the same direction, via Masaka to Bushenyi.  

I would also agree with hon. Ntimba who mentioned yesterday that probably to encourage this, we need some bit of competition within our districts; at district level, sub-county level and so on, so that people are encouraged to plant more trees.  In Masaka, we have a policy, when we are happy we plant a tree, when we are sad, we plant a tree.  If someone marries another wife or - we plant a tree, if we get a baby in the home, we plant a tree.  So, we feel planting trees is part of us; we want other districts to develop this culture other than waiting for the Minister or the Ministry to put in place this policy.  So, by the time the policy becomes on planting trees, you are already established on the ground.  The Bill mentions the right for every person for a health environment.  

Now, Mr Minister, as you are aware, most of the women in some areas travel long distances in search for water.  Can we have more boreholes in such areas and piped water for that matter?  Can we see more skills educating the women energy serving methods, because we talk about - but do we have a national scheme to educate the people, particularly the women on how to conserve the energy.  Do they know about biogas?  We talk about rural electrification, but this might be a long story; when will the electricity ever rich the rural areas?  We need these quick methods where the women in particular, could be educated on.

Let me turn briefly to this wild weed which is eating our lives away; a lot has been said, this weed has been with us for so many years.  It is like, because we have failed so far to prevent it, so, if you do not prevent you have to cure, and we are even failing to cure, so what happens next?  The whole country is going to perish!  These days there are shortages of water supplies, electricity supply because the level of the water at the lake is going down.  In fact, even the other lakes are infected.  

Yesterday, one of the colleagues who traveled to south Africa mentioned something about the film we saw; we attended a workshop about environment and tourism.  In that film, we were impressed the way South Africa combated that wild weed. 

 Now, why do we not try to approach such countries which have ever suffered this disease so that we learn from their methods, and when hon. Mugarura was trying to broaden our knowledge, some hon. Members were saying, but we have done this and that and we are doing it, but learning is endless; let us try all methods to combat this wild weed, otherwise we are perishing.  

So, if a Minister sees that someone has got a point on a particular thing, try to invite that particular person so that you have more dialogue with her or him, other than just saying but we have done this and that; because we have got to learn from each other (Interruption)

MR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I do not know whether I should repeat it or not because yesterday I gave information which I thought was conclusive.  We have had workshops here and these workshops are not attended by the hon. Member who is talking now; she goes to South Africa to the workshops in South Africa and it is a shame there.  The method she is talking about we have already adopted; all the methods you are talking about are already adopted!  Hon. Member stay peacefully, we are working.  

DR MATOVU BYATIKE:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member speaking that, it is much easier to control a disease in a family than in a community.  In Uganda we are dealing with the hyacinth on Lake Victoria, much bigger water than South Africa.  It is much more difficult, it is not that easy!  Small dams and small ponds and rivers are different and you can easily control the weed there than the Lake Victoria or Lake Kyoga at that.

MRS BYEKWASO:  Mr Chairman, I appreciate all the information given to me, but what I am saying, first of all, I want to answer the hon. Minister, we are not invited to these workshops, we do not know where they are held, I do not know whether the other Members are invited, we are not invited.  

Secondly, the honourable who said it is better to deal with our problems here other than South Africa, but this is added information, we are bringing what we saw!  Can we please put it in practice?  Can he consult us so that we brief him more, other than staying ignorant? 

LT COL SSERWANGA LUWANGA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification in view of what hon. Lubega has raised and in view of what the Minister has answered.  I am seeking a clarification on the issue that how does the seminars, the workshops eradicate the weed?  because the weed is in the sea, the weed is in Lake Victoria, it is in the river, it is in Lake Kyoga, but I hear him stressing that we are having workshops, I think in Conference Centre or Sheraton; so, I have failed to understand how these workshops will eradicate the weed. (Applause)

MR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO:  Mr Chairman, I wish to clarify to hon. Sserwanga Lwanga, that we are an educated people, and we would like to use methods which are concerted and methods which are not wasteful; and to do that, just as we are here in this House, it is always better to use many heads than one; and that is why we call workshops so that we get information from all angles so that we do not appear to be close minded and use methods which will not be cost benefit.  The lady is complaining that we are not inviting here, hon. Sserwanga Lwanga is complaining that we are wasting time in the workshops; so, which method should we take?  It is better that we discuss, we invite foreign investors who are willing to help us with eradication of this weed and we use the available methods in the best way possible.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KAJURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I too did visit South Africa recently and I did meet those very same people that, perhaps, hon. Lubega is referring to; they did express interest in assisting Uganda - I have invited them to come here to have a look and I hope in the near future, they will be with us here and they will be able to see for themselves what is going on and, perhaps assist us with the ways in which they have been able to control theirs; but theirs as my colleague has said, has been a small problem compared to ours, but we can always learn from them because although they have not eradicated it, they have contained it.

MR NASASIRA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wanted to avoid it, but in the spirit of, I think, collective responsibility, and seeing the interest hon. Byekwaso has about South Africa’s technology, I just wanted to inform her that the last workshop we had on the 11th April, there was a team from South Africa, including a South African consultant who gave a demonstration on how the method they used to eradicate this weed.  

Secondly, I do not think - I know the weed is worrying, but I do not think in looking for methods of eradicating it we should rush into unresearched chemicals to destroy our water.  30 per cent of Uganda is water; currently we are earning over 50 million dollars in export of fish.  The moment we introduce a wrong chemical in lake Victoria, it will affect Kyoga, it will affect Albert and in two years time, we will have a problem if that chemical is proved to be dangerous.  

Of all the chemicals that we have been trying to find out, there has always been caution of saying, ‘if you use them carefully.’  We do not want a situation where prove in two years time that we did not use them carefully.  We want to study everything so that when we eradicate the weed, we eradicate it but at the same time leaving our lakes and water environmentally friendly.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS BYEKWASO LUBEGA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  So, at least, I am a bit comfortable now, I know what I am talking about.  So, my travel to South Africa was now a waste; at least, the hon. Ministers are aware of what is happening there.  The Ministry is going to set-up a Board. I would request, as I have already mentioned, that you mention the environment and you touch the hearts of women.  I would suggest that on this Board please, we want to see a good representation of women; and secondly, I wish to suggest that probably in this House we should set a Committee called a Monitoring Committee so that it follows up what has taken place -(Interruption)

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  On the issue raised by the hon. Member concerning the Board, the proposal as clearly written on page 21 under Clause 9.5 ‘the members appointed under sub-section 3, that is the Board - shall be persons who qualify by virtue of their knowledge and experience in environmental management’ there will be no affirmative action on gender matters as far as that is concerned.  It is purely and strictly - unless this House tries to see it otherwise.  

Secondly, there is a Sectoral Committee for Natural Resources, and I am the Chairman of that Committee which is ably handling the matters connected with the environment.

MRS BYEKWASO LUBEGA:  So, I would request that Committee to be more active than it has been.  

Lastly, as the hon. Ministers have mentioned about different workshops, seminars and so on, we at times attended seminars, not specifically on environment, but other seminars.  But when it comes to the implementation part of it, that is where the whole thing dies; that is why I am calling upon this Committee in charge of Natural Resources to be more active.  Because the environment in Uganda is really dying, so that when there is anywhere where the Ministry is stuck, they can always come to it to assist.  

Otherwise, implementation of policies is very poor in Uganda.  So, all the committees in their capacities, please wake up and make a follow up of your different areas of operation.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR MARWAS (Dodoth County, Kotido):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  However, I have a bit of a problem on this Bill.  The Bill basically talks of the authority; we are creating authority which, according to this Bill, is going to create laws which are not specified in the Bill.  This is the greatest weakness of this Bill, and if we are not definite on this law, how are we going to implement the laws that we do not know, who is going to make them?  

I want to be specific mainly on the Bill.  I am happy it has come, because this is time for modernisation in the world, not for industrialisation.  It is good that we are having something in place, because most of these industrial countries are now shifting to the third world, because the laws on the environment and industrialization in the third world are lax.  So, a lot of industrialisation is brought to Africa, to all the other countries; I think it should have come in place.

If you look at the authority, I am asking myself, since we have not or do not know the authority it is going to make, who is going to survive the authority.  If you open Section 6, you will find where the authority is given a lot of powers, but then the individual has no way of going to court.  What happens if the authority decides to collude in the court because that individual in that locality has no room of going anywhere, you only appeal to the authority; what if the authority refuses to take action, what happens to that individual?  I think there should be room for an individual also to go to court in case the authority decides not to take action on this pollution.  

If you look at Section 15 to 18 -(Interruption)

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I hope I understand the - of the Member but if we look on page 70 under part (xiii) offenses; here they describe the penalty relating to environmental inspectors or cases relating to impact assessment, offenses relating to records, and offenses relating to environmental standards and guidelines.  It goes on to talk of offenses relating to hazardous waste materials, chemicals and substances; offenses relating to pollution, offenses relating to registration, orders and easements and the general penalty, not withstanding that the next section talks about judicial proceedings.  I wonder whether what he was raising is outside the provisions of these particular offenses.

MR KAJURA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The authority does not make laws, the laws are made by Parliament, and this is going to be the principle law, and if we turn to page 18, the functions of the authority are to coordinate the implementation of government policy and decisions of the policy committee, to ensure the integration; and then elsewhere it will give guidelines.  But obviously the authority cannot make laws; the laws are made by Parliament.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, I will give where I am talking about since the Minister is giving information, which is not correct.  If you look at Section 104, it says; “no suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings will be brought against the Policy Committee.  The Executive Director, the secretaries and Inspector and Analyst or other officials in their personal capacity, for anything done; in good faith under Statute or Statutory Instrument, guidelines and standards made there under...”  I am saying all these are not specified, and you are saying nobody can take any legal action against these people.

I intend to bring a few amendments on these.  If you look at Section 59 - because there is no room for private citizens to take anybody to court - if you look at Section 59, it says, “The Technical Committee on pollution appointed under Section 12 shall be composed of such persons...”  Now, this is for industries that are going to be set up.  I am asking the Minister -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wish to seek clarification from the hon. Minister of Environment on this very important issue hon. Marwas is raising.  Whereas somebody should not be taken to court when he is doing something in good faith, but the important question is if the authority which is set up colludes with an individual who is supposed to dump materials that would be otherwise dangerous, how is it provided in this Act that the collusion between authority and the person is, actually taken of.  I am aware that in our own laws, individuals can take people to court when they do wrong.  But should there not be a provision to ensure that the authority itself cannot be corrupted as an authority to collude with polluters of the environment?  

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, hon. Magezi wants to clarify, but I think the Minister was asked for clarification.  Mr Chairman, if you look at Section 59, it talks of the function of the Committee.  I believe these are functions for the industries to be set up.  My question is, what happens to these other industries, which already exist and may cause pollution of the environment?  How will these industries be taken into control, because I read somewhere that where pyrethrum is planted that soil will no longer be fit for production of any other crop, and yet we are growing pyrethrum in one of the most fertile districts in this country?  I am asking after the pyrethrum; what happens to Kabale?  And yet such issues are not catered for - of the going industries are not catered for in this Bill.  What happens to those industries, because are only taking care of those industries that are going to come after coming into force of this Statute, but these others which are already in force and may violate the environment, there is no room given in this Bill that should take care of them.

MR KAJURA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  In law, it is very usual to protect individuals, like an individual Policeman; a policeman may arrest a criminal but you do not sue him as Mr Tom Mukasa, you sue the government.  Now, similarly here when they have been covered by a section, which was mentioned by the hon. Member on the Floor, 104, it even talks in terms of good faith!  ‘For anything done in good faith and the Statute or Statutory Instrument.’  Which means that if officials exercise powers under this law, are corrupted, then they are also acting in breach of this law.  Now, if you return to 53, the authority shall be capable of suing and being sued, and suffering all acts and things as bodies corporate may be lawfully do or suffer.  So, this, Mr Chairman, is well covered.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, if the Minister can care to look at 105, comparing to what he has just said; 105 reads as follows: ‘where this Statute empowers the authority or any other of its organs to make a decision, the decision may be subject to appeal within the structure of the authority in accordance with such administrative procedures as may be established for the purpose...and it goes on to say; and decision shall not be called into question by any court.’  Therefore, I am saying -(Interruption)

MR KAJURA:  Why does he not complete and say, nothing provided for in this Section empowers the High Court in the exercise or supervisory jurisdiction.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, my understanding of any court includes the High Court.  So, I do not what - however, I want to look at the offenses from Section 96 to 98.  

I wish to be advised by the lawyer, because 96, after always offenses, he commits an offence and is liable to conviction to imprisonment not less than 12 months.  But when you go to our law books - because Parliament usually gives the base line, the maximum, and leaves the court to play around in a certain area, but now we are saying not less than 12 months.  But I think we should say not more, so that somewhere the courts can play around - when you say not less, you can as well be given life imprisonment - I mean somebody can play around and they are talking of people who are going to jail, and none of us here will like to go in jail indefinitely.  So, the law must be a bit specific.  

Even on 198, it is the same thing, not less than, not less than, - I beg the court is left from 12 to anything; and nobody can play around with this.  It is a laughing matter, but the day when you end there, because we make laws and the first people to be effected by the laws are the legislators.  So, we should make definite laws to take care of all of us.

MISS KADAGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that the formulation of this Clause, this is the court with the discretion to determine, depending on the gravity of the offence.  If it is a minor offence, one may get 12 months, if it is graver, it can be two years.  So, we cannot tie the hands of the court at this stage.  Thank you very much.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, those offenses are very grievous; suppose as the Professor has just said here, there are things in the wetlands, because they are not definite, in my own land and yet I am doing it in good faith for the survival of my children, am I going to imprison for 12 months or more?  So, I have some amendments to move at the right time, but this question of fixing the basic minimum so high should not arise, because this is first law I am seeing which gives minimum, but the rest say not more than this.  Even in sentencing death, they may face death, not that shall be hanged; but this is the only law I am seeing, I am sorry for draftsmen who drafted.  I think it is not in good faith.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.  

(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 25 April 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

