Tuesday, 22 April 2003

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my pleasure to welcome you back from the Easter holidays. I hope you had an enjoyable Easter, and I have every hope that your constituents were happy to see you; and you feasted with them. So you are welcome.

Honourable members, we have to adjust our Order Paper a little to include an item on the Land (Amendment) Bill, so that we clear the terms of reference, so that the committee can start its work. So please, consider the Order Paper as having been amended. We shall start with that particular item so that we set the terms of reference. Thank you.

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, any views on the terms of reference? The chairperson is not here; any idea? Well, I hope all members have received a copy from the chairperson of the committee suggesting certain terms of reference. I do not know whether you have the copies?

MR JOHN AACHILLA: Mr Speaker, I am a member of the Select Committee and I have been consulting with the chairman. He informed me that there are a number of proposals by members on terms of reference for the committee which he has he just gone out to compile and circulate to members.  He told us he would be in the House in a few minutes’ time. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So it means you need some more time? Then we shall come to it afterwards.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA TEA GROWERS CORPORATION (REPEAL) BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Speaker, more consultations are being made on this bill, in which case, I am not ready to move for the second reading.

THE SPEAKER: In that case, the matter is suspended for some time - indefinitely.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Mr Alex Kamugisha): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2002” be read a second time. I beg to move.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Seconded.

MR KAMUGISHA: Mr Speaker, the National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill was first introduced in this House on 12 December, after which you committed it to the relevant committee. We have since then had an opportunity to interact with them so that we can reach some wider understanding.

Introduction: 
The National Youth Council was established under the enactment of the National Youth Council Statute of 1993.  The Statute provides for the establishment of the National Youth Council, its composition, objectives, functions, administration and other connected purposes. 

By April 1994, all youth council structures from the village to national level were already in place. The overall goal of the council is to empower the youth and provide for their participation in the socio-economic development process of this country. 

Main objectives:

    1. To organise the youth of Uganda in a unified body;
    2. To engage the youth in activities that are of benefit to them and the nation at large; and
    3. To protect the youth against any kind of manipulation.

The council is a non-partisan and non-discriminative umbrella-body, which guarantees participation of all Ugandan youth between the age of 18 to 30 years.

Mr Speaker, during the implementation of the statute since 1993, a number of gaps and weaknesses have been identified. These proposed amendments are therefore intended to strengthen the Youth Council structures, as well as harmonise and synchronise the statute with other related laws and policies that came on board since 1993.

These laws and policies include the 1995 Constitution, the Local Governments Act of 1997 and the National Youth Policy of 2002.  Now, therefore, it is proposed to amend the following sections of the National Youth Council Statute of 1993.

Mr Speaker, Section (2) of the Bill, repealing Section (5) of the National Youth Council Statute, 1993 on composition of Council: 

This section intends to amend section (5) of the statute, which concerns the composition of the council.

The current statute provides for two national structures, namely the National Youth Delegates Conference and the National Youth Council. Each of these bodies is required to meet regularly. However, there has been duplication of the roles and functions of these two bodies.

For example, while Section 8 of the statute mentions that the main function of the National Delegates Conference is policy making, the role of the National Youth Council is not clearly mentioned or defined. Hence, it creates some role conflict. 

The main advantage of the proposed amendment is that the number of decision-making organs of the council will be reduced by combining the National Delegates Conference and the National Youth Council into one effective and workable body. This section, therefore, seeks to repeal Section 5 of the statute, and harmonise the two bodies under Section 8 of the statute. The new composition of the Council will now be transferred under section 8 of the statute. 

Section 3 of the Bill: This is on membership of the District Youth Council.  Mr Speaker and honourable members, this section seeks to amend section 7 –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think what you need is a general mention of the amendment; we shall go into details later.

MR KAMUGISHA: This section seeks to amend Section 7 of the principal enactment by adding more membership to the District Youth council. 

Section 4 of the Bill proposes the composition of the National Youth Council and the main element here is to make sure that the national body has got direct linkage with the district body. It is here that we propose that the new body comprising the chairpersons of every district, secretaries for women, 14 representatives of the youth organisations, four students elected by UNISA, one Member of Parliament, or chairpersons of the County Youth Council.  

Section 5 of the bill is on age. Age has been a problem in implementing the statute, and this section provides a solution to the long-standing issue of age verification. The legal acceptable definition of youth is 18 to 30 years, and I must mention here that this was an affirmative action which was intended to empower the youth and to develop their leadership role. However, it has not been very clear as to what happens when the youth is already 30 years. So, this section proposes that once you are 30 years, you should cease to be a member of the Youth Council. 

Section 6 of the Bill is on the role and appointment of the executive secretary. The secretary is the one responsible for implementation of the council’s policies. Therefore, we think his participation in the National Executive is very crucial. So, this section proposes that he sit on all council meetings. It also stipulates how he will be elected. 

Section 7 of the bill is on the election of youth representatives in the National Youth Council. It talks about election of youth representatives in the NRC, which is no longer relevant. The youth are now represented in Parliament by five Members of Parliament who are elected under the National Elections Act, 2001. Therefore, this section is no longer relevant, and it should be repealed.

Mr Speaker, these are the cardinal elements of the bill which have already been deliberated upon. As I said, we had extensive discussions with the committee, and at an appropriate time, I will address myself to some of their recommendations and the way forward. I beg to move, Mr Speaker, thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable members. I beg to present the report of the sessional Committee on Social Services, on the National Youth Council Statute (Amendment) Bill, 2002. 

The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2002 was read for the first time in this august House on 12 December 2002. In accordance with our Rules of Procedure, rule No. 154(c), the bill was referred to the committee of social Services for consideration.

Methodology:

Various stakeholders were invited to present their views and submit memoranda on this bill. The Committee is extremely grateful for the contributions made by Members of the Equal Opportunities Standing Committee and the youth representatives in Parliament during the discussions of the bill. 

The committee is also grateful for the co-operation and input from the Minister of Gender Labour and social Development.  

Lastly, the input made by the following stakeholders is commended: 

    • The National Youth Council; and 
    • Youth Analysis Board. 

Financial Implications:

In accordance with our requirements of Section 10 of the Budget Act, the certificate of financial implications of the bill was signed by the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development and submitted to Parliament (See the Annex). Some copies must have been on the table, honourable Members. Government is, therefore, urged to honour its commitment to provide these funds which have been earmarked and reflected in this certificate so that the objectives of these people are achieved.  

Background:

Honourable members, in 1993, Parliament passed the statute, which established the national youth council running from village to national level. The main objectives of the national youth councils were to organise the youth of Uganda into a unified body, protect the youth against any kind of manipulation and engage them in activities that are beneficial to them and the nation. 

The same statute of 1993 established the National Delegates Conference, which was the main policy making organ of the Council.  

Since the statute became operational in 1993, some gaps, which limited performance of these Youth Councils, have been identified. It is therefore on that basis that amendments have been proposed to make the youth councils more encompassing, efficient, and to establish linkages with other relevant organs.  

Observations and Recommendations: 

Composition:

Honourable members, the statute of 1993 established two supreme structures at national level, namely, the National Youth Council with a total membership of 67 and the National Youth Delegates Conference whose membership was 310. 

It has been noted that the National Youth Delegates' Conference had no direct linkage with the lower youth council structures for effective implementation and monitoring. It is further noted that the same body had irregular meetings due to financial constraints.  

The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill proposes the merger of the National Youth Delegates' Conference and its re-composition into one supreme national body called the National Youth Council.

Currently, the National Youth Council Statute provides for the National Youth council in Section 5, and the National Delegates' Conference in Section 8 of the Statute. 

The proposed amendment will merge the two into one supreme national body, thereby streamlining the size, the functions, and increasing youth participation at lower levels. The supreme national body is supposed to meet at least twice a year in order to perform their roles effectively. 

It is important to note that chairpersons and secretaries for female, as well as secretaries in charge of finance at district level, will be members of the National Youth Council. 

Honourable members, I want you to note this seriously, because originally, there was a special delegate elected, but now, according to the amendment, we are proposing that the chairperson of the district youth council, the secretary for females, and the secretary in charge of finance will now be the members of the National Youth Council. Those will remain with a linkage down. The other one was just a delegate. After that, he or she did not have any linkage with the district council, nor did they have a linkage with lower councils.  

The structures had no linkage with relevant policy making bodies at different levels to ensure that interests and needs of the youth are taken care of in the policy formulation and programme implementation. For example: 

    • The National Youth Delegates' Conference, which is the supreme policy-making body, had no linkage with youth Members of Parliament. The Committee has proposed that all the five Members of Parliament representing the youth become ex-officio members of the new recomposed National Youth Council.

    • The parent ministry, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, had limited linkage with the lower youth council structures, yet the ministry is responsible for their budget and policy.

It is proposed that the district officer responsible for youth affairs be an ex-officio member on the district youth councils.

    • The students and non-governmental organisations dealing with youth affairs are not participating at district and lower youth council levels.  

The Committee recommended that students and non-governmental organisations dealing with youth affairs and persons with disabilities be represented on youth councils at sub-county, district and national levels.

It is important to note that the chairpersons of sub-county councils will now be members of the district youth councils. The Committee proposed the removal of county youth councils because of the redundancy and inconsistency with the existing local governments. That is also important to note.

There was concern that the National Youth Council and the Delegates' Conference formed an electoral college for the female youth Member of Parliament. The proposed composition of the National Youth Council may be too few for an electoral college. 

It is recommended that the law dealing with elections of the youth members of Parliament be amended to set the electoral college for the election of the female youth members of Parliament, which could be an expanded National Youth Council.

Establishment of Secretariats: 

There is need to have consistent structures to facilitate the operation of youth councils at different levels.  

The Committee proposed the establishment of secretariats at the district and sub-county levels, as it is at national level. However, the Committee recommended that the secretariat at district level be established to start with, and at sub-county level in the long-term plan.

Funding: 

Youth councils have been poorly funded. Even where funds were approved by Parliament, Government released little. We have to note that.  It is noted that some local governments have not released funds to youth councils, except in a few isolated cases.  

It is disappointing to note that the statutory meetings for the National Youth Executive Committee, National Delegates' Conference, National Youth Council and National Consultative Forum have not been convened regularly due to financial constraints.

The Committee, therefore, recommended that the youth councils, both at national and district levels, have an independent legal status as body corporate. This will empower youth to raise funds from several sources, with supervision from the centre, to ensure accountability and proper use of funds.

The Committee further recommended that funds of youth councils be decentralised as conditional grants to districts through the normal accounting systems The Chief Administrative Officer will then be responsible for accountability of the funds.

The Committee has recommended that section 19 of the National Youth Council Statute of 1993 be amended to ensure that district and sub-county local councils make financial contributions to youth councils respectively. 

Honourable members, as an extra observation, these youth councils have been mainly relying on funds from the centre, but we are not even decentralising the funds. And not only that, there are some districts which could be capable of contributing monies to the youth. So, we are making the legal provision for that.  

Filling of vacancies for youth councils and committees:

The Committee supported by-elections where the office of a member of the National Youth Council falls vacant by virtue of death, resignation and abscondment for more than six months.

However, the Committee did not support overage to be among the factors to be considered for filling vacancies, as it may cause unnecessary by-elections and financial expenses. The elected youth councillors who become over age should be allowed to occupy offices until the next elections are conducted.  

Honourable members, according to the election requirements for the youth, it is the age between 18 and 30, but somebody can be 29 and a half. So, after six months, will we begin having by-elections? If somebody is elected at 28, what happens? 

So, we said that once somebody has entered office, let that person occupy the office because at the time of election, he or she qualified by age. Otherwise, we shall have all sorts of by-elections and it might be very expensive.

Tenure of office: 

Honourable members, the Committee proposed that the tenure of office of national youth councils be moved from the schedule to the main body of the law. This will limit unnecessary issuing of statutory instruments by the minister in order to adjust elections of the youth councils. 

For example, currently, if it were not in the schedule, it would have been mandatory for the ministry and government to organise elections.  But now that it is in the schedule, this allows them time to adjust here and there. So, we want that section on the tenure of office to be moved from the schedule to the main body, so that they have limitations on adjustments.

The Committee also recommended that the tenure of office be increased from three to four years. This will give enough time to councils and committees to deliver. We gave local councillors four years, so we can also give these councils four years, so that they can deliver.

Transition period:  

Most of the youth council leadership has been elected, and some amendments in the new bill have proposed scrapping of some existing structures; for instance, the National Delegates' Conference and the county councils. 

It is important to note that 25 districts elected the national delegates on the basis of the existing law, in spite of the advice from Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The ministry's position was that election of national delegates be postponed until the new law is in place. But this position was ignored.

However, these delegates cannot be said to be illegal, because the existing law provides for them.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that the new law consider the transitional period to cater for the affected positions. It is recommended that for those districts where the delegates were elected, the delegates will fill the office of the Secretary for Finance in the district on the national council until the expiry of his or her service as delegate.  

Honourable Members, as you have heard, in spite of the advice from Ministry of Gender, some districts went ahead to elect one delegate. Now we are putting it in the law that the merger should bring the National Delegates' Conference and National Youth Council together. We are also saying that these delegates did not have a linkage with lower councils and, therefore, proposing that the chairperson for Youth at district level, Secretary for Finance and Secretary for Females be the ones who come for the National Youth Council meetings. But in the case of those districts, which did not listen to the advice of the Ministry of Gender, we are saying that during the transitional period, we allow those who were elected as delegates in those 25 districts to come for the National Youth Council meetings in place of Secretaries for Finance until their period is over.

In conclusion, honourable members, the Committee has recommended for a comprehensive amendment of the bill in future instead of just bringing piece meals of the amendment. Honourable members, Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Committee.

MRS NANSUBUGA NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee for this report, and I would like to talk about one issue. 

Mr Speaker, we have youth councils at district level, but unfortunately they are not functioning. When we move around our constituencies, the main reason given to us is that they are not funded. I would like to suggest that funding of district youth councils should come directly from the Ministry of Finance as a conditional grant - (Interjection). Yes, because down at the lower levels, the youth cannot participate! It sounds a bit too big, but really, if you put in place a youth council and you want it to work, we should really get means of getting it to work. That is the point I wanted to put across; that the youth are supposed to be funded if we want them to participate fully. They are left out not doing anything! 

One other aspect I would like to add is that every youth executive Committee has nine members, and I propose that instead of having one post for a female youth, we should conform with most laws and have a provision of a third being female. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I want to thank the Committee for this report, but I also have a few questions to raise. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that we have had budget cuts of 23 per cent. Now I do not know to what extent they are going to affect the activities of the youth, because our main problem is money. I am also worried about these new bodies that are being created. 

First of all, we are now going to create secretariats at the district and at sub county levels. We have been crying for money for a long time, what assurance have we got that when we create more offices, then money will become available? I would have wanted the Committee to give us assurance that despite the creation of these new offices and despite the 23 per cent budget cuts, money will still be found to run all these institutions. 

Mr Speaker, I am also not comfortable about this provision that when a youth is elected at, say, the age of 29 and a half, he should still serve on the Committee even after going beyond the age of 30. Why do we have to leave it open? Why don’t we say that a youth who is over 25 should not contest for an office, so that if he gets to the office at the age of 25, by the time that youth clocks 30 then he will be within the ambit of the law!  

MS SEKITOLEKO KABONESA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Kalule for giving way. I would like to inform hon. Kalule, and the House at large, that the youth bracket in this context is between 18 and 30, and there is no way we can tell someone who is 29 years and 8 months not to contest. He will challenge you, definitely. But now what we are saying is, because we do not want to keep on carrying on by-elections, let someone serve his or her term till the end of five years. And by the way, under other laws, a person at 35 years is still a youth.  Therefore, we would not really see a reason to refuse such a person to keep on until his or her term is over. So I think, we should be considerate and actually, those who are 39 years, we still consider those as our senior youths.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much. I would like to seek clarification from hon. Kalule Sengo, because elsewhere we have other laws that have limitations in terms of assuming certain offices. A case in point is the office of the President, where for one to qualify to be a president, he should not be beyond 75 years. But I do not think that someone at 74 can be stopped from assuming the office of the President, because he will end up being 77 as he goes through his term of office.

So, I think these matters are quite sensitive, because you do not have a clear cut limit, which you can use with clear precision and be able to apply across the board.  At some point someone is eligible, because if you say a youth is between 18 and 30, at 29 and two months to go, he is still a youth and he is entitled to that. So, I think it is only logical that we leave it at that.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the hon. members for that information, but when we argue it in the case of the President, these are some of the anomalies we are talking about. If we know that a President should not stand at the age of 75, then we would be more comfortable if we said that a man beyond 70 should not contest, because we fear that if he contests at 74, then he will be in office until about 80. This was a proposal, Mr Speaker. 

Mr Speaker, again I am concerned about the whole policy of Youth. It is okay to create these councils and make all these amendments, but I think we need something that can really touch the youth directly. How have we managed to engage the youth into productive work? When you go to all these townships in Uganda, you find the youth idle from early morning up to the evening! I would have loved a policy, which in a way coerces these youth into productive work. 

Why don’t we put up some kind of farms or projects, which are meant for the youth, and then we urge all the youth to go and participate in this? In the first place, the youth are more energetic than the rest of us, Ugandans. They should actually be more productive. But instead, we pass these laws and then we do not really target these youth for productive work. So, Mr Speaker, I think this is one of the other things that we need to think about as Government.

Again, Mr Speaker, I want to find out how far this scheme, which was initiated some years back to give some form of entandikwa to the youth, went. Where did that scheme die out? How did it disappear? 

I remember when I was still the RDC in Rukungiri, some money actually did come out. Each of the youth was given half a million as entandikwa for some productive work. At that time, there was a promise to extend even more money to the youth. But the whole thing disappeared in thin air. It is not even talked about!  

Mr Speaker, I think we must be conscious of the fact that the youth are the leaders of tomorrow.  The youth are the assets of this nation. Everything should be done to assist these youth.  With those few comments, Mr Speaker, I thank you and I support the motion. Thank you very much.

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want also to thank the committee for the good work done. 

I want to thank the ministry for identifying these gaps. The National Youth Council Statute was put in place in 1993, which was before the 1995 Constitution and before the Local Governments Act. So, definitely, there were gaps that were left. I believe that at another time, the ministry will have to do another overhaul of the entire National Youth Council Statute, because there are still other gaps, even when these ones have been brought on board.

Mr Speaker, I want to start with the issue of funding. I was a chairperson of a village youth committee. I was also chairperson of a parish youth committee. I was also chairperson of a sub-county youth committee. The youth committees are progressive; you move from one level to the other.  I was also a chairperson at county and district levels and, therefore, involved –(Interjection)- I am not campaigning, incidentally. So, when I talk about no funding of youth structures, I really know the agony, the misery, the frustration and the challenges that the youth leaders face at those various levels. 

In Uganda, youth funding has followed a very strange and unique trend. When these structures were put in place in 1994, they received funding in 1996; that was prior to an election. That is the time when the National Youth Council was able to buy motorcycles for all the 39 districts then.  

We again received unprecedented funding between 1999 and 2000, still prior to a referendum and another general election in 2001. That was the time when motorcycles were bought for the newly created districts. This is when Kalangala received a motorboat engine, this is when money was sent to the district –(Interruption).

MS BINTU JALIA: Thank you very much, hon. Namayanja. In 1994 I was elected as the Youth Representative, Western Region, to the NRC. After the elections, the youth councils disappeared until 1996, towards the elections. That is when the youth started being identified. Thank you very much.

MR DANIEL KIDEGA: Thank you so much, my very good colleague, the Youth Representative for Central.  While she was the district youth chairperson of Luwero, I was the national youth chairperson, and we really suffered because of under-funding of the National Youth Council. 

But the information I would like to volunteer is that, in the 7th Parliament, there has been a new occurrence. For any bill that goes through this House, the Ministry of Finance gives what they call, a financial certificate. That was not the case with the 1993 Youth Statute. 

So, I hope that the fact that the Ministry of Finance has given the financial certificate for this law we are going to pass, there will be no reason to say that there will be under-funding of the National Youth Council. So, the information is that there is a financial certificate, which has been given to the committee, assuring us that there is funding for the implementation of this law that we are going to pass.  Thank you so much.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you and to thank the member holding the Floor.  Definitely, I have long passed that bracket of youth, and I am grateful to God, because not many make it up to my age. 

But the information I wish to give is that a certificate from the Ministry of Finance, under the Budget Act, does not create money in the Treasury. And certainly, it is not a guarantee that there will be funding. For example, we passed the Leadership Code Act and a certificate was issued on this Floor. Unfortunately, up to now, no sufficient funds have been found for the full implementation of that law. 

That is why, Mr Speaker, I even raised my concern that the Minister of Finance should not bring in-exactitudes through the Floor of this House. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hear you talk about Ministry of Finance, but these youth councils fall under one of our sectoral committees. What have these committees, which are in charge of youth councils, been doing to assist them since 1994? Budgets are brought here, why don’t you say, “We do not see a vote for the youth”. 

So, I think we should also be vigilant ourselves. When a budget is presented and we think there are inadequate funds for youth councils, or any sector for which you are responsible, it is for you really to point out this problem. Point out the problem so that it is remedied, instead of waiting for years and then saying, “they died in 1994, resurrected in 1996”, and so forth! (Laughter)

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, honourable members. I have been on the Committee of Social Services for quite some time, and these councils fall under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Mr Speaker, it is out of exactly what you have said that these youth councils had at least some money to buy the motorcycles and bicycles, and some of them managed to open offices. 

At the time when we entered in 1996, it was amazing when we would receive the budget allocations for the youth councils, and they would only indicate a wage bill for the secretariat, but no operation funds. So, we started asking, “we are paying these workers to go and do what?” 

In the financial year 1999/2000, when we appropriated Shs.750,000,000 and the Ministry of Finance released Shs.450,000,000, it is because we had insisted. And we are moving, and we shall continue to insist.

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank the honourable colleagues, the senior youth, and my colleagues for the information given. But still, in 1999 and 2000, for the first time in the history of youth councils, a national youth delegates’ conference was convened, not for purposes of elections, but that time it was to discuss issues, and candidates were supposed to address the youth. 

Members have raised the issue of the certificate of financial implications. The certificate of financial implications in 2000 and 2003 indicated Shs 514,500,000, but Shs 230,000,000 was what was released for the financial year 2000/2003. Maybe the reason was because of the budget cuts, but I do not know whether the budget cuts are going to be permanent, because even in 2003/2004, they indicate Shs 527,000,000 for the youth councils, but the National Youth Council, in the provisional budget, has still been allocated Shs 234,000,000. 

Whereas I also agree that this financial implications certificate is not money in itself, how come that at particular intervals, money is there. Should we again sit back and wait for 2005 to get more unprecedented funding? This kind of under-funding at national level, and no funding at lower levels, I must say, on behalf of the youth of Central region, is making the young people begin to lose their revolutionary patience. 

Whenever we have raised the issue of funding, we have always been told to wait. We have always been reminded about the existence of the structures. We also appreciate that the structures are very wonderful, they are very beautiful, they are very exceptional but the beauty of the structures is seen in their operation or functioning. However beautiful these structures are, however exceptional they are, the impact can never be felt unless the structures are funded up to the lower levels. 

To that end, I want to vehemently support the recommendation of the Committee, that funding for the youth councils should come directly from the Treasury to the districts as conditional grants, like any other money that is sent. Otherwise, that time when we received unprecedented funding, Shs 4 million was taken to West Nile. But they used Shs 1 million to take Shs 4 million to West Nile; they used it on transport by air, and the minister was supposed to hand over the cheque - (Laughter)- and the ceremonies that go with it. So, all those things were involved. 

I want to really appeal to the ministry, that ten years down the road - it is now a decade since these structures were put in place. There should be a very systematic funding mechanism for the youth councils.

On the secretariats to be established at district level, some of these secretariats have been there. Some of them are provided by the district local administration, those administrations which are somehow sympathetic. They are not obliged to provide, they just sympathize with the poor young people. 

As for others, there is a time when I talked about how we received money and the young people were told to rent offices. Some of them were even sued for non-payment, because this money was meant to pay rent for only three to four months. In Luwero, I had to pay the rent from my personal savings because I was being taken to court. That is why I said we are losing revolutionary patience.  

When the secretariats are put in place, I am appealing to the ministry, or to Government, to ensure that they are funded and they are made operational. Otherwise, the young people will end up being sued. And I want to support the Committee that these bodies should be body corporate, so that in case of any problem, they do not sue the district chairperson, but the district youth council.  

Let me talk about the composition of the District Youth Council and the National Youth Council. At national level, the Committee has provided for Members of Parliament as ex officio members.  I would like to suggest that at district level and sub-county level, the district councillors be ex officio members to the District Youth Council because these are councillors who sit at the district local council, and who are going to lobby, because the Committee has recommended that the district local council provide some bit of funding, in addition to what will be coming from the national level. I suggest that we have the councillors at all levels as ex officio members of the District Youth Council. 

On the issue of the delegates, I am a bit reluctant, because you talk of a transitional period, and then provide that districts that elected send delegates, and those that did not elect send secretaries for finance. We need some bit of harmony. I need some more clarification from the Committee. 

I was wondering; why don’t we have new delegates? Those districts that did not elect should elect delegates, and then we have this provision working after the end of this tenure of office. I thank you, Mr Speaker.
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I wish to salute the chairperson of the Committee on Social Services, together with all the members of the committee, for coming up with a detailed and elaborate report on this bill.  

This bill focuses on the empowerment of the youth as a marginalised group. It deals with affirmative action, and I definitely support the bill. Also, I definitely support all the recommendations, together with the amendments. But, Mr Speaker, there is one burning issue here that all of us must talk about and be very open about. Maybe we should not only put it in the perspective of the youth. 

The other day when we were considering the bill on the national women’s councils, the same lamentations came up about money. In a few days to come, we shall be considering a bill to establish a national council on disability. The same questions will come up.

Mr Speaker, this government has been talking about affirmative action, but we have been here long enough to know that affirmative action without money is meaningless. Affirmative action without resources is not for you. It cannot bring about any fundamental transformation. 

We have been talking about programmes to empower the youth, to empower people with disabilities, to empower women but most of these programmes are under-funded. They are not considered as a priority. 

If I may be allowed to give an example, which does not only focus on this bill, as a representative of people with disabilities, it is sad for me to note that right now, the Minister of State for the Elderly and Disability Affairs does not have an official vehicle and yet she has been in this ministry for more than five years. How does the Government expect her to go and mobilise our people in the 56 districts of Uganda? Therefore, this issue of funding is a general concern. 

But they have some good ideas. I would think that we let this matter be handed over to the Standing Committee on the Budget. The Budget Committee should have responsibility to scrutinise the budget, to ensure that the youth have a share of the national cake, the people with disability have a share of the national cake, and the women have a share of the national cake.  

Why am I talking about the Budget Committee?  Because the Executive has frustrated us! Every year we stand here and talk, our voices are now getting hoarse. We look to the Budget Committee which we established a few years ago, to ensure that we analyse the principles of national justice and affirmative action, as enshrined in our Constitution.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on page five, they mention establishing independent youth councils as a body corporate. Will these bodies be expected to fundraise and raise their own money? This is a good recommendation, but if you are talking about fundraising, mobilisation requires knowledge and skills. These skills and knowledge are acquired over time. 

If you want to encourage these councils to be engaged in some form of fundraising or mobilisation of resources, and effective utilisation of resources to achieve the required output, you must be prepared to undertake a serious and comprehensive programme to build the capacity of the youth. With that, they can be able to generate the required funding and requisite productivity. But I do not see any deliberate effort here to empower the youth, and to ensure that they can mobilise money and use it productively.  

While I am criticising the Government in general, I would like to thank the minister in charge of youth affairs for the effort he has so far put in to ensure that we can empower the people with disabilities, the youth and other marginalised groups.  But we must know that a lot still remains to be done.  

I have only two humble requests, and I want to repeat myself, because I want to ensure that they are understood. The Budget Committee, please help us to ensure that affirmative action is translated into allocation of resources. Secondly, for the youth, I appeal to the minister to initiate a very serious comprehensive programme to build the capacity of the youth to mobilise resources and utilise them effectively.

With these few remarks, Mr Speaker, I beg to support the motion. Thank you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the good job done, and the Government for bringing the bill. But I would have been happier to first see how we are empowering the youth. We have said that they are the future leaders of this country – (Interjection) – I understand they are the leaders of today.  

Mr Speaker, I will start with the financial implications, before I make further comments on the bill. I have analysed it and I have picked two issues. 

Under item 40, there is, "Transport and grant costs". I would imagine that these are funds that are going to be used to transport the youth councils in the districts and at the headquarters. Given such resources, I foresee a situation where this money will not be enough to do the job. I am looking at this as if this certificate was put there for window dressing, so that we pass the bill without questioning it.

Look at item 60 – "Transfer Payments". It is Shs 329,000,000. I assume that this is the money that goes to districts each calendar year. If we divide this by 56 districts, you come up with about Shs 5.8 million each. Could this run the district council for a full year? I think we should be realistic. The national youth councils we are forming, which we are passing the law for should be the ones that will be operative.  

I recall that some time back, there were youth that were called to Kampala here for a conference, and they got stranded. Many Members of Parliament were embarrassed because they had to find resources to deal with their youth. I do not think it is good to make a law that will become redundant. 

In 1996, when we were campaigning for our beloved President, the youth were not a problem. In 2001, the youth were a problem. In 2006 they will be a big problem, unless we help and empower them in a very affirmative way. There is no need for us to say that the youth are okay when they are not. 

Why am I bringing that up? We have not addressed the problem of the Entandikwa. We have heard about the YES project, that is the Youth Enterprise Scheme. I do not know how it died. In fact it is going to come up again towards election time, but before that, it is not there. Can you empower someone towards their dying time? Why do we make things that will not operate? 

The Minister of Gender has not come here to tell us of an employment policy. Every year we get 10,000 graduates at O’ Level. What are we going to do with them? Should we pass the law for the sake of it, or we should address the problems? Let us first – we know the problem - let us get drugs for the problem and deal with it.  

In this law I do not see anything to deal with the funds for the YES scheme. I see the money here is going to be for operation of the headquarters. What about the real one to empower the youth? The real funds –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As has already been said, I was a Commissioner for Youth and Children Affairs in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The information I would like to give my friend, hon. Mafabi, is that let him not confuse the present bill with the YES scheme. These fall under two different departments, although they are in the same ministry. 

I would appreciate it if he could concentrate more on the bill that is at hand, because for him to come here and say that there is no indication of funds for YES, is to say that we should have discussed a bill from another department. These are two different departments. If you want to know which departments these are, the bill at hand is under the Department of Youth and Children Affairs, and YES is under the Entandikwa Department. They are in the same ministry but different departments. That is what I am saying.  

MR MAFABI NANDALA: Mr Speaker, thank you. I want to thank hon. Wadri. I know you are looking at the micro and I am looking at the macro. I am interested in the ministry that deals with the stuff, and I do not know the difference. It is your problem with your units, but what we need is service delivery, not units. 

Anyway, what I was trying to talk about was that we are trying to make the youth councils very powerful, but with neither resources nor a clear way of operation. I want to look at the issue of representatives. First of all, I see the numbers are too big. When you say that now every female representative in every sub-county and parish would be a member of the council – I am trying to look at the district council; then we shall come to the headquarters, the National Youth Council. I think they are too many. 

For now, we know very well that every council that is being formed, women make a third of it. Supposing the finance secretary is a woman, the secretary for women is a woman, and the chairperson is a woman, like hon. Namayanja, are you telling us that women should head the councils so that you are happy? No! 

My suggestion is that for the purpose of - because we have even limited resources; we are operating with limited resources, we should elect the councillors who are the representatives of the youth, and not just say that because someone owns an office, then they should become councillors at the next stage. That is not democracy.  

For the MPs, I do not have a problem. Those can be ex officio members to the council because they will be the ones delivering the information from Parliament. That is their constituency to which they take information about what we are planning to do. We want to get your views –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much honourable colleague for giving way. I want to inform hon. Nandala Mafabi that the youth councils' structures are the constituencies for the councillors. Members of Parliament should be ex officio members to the National Youth Council because we sit where the budgeting is done. Likewise, the councillors at district and sub-county local councils also sit where the budgeting is done. That is why we are proposing that they should come here. Thank you.

MR MAFABI: Thank you, hon. Namayanja, for that information but –(Interruption)

MS KABONESA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I thank you honourable member for giving way. Probably what hon. Namayanja forgot to tell you is that ex officio members are not paid in this way, and therefore, we will not have any under-funding if they came for the meetings. We also want consistency. You have talked about Members of Parliament being ex officio members at the national level, why not the councillors who are going to go to the district councils? 

That is because I do not see how the local governments would start giving money to the youth councils without a section in the law that allows for that.

On page 16, on the tenure of office for the Youth Council Committee, it reads, “Subject to the Statute, every Youth Council and Youth Committee shall remain in office for a period of four years from the date of its inception, after which it shall automatically lapse and dissolve.” 

Mr Speaker, I want a clarification from the chairperson. As we talk now, it is two years since the National Youth Council was supposed to have been put in place. I even do not know whether hon. Kidega is still the Chairperson of the National Youth Council. So, the clarification I want from the chairperson is whether –(Interruption)

MR KIDEGA: Thank you so much my good friend and colleague from the Eastern region. Definitely, I am still a member of the committee. The time we are talking about is the tenure of youth councils being four years. You will realize in the report that there were a number of youth groups and organizations that were invited to come and give their views on this. 

One of the critical things that came out so clearly is that for one to be elected into the various offices of the youth, there is no academic qualification required. So, any person could qualify, and that allows for a lot of confusion. By the time the person who has assumed office settles to start doing work, the term is ending. So we found it necessary to extend it to four years. On the aspect of whether I am still the National Youth Chairperson, the matter is very clear. This is a legal issue, and I lapsed. Thank you.

MR WADRI: I would like to inform the House that hon. Dan Kidega is still the Chairman of the National Youth Council and that is the reason he traveled to Cyprus the other time with the minister. In a similar vein, he traveled to Britain on the invitation of the Commonwealth Youth Programs So, he is still trotting around as a chairman. Thank you. (Laughter).

MR KIDEGA: Mr Speaker, it is very clear that I was not only a local chairman but also a very good chairperson. So, I went to many international meetings where I was elected into so many organs. Right now, I am a member of the Regional Advisory Board of the Commonwealth Youth Committee, and I did not go to the meeting as a chairman but as a youth of Uganda. Next month I will be travelling to Botswana for a Commonwealth Youth meeting, as a youth of Uganda. I thank you so much.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you for all that information and clarifications. Mr Speaker, the clarification I wanted from the chairperson was that since it is now two years since the general elections took place, would the committees we are going to put in place be compensated for this time loss of two years? The law says that this should be from the date of its inception. So, I need clarification form the chairperson. (Mrs Hyuha rose_).

THE SPEAKER: No, you will clarify later. However, I believe there is no question of compensation, as this is the beginning of streamlining of things, as they should be. The question of expanding automatically means that you do not leave room for the minister to extend the term, because you fear a vacuum. Elections will be organized in good time so that there is no vacuum left.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to support the committee on the issue of giving an independent legal status to the district and national level Youth Councils. This has been a very big hindrance. 

The NGOs and donors have been failing to assist the Youth Councils because they could not differentiate it from government. In fact, many of them take it as an institution of Government, and to be specific, others have been taking it to be a youth wing of the Movement Secretariat. So, I am very happy that they are going to be a body corporate. That way they can access funds from NGOs and donors, and they can even fundraise. I support that recommendation of the committee, Mr Speaker.  

I also want clarification from –(Interruption)

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. On the issue of the youth councils at the national and district level being bodies corporate, the point that was made is that at the national level it was already a body corporate, but it existed under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which ministry did not give recognition to this fact. So, the emphasis in this amendment on fundraising and autonomy is to create more room for this body, at the national and also district level, to act autonomously, which was hitherto not respected. Thank you.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you for that information honourable colleague. The other issue concerns the appointment of the executive secretary at the district level. 

While at the national level the Ministry of Public Service provides for consultation with the National Youth Council at the district level, it is not provided for here. The report says that the CAO will appoint on the recommendation of the District Service Commission.  

Mr Speaker, experience has shown that the district youth officers, as per now, are not accountable to the district youth councils. When you ask them anything they could even ignore you because they are not accountable to you. So I suggest that the executive secretary should be appointed in consultation with the district youth council. I also –(Interruption) 

MR WAMBI: Thank you very much, honourable Member for Youth, Eastern, for giving way. About appointing the General Secretary at the district level, I think it is not the CAO that appoints as such. This is a job at the district level and it will be advertised. Various steps will be taken and the procedures involved in Public Service recruitment will be used at the district level, with the District Service Commission. 

Thereafter, the CAO only acts, as the Permanent Secretary of a district, to issue an appointment letter, not that he will be able to appoint. Otherwise, that would be personalizing the issue. Thank you.

MR KAJEKE:  Thank you for that information.  But in the report, it is specifically pointed out that the CAO shall appoint on the recommendation of the District Service Commission.

I would like once again to thank the Committee for the good job well done, and the ministry for bringing up this bill.  This bill has been long overdue. Elections did not take place because we were waiting for this bill and we have missed a lot.  

For us as Members of Parliament representing the youth, we are supposed to work through the National Youth Council and the rest of the youth councils. We have been finding it a problem to operate. So, I thank them for bringing this bill. We are now going to operate smoothly because all structures will be in place.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbaale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to other members who have thanked the Committee for the work well done.  I will begin by observing that the biggest population of this country are the youth and, therefore, I would like to urge that as we make this law, we should be able to support the youth in all activities that are geared towards eradicating poverty. This area has a lot of potential untapped.  So, it is only the law that can help us to tap that potential, and have the youth in active service.  

I want to make a few observations. On page 5, the Committee has talked about the establishment of a secretariat, and on the following point they have also mentioned making an independent legal status of the youth as a corporate body.  I think these are important issues, but we need to harmonise the existing laws.  

As already mentioned, when the statute was made in 1993, that was before the 1995 Constitution and before the Local Governments Act.  Therefore in order for us to harmonise, we need to ensure that the Local Governments Act takes into consideration the bodies that we are putting in place.  We need to define how the secretariat will co-ordinate with the local governments there.  This may cause some confusion if it is not clearly defined.

The other point I wanted to mention is that, this law would help us to define clearly who is a youth. Of course, for purposes of election, it was said that the youth is between the age of 18 and 30. We also noted that in the Constitution, the minimum age for President is 35.  There is a gap between 30 and 35.  Therefore, as we define who is a youth, we should include the youth to go to 35 years.  That waiting period to become a President should not be left as a gap.

The other point I wanted us to note is that, as we make this law, there are many people suggesting that we go for multiparty politics.  I wanted to be clarified on how these structures will operate within such a system?  We need to be clear also at that level.

Lastly, I would also like to say- (Interruption) 

MR NYEKO: Thank you for giving way.  In the early 1960s, when there was full blast multiparty politics, we had very viable youth structures like the NUYO and so forth, and they were very effective and the current President was brought up through that system.  Thank you.

MR MADADA:  I am also aware that certain parties in power misguided those youth structures.  Therefore, we need to be clarified on how they will not be misused.

Lastly, the other issue I wanted to note is about the structure.  You have mentioned the national council and the district structures, but I feel there is a missing gap at the regional level, because these Members of Parliament that we have here are representing regions.  When they go back, you find they have no structure where they can meet their people within that region.  So, I would like to know whether a member from Eastern region has a structure to meet his voters or constituents.  Thank you.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I also want to thank the Committee for their good report, and I have a few issues to raise.  We are debating an important sector of society, the youth, and all of us here have gone through vigorous elections and we have interacted with the youth during the process of looking for votes.  If you were very unlucky and brushed the wrong side of the youth during elections, then you should have had a very bitter experience.  

It is not a question of having good structures for the youth from national to the village level; it is not a question of funding because you may send funds and these funds disappear among the beneficiaries, and this may not make a serious impact.  

To me, it is the question of programmes for the youth, programmes that are meaningful and that will transform the youth into useful citizens of this country, not the money.  The money will go but if it finds programmes that are not tailored to the youth, the money will certainly be misappropriated, and this will make no impact.  

Government has come up with strategic interventions, maybe this is the time for Government to make a strategic intervention with a serious programme to enable the youth in the villages have some income in their homes, if they have the homes. 

During the 1960s, there used to be a programme called the Youth Farmers of Uganda Programme.  During my research, Mr Speaker, I discovered that the progressive farmers of today actually started as young farmers of that time.  They got the concept of farming; they appreciated agriculture and actually grabbed it and have developed as good farmers.  Possibly, it could be high time that Government looked at that programme.  If it had any shortfalls, they should have it re-modified so that the youth down there can be engaged into a programme. 

Today, you will go in our constituencies and you will find the youth -(Interruption)

MR NDEEZI: I thank the honourable member for giving way.  Now you are saying that the problem is lack of programmes and not lack of money.  But some of us have had the opportunity to interact with many youth groups, they have projects but they do not have money!

REV DR KEFA SSEMPANGI:  I want to provide more information that the youth in my constituency in Bugerere are willing to be farmers of pineapples, but because of the low prices of pineapples, they do not find any encouragement to go farming.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, while we are saying that Government lacks pragmatic programmes for the youth, all this is happening because the youth councils, for quite a long time, have not been apolitical.  Time and again, they have been used for political purposes.  

In 2000, when I was still a commissioner in that ministry, a senior citizen of this country and a senior member of the frontbench, one time directed me and said, “Mr Commissioner, I am directing you through the Minimum Youth Mobilisation Programme to make sure that all the youth of this country enter the yellow bus, the "Movement Bus". This was something, which was directed in a meeting. And as a bureaucrat, I had nothing to do but to say, “yes Sir, or your Excellency, I will do so”.  

But having said that, you will realise that within a short time, 13 ministries were asked to mobilise resources. Colossal sums of money was realised within two weeks, and the youth, ministers and politicians were sent throughout this country - that is the infamous Movement Bus, which caused terror during the campaigns.  

Immediately the referendum was over, the programme came to a standstill. It then waited until 2001, when the presidential campaigns were on. Again another programme was coined under the office of the Vice President, and I was still given the same directions, “Can you please make sure that the youth of this country vote wisely?"  And ever since then, having -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Incidentally, former commissioner, did you take the Oath of Office?

MR WADRI: Yes. At that time, as required by Public Service, I did take the Oath of Office, in 1981.

THE SPEAKER:  Does it still bind you?
 
MR WADRI: I am now out of that office, so I cannot be bound to it- (Laughter)- I am no longer a civil servant, I am a politician, and so that office does not bind me.

MR MIKE SEBALU: I would like to seek clarification from my good friend Wadri, because he is giving us very useful information that he got privileges as a result of his office.  He did not seem to agree with those positions.  I am wondering whether it was not very useful for him to resign at that point in time to protest being misused in political programmes, since he was a civil servant?

MR KIDEGA: Thank you my very much, my senior colleague and former commissioner.  Indeed, Mr Speaker, honourable members, I was actually then sitting on the youth desk in the office of the Vice President, and when all these programmes were being conducted, I was there.  In all the meetings where ministries were invited, namely, the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Finance and all the government departments, a technical team  was constituted to come out with a working document for implementation.  Thereafter, they went to the various organs of Government to put a pool of money and implement this programme, which was then generated by the technical team.  

I am very aware that part of the technical team was my former commissioner, who is now my colleague, the senior Member of Parliament from Terego. I did not hear of the Vice President instructing, unless he is willing to provide me with concrete evidence in writing that the Vice President or any other minister did that, I am not so convinced.  Can he please give us some clarification on that?

THE SPEAKER:  Why don’t you allow the member to develop his argument?

MR KAJEKE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  The clarification I want from hon. Wadri is about the allegations that while you were a commissioner and a member of DP, you were mobilising for UYD? I need a clarification. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the first place, I would like to inform my friend hon. Sebalu that I took the right decision and that is why I am in Parliament.  I could not continue being directed that do this and that, when my own conscious is not clear!  That is the reason why I wilfully decided to quit civil service. That is why I am here. 

One member was asking for evidence- for those of us who have been bureaucrats for long, you know very well that many times directives given by a superior are not always documented.  So if my friend, hon. Daniel Kidega, is looking for a document, he may not get it. In any case, the directive was not given only to two of us, we were many.  But of course, I know which side of the bread is buttered to hon. Daniel Kidega, who, after all, has already told me that at that time he was sitting in the office of the Vice President.  So what else would you expect from hon. Daniel Kidega? (Laughter) 

And as to whether it is true that when I was a commissioner and as a DP member, I was recruiting members for UYD?  When you are in civil service, you are apolitical.  You can nurse the ideas, you can have sympathy for a political organisation, but you are not allowed to come out openly to campaign.  Therefore, I could not have taken oath of office to serve this country in the civil service and abide by rules of civil service and at the same time eat my words on my oath and go about campaigning for the Democratic Party. But if there is any chance to campaign, it is now, you can even see me donning the attire- (Laughter).  

So, as I was saying, the problem we have in this country is not lack of programmes, it is that the youth are being misused.  I have been told that the information is too long, so I think I can end it there, I will come back another time.  Thank you.

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker, a lot of information has been given, but I still contend that we need programmes for the youth, that are geared at transforming the youth as useful citizens.  The programmes that have been described were actually imposed on the youth. For a programme to succeed, the target person should have a minimum participation in its generation.  If not, that is the beginning of failure of a programme.  So, if programmes were imposed on the youth, certainly they had to fail, and if we continue with such programmes, they will fail. I want to end there.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, whoever stands will have just three minutes, because I want to end the debate.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Committee for a good report and the issues that they have raised that have been long outstanding in terms of bridging the gap to allow the youth full participation in all activities of developing this country.

Definitely, the youth are a very useful resource; they have provided quite a number of very good leaders.  I am proud to mention that I am a product of the youth programmes. We pioneered that in 1993 and -(Interruptions)- Mr Speaker, can you save me from the wrath of the lady from Arua? She is harassing me from the back- (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have no comment.  Proceed.

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One observation that I would like to make is that in 1993 the youth structures were put in place.  But when you look at ten years down the road in terms of progress, not much has been done in order to entrench these programmes and make them move sustainably.  

There are so many gaps that still exist here and there, and this bill is seeking to fill in those gaps. It becomes very dangerous when you organise the youth in clear demarcated structures and then you leave them redundant. It creates apathy and they cannot really contribute positively. 

One of the main issues that have rendered these structures not to be as productive as you expect them to be is the financial contribution from Government. The structures are there, the leadership is there and there are followers to be led and you find that at the different levels, there has been some reasonably good financing at the centre.  But when you go to the district, the financing is really pathetic. And the activities, like my colleague was saying, the challenge the Government has now is to translate these structures into programmes that are sustainable and keeps the youth actively participating as we are encouraging participatory approach in whatever we are doing.

I really do appreciate the idea brought in by the committee, of encouraging the district and sub-county councils to contribute because we are running a decentralised system, and the level of financing should go to the levels where the activities are concentrated and the activities of the youth are concentrated at the lower levels.  But the funding is not commensurate to the activities that they are supposed to undertake.  So, we do put it upon the districts and the sub-counties to provide sufficient funding for these councils in order to operate.

The issue of the tenure of office is a very welcome innovation because running a three-year term for the youth councils when the local governments are running a four-year term brings a contradiction in terms of planning, and even the activities that are supposed to be run by these youth councils, because more often they are tagged to the councils in order for them to operate.  So, harmonising the term of office of the youth councils and the term of office of the local governments is a welcome idea because it creates predictability in the activities and planning levels.  

So, I end by supporting these amendments.  I think they will go a long way in uplifting the plight of the youth, and allowing them maximum participation in the development of this country, since they form the biggest part of our population.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me also to thank members of the committee for the work well done, and I must admit that the committee has done very good work.  I am also appreciative to the National Youth Council since I am one of the products of these youth councils from LC1, LC11, and LC111 up to the district of Kampala.

These youth councils have contributed a lot in terms of putting us together as members of the youth. However, my major concern is on funding.  Sincerely speaking, Mr Speaker, funding activities for youth councils leaves a lot to be desired.  I am not yet convinced that the government has come out seriously to address the concerns of the youth.  These youth councils are mainly used, especially during campaigns, because they are well organised and when it is time for campaigns, that is when we remember that they do exist.

As hon. Kajeke put it, we are not so certain which mother ministry the youth council’s fall under. I am more than convinced that Government wants to push the youth councils in the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness so that they can really be used at any time when there is something disastrous coming ahead. When the Committee suggests that –(Interruption)

MRS ANGUPALE: Mr Speaker, I was trying to keep my information to come after the debate, but I would like to inform the honourable member that the committee decided to allow decentralisation of funds to the districts because there were several funds which were at the centre, which could not go to the district, making the elections of the district youth councils idle because of lack of funds.  But if this money is decentralised at the district, it will make the functions of the youth to be functional.  

I can give a clear example: funds for workshops meant for sensitisation of the youth used to be at the district level but they couldn’t access it because they were never informed.  That is why the committee has now proposed that this fund should go at different levels so that the youth can access it.  After all, at the district level the funds that are budgeted for the youth may be only Shs.900,000, which is only for the youth celebration days! So, if these funds are decentralised, the youth will be functional.  I thank you very much for giving way.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you so much, hon. Angupale, for that good information.  But I would like to inform you that even if we decentralise these funds, they are going to be misused.  A lot of funds have been really sent to districts, and to local division councils. I can give a good example.

When it comes to the international youth celebrations, arrangements are made and budgets are put forward without even the involvement of the youth.  And then they come out to say that today’s celebrations have cost the district 10 million shillings, and yet all that money has only been put towards hiring tents, seats and some samosas, and then you call it a day! 

Mr Speaker, the Government should take the responsibility of ensuring that projects for youth councils are being supported. We should even stop talking about youth councils as a body that is going to unite the youth, when the youth are very poor, and they have not been assisted to develop their talents and projects. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the contributions I have heard, I think we are just repeating the same points. It is high time we wound up.

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the good job they have done. And I fully agree with the ministry, the Government and the Committee that we amend this law in order to make things go better for the youth. 

But I would like to be assured by the chairperson of the Committee that if this statute is amended, the organisation is going to act independently. And two, that they are going to be well funded, so that they operationalise the youth activities. 

Because, if you look at the objectives of this organisation, basically they are to organize the youth of Uganda into a unified body, to protect the youth against any kind of manipulations, and to engage them in activities that are beneficial to them. This is a very important activity, and I hope when this bill is passed, these areas will be properly taken care of.  

Secondly, maybe we should look at the past youth organisations in Uganda to understand why this organisation has been inactive. It is not only during this period of the Movement that the youth organisations have been there. When we were young and very youthful, we had groups like the National Union of Students of Uganda (NUSU), and we had also NUYO. 

I must say here that the political forces at play have manipulated all youth groups in Uganda, at every given time. Unless we delink this important youth organisation for the people of Uganda from parties, movements and governments, then I cannot see how we are going to see them work properly. 

For example, we have been told by the senior youth leaders that they become active when there are going to be elections. And it is true that the youth become very active when there are parliamentary elections, presidential elections or elections for the youth. After that, there is no activity. The only other activity I always see in my district is the youth day, when Government has allocated Shs 800,000 from the entire budget for these activities -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, these youth also ask us, as representatives who gave them manifestos, what activities we are arranging for them. This is another point we have to address.

MR SABIITI: That is noted, Mr Speaker. I think I was trying to raise the debate to another level, not about the way youth participate in general politics, but how the youth are organized by the state, in most cases, to pursue a certain line, a certain ideology. And that is dangerous for the youth organizations. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would request the chairperson to clarify whether, if this bill is amended, the normal Shs 500 million given to the youth council is going to change. Because, really, Shs 500 million is a token! It is a token which cannot run an organisation that is over 40 per cent of the population of Uganda. If you are to make them effective, I expect the Government to be serious and fund this organisation.  

I agree with the Committee that these organisations should be body corporate. I do not agree with you on the age. One member brought it up. It appears between the age of 30 and 34, no youth is allowed, if we pass this law, to participate either in presidential elections or youth elections. It bars that age limit between 30 and 34. So, I think we should clear that.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I also support the youth council for merging the National Youth Council with the National Delegates Conference. Because we have seen that in most cases, giving an example of our NEC and Movement Delegates' Conference, what is done in the council then goes to NEC. It is just a waste of money. So, I applaud them for having merged the two, so that we do not spend much money unnecessarily. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Since I have not heard anything raised for the Committee, I think the minister should answer and then we proceed. If you have any important point, you can raise it when we are at the Committee stage.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank all the honourable members for their valuable contributions. 

Many of the reactions were quite similar, hinging on financing and facilitation for the youth councils, age and related issues. Therefore, those which are similar, I will tackle them together and then point out specifics from different members.

On funding, it is true that we have not had sufficient funds to run the youth councils, but it is also not true that we have not had any funds.  Indeed, we have had funds to do some minimum activities. 

Our youth councils have been provided with transport. At least every district has a motorcycle. All the old districts at least had a motorcycle, and less than a month ago, we provided three motorcycles to the new districts. We are making arrangements to supply the remaining districts. All that is some money. (Ms Namayanja rose_) Let me first finish, madam. 

Similarly, we had some bicycles provided to sub-counties, and this is over and above activities like seminars. We have held sensitisation seminars on issues that concern the youth. We have held seminars on leadership. These have been going on in various districts, and I think honourable members have attended some of these. And we are continuing, because as youth councils come in, we have to hold for them these seminars. 

We have developed very good manuals for leadership among the youth, and these have been the guiding documents as we sensitise the youth. We have had sensitisation seminars on AIDS/HIV, and many of you, honourable members, have attended this. 

So, really, I am trying to say that we may not have done everything, but we have done something reasonable to keep these structures operational. Maybe at this stage we are talking of additional funds, or more funds, into the councils. But maybe it is not very fair to say that there has been no funding at all. 

I do hope that as these bodies became corporate at the national level where they have been, and now with additional corporate bodies at the lower councils, they can attract more funding. I know that there are quite a number of agencies that are prepared to provide funding at that lower level, if our law says so. In fact, in this respect, the National Youth Council has already attracted a lot of funding from international organisations.  

Having said that, Mr Speaker, let me also say something about these youth – and I wanted to thank hon. Ssebaggala. He has just gone out, but notwithstanding some of these problems, which have been highlighted, I think we should appreciate that the youth of today are not the same youth as those of a decade ago. The youth have an identity, they know themselves, they know their power, they know their status and they can fight for themselves. 

I do not agree with quite a number of members who think that youth can be manipulated. The youth of today are not easily manipulated. You have to take this from me. If you think you can manipulate them, or if anybody thinks he can manipulate these youth, you will be shocked. Even if you think you can give them money to entice them, to manipulate them, they will eat your money but they will not necessarily go with you. So, I think if there is one area where we have made a breakthrough – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is related to the plight of the youth in this country.  You have ably stated that the youth in this country cannot be manipulated. Today a good number of youth are not employed. The source of unemployment is basically because there is no infrastructure capable of absorbing them. 

A number of public parastatals, which impact the youth, have been sold off, and they have nowhere to be employed. Much as the youth councils exist from village to Parliament, how can you say that they have not been manipulated, if you have not taken any action on the matter of unemployment?

THE SPEAKER: Wind up, so that we do the legislation in the committee stage.

DR KAMUGISHA: Thank you, hon. Member of Parliament for Lubaga South. Honestly, I want to clarify this issue by assuring you that this country has prepared its youth to attain employment, starting from education. You cannot talk of employment unless you have education. 

The other day you were talking of universities here; all that is preparing the youth for employment. One member mentioned that education should now be tilted towards employment, and all of you agreed. So, education alone is a very big factor in preparing the youth for employment. 

But over and above that, you are very aware that we have got other programmes, like the experience we gained from the YES programme. By the way, although there were no sufficient funds under the YES programme, that programme gave us a lot of information, a lot of experience, and good practice. To the extent that now we know that youth, once they have been given skills, they can borrow, they can work and then pay back. 

That is why we are encouraging many of them, because even if the money under YES is not enough, we have got many other micro credit schemes by NGOs, by private organisations. And if you pass the coming Micro Finance Bill, then more funds are going to be available for the youth. You will be surprised how much unemployment reduction will take place once that is  – (Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: Are you implying that the big problem is lack of money only, or does your ministry have youth entrepreneurship courses or something like that? The failure rate of business in this country is so high, even with resources. Does your ministry have programmes and projects where you actually train youth in entrepreneurship and running businesses? Because it is not enough just to have money, you have to have the skills, the knowledge and so on. So, do you have that kind of programme?

DR KAMUGISHA: Honourable member, we have already been accused of training youth in large numbers in entrepreneurship but not giving them the finances. So, it is true that we run a lot of courses in entrepreneurship. And as I speak now, there are a lot of youth who have been trained, and this is an on-going training programme. (Interruption)  

MS TIPERU: I thank you very much, honourable minister. I thank you for saying that certainly Government has a plan for its youth through education. Indeed, it is true that if we talk about the age category of 18 to 30, those who are in school, those doing prostitution, those doing business, those doing kyeyo abroad and those in the Army all fall there. 

I want clarification from you. What have you put in place to ensure that there is co-ordination between all the different government ministries and the National Youth Council? This is the body where all the youth search for information on what activity government is doing for them. What have you done for them? What have you put in place for them to get that?

Secondly, the President talked about the construction of a national youth centre, is there any news about it, because they are looking forward to that?  I thank you.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. In relation to what hon. Tiperu has said, I also want to find out the progress so far made by the ministry, as far as implementation of the national youth policy is concerned? I thank you.

DR KAMUGISHA: Thank you, honourable members. The national youth centre, if I can start with that one, was requested to come up with a project proposal. It was done, but we found need to re-do it. So, it is being redone. Once that has been done, then we can solicit funding for it. But I think the commitment still stands, on the side of the Government.  

Mr Speaker, I was still mentioning the achievements as far as the youth are concerned. And I want to thank hon. Mike Sebalu who elaborated on how much has been achieved in this area. We have a lot of Members of Parliament who have come through the youth councils, and now they are in high positions of decision-making. That will continue, so that many of them can be empowered in that process.

Again on funding, we have no problem decentralising funds to the district. In fact, that has been the desire of my ministry, that funds should be decentralised and accountability be made from the districts. We shall continue pursuing that, because we also have other programmes that have succeeded in that manner.

The hon. Member of Parliament for Ntenjeru North talked about the composition of the committee, and he said that one-third should be female. Well, I have no problem with that, if we put it in the law. But knowing the way the youth councils have been, there is a fair mix of both sexes in the committees. But I have no problem with that proposal of one-third.

Hon. Kalule Ssengo asked whether we have any assurance that secretariats at the districts will get the money. Well, it is a good proposal. By the way, let me assure you that this chronic under-funding will definitely not go on. As we solve many of our problems, we open up more opportunities to release funding for other activities. So, I do hope that once these secretariats are in place, with time sufficient funds will be made available for them.

On age, I still think that this House should remember that youth structures came up as affirmative action, just like women and people with disability. That is why we put the age bracket of 18 to 30. My ministry would like to see this age bracket being complied with, because if you go outside that, then it is no longer affirmative. 

And I do not think it is comparable with the age of the President. The President is an adult. You cannot compare the two. The youth are still emerging. They are still learning leadership.  So, the more you have, the better. When time comes, I would still request you to think about this very seriously, so that we limit ourselves to that age bracket.  

Hon. Rose Namayanja mentioned that the youth have been receiving funding prior to elections. Well, I do not think there is any particular relation with elections. Funds are released as and when they are available. If it is shortly before the election, I think it is a coincidence, more than anything else. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want us to deal with this and finish, because this is not the last time we shall deal with the policy on the youth. The Committee should call the minister and deal with it thoroughly. This is in respect to the amendment of the bill.

DR KAMUGISHA: On secretariats at district level and the mode of appointment of the staff of the secretariats, I have no problem with that. I want to thank the member who clarified that it will be in conformity with the existing Public Service Regulations. However, the Youth Council can give advice but we wanted it to be transparent and we think the procedures used by both the Public Service and the District Service Committee are quite transparent. That is why we would like the secretariats at those levels to follow that procedure.

Hon. Ndeezi proposed that the Budget Committee should help the affirmative action.  Well, I will have to leave that to the House, but I just want to tell you that we are doing our best to make sure that funds are made available.

Now, the YES Programme; true, this one is in a different department, but since it concerns the youth, I will follow it very keenly. I am quite satisfied that it has met some of its objectives. Certainly not all, but we have received a lot of good lessons from this, and as I speak now, a lot of work has been done to review this scheme. Intermediary agencies have been appointed, and I think a lot of money is being recovered so that it can be available to more youth in other places.

Hon. Kajeke, I have taken note of most of what you have said, especially on funding. 

On tenure of office, I have no problem with the proposal by the Committee for four years.  

One member talked about how hon. Kidega went to Cyprus.  As he said, he has been an active member of the Commonwealth body and sometimes the minister is requested to appoint another young person to be on the delegation. We have tended to take him because of his exposure and vast knowledge on youth affairs. I think other members from other countries have found his contribution very valuable.

Hon. Madada needs to be clarified on who is a youth. I think we are very clear, at least I am. 18 to 30; 30 to 35, well, that is not my area. That is where those who have been on councils maybe are preparing to come to the presidency or wherever. But I think we should stick to 18 to 30.

How will these structures operate under multiparty democracy? I do not think there is a problem. These structures are non-partisan and non-denominational. So I do not envisage any situation where they will fail to operate in the event that multi-partyism returns.

Need for a regional structure; we have not considered this, but I think the Youth Members of Parliament, if they want a regional forum, can convene the district forums 

Hon. Dr Kasirivu said that we need to consider programmes rather than councils. We handle them together, and I am happy to say that we also have programmes, which address the youth concerns in accordance with the National Youth Policy.

Hon. Kefa Ssempangi, the issue of markets for pineapples.  Really, that is a little bit outside my mandate, but you are very well assured that the issue of markets is being pursued by Government as one of its top, top priorities.  So if the youth produce anything, be sure that the markets will be found.

Hon. Kassiano Wadri, I have no record in my ministry to prove that you had ever been directed to put all the youth in the "Yellow Bus". If that was given to you, I have no confirmation of it. But let me also say that I also tend to think that once you take an oath, it has no time limit. In other words, the things you did as a commissioner, the moment you decided to leave, I think you left them in the ministry where you worked. That is why we do not follow you here to say when you were there you did this. This is a different forum altogether. So, we prefer that we do not mix the two.  

But having said that, let me say that Government has benefited from the minimum youth programmes because a lot of youth were trained under that one.

I have already responded to hon. Ssebaggala. Hon. Sabiiti, yes, when we were young in NUSU and NUYO – I do not know whether you were trying to say that in those days there was no manipulation and today there is manipulation. But what I know is that the youth structures have evolved over time, and what we have today is definitely an improvement of what was happening under NUYO and NUSU. So there is a lot of improvement, and I agree that we should de-link youth from being partisan. Fortunately, the Movement is not partisan; everybody is there. But maybe once we go other ways, definitely this clause of partisanship will hold.

So, Mr Speaker, these are the responses to some of the issues raised. I hope that once we come to the committee stage, and when need arises, I can also come in to expound on some of the issues raised. I thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill 2002 be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.57 and adjourned to Wednesday, 23 April 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)




 








 










