Tuesday, 26 April 2011

Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting and congratulate you upon passing through the Easter weekend peacefully because I have not received any adverse reports. Congratulations.

We have a lot of business to handle before we end our term and I urge you to really spare some time so that we clear whatever is possible before the end of our tenure. There is a lot by way of Bills, motions and other business. I thank you for being patriotic as displayed by your attendance in this sitting. Please, urge others to do the same.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I wish to request that item No. 4 on the Order Paper be re-arranged to become item No. 3. This law is badly needed and it is a prior condition to the disbursement of the Budget support. It is also urgently needed for the regulation of the many pensions’ schemes, which we have temporarily put on hold. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, you have heard the request of the Minister of Finance to replace item No. 4 to become No. 3 for reasons, which the Minister has given.

2.59
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I thought the Budget is more important in this circumstance because we need money for operations unless you do not need the Budget money? All these laws are for the Minister of Finance. Why is she changing now? Is the other one more important than the others? Could she tell us the scale? How heavy is one and how light is the other?

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, the reason we are requesting for this Bill to come before the Budget is because it is holding up funding for the Budget; US $100 million is being held up pending the passing of that Bill. Thank you.

3.00
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I do not have any problem with the request by the Minister of Finance to adjust the Order Paper. First of all, I would like to thank her for finally complying with the demand of Parliament to first bring the Bill for liberalisation of the retirement benefits sector, which they ably did last week. That was the pre-condition that we gave them before we could debate the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill. So, with that compliance, I would have no problem having this Bill being brought up for second reading. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our laws are very clear especially the Constitution, Article 156(2)(b). As you are aware, much of the money we are talking about has been expended and it says, “A supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid down before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.” It is a must and what we are talking about is more than four months. Does it mean that we should continue to commit a crime?

THE SPEAKER: We are not committing any crime because the supplementaries are in the House. In the circumstances, as explained, item No. 4 becomes item No. 3 and No. 3 becomes No. 4. As you remember, we adjourned proceedings when we were in a general debate. Hon. Epetait moved a motion and as a result of that motion, we kept this Bill on hold until a certain step was taken. The step, which was taken, was to bring the liberalisation of the pensions’ scheme, a Bill which was read the first time and the mover of the motion has no other objection. Therefore, let us proceed with the general debate of the Bill.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE RETIREMENT BENEFITS AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

3.05
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think at the time hon. Epetait moved a motion, I was on the Floor and I am the one who raised the need to realign the liberalisation vis-à-vis the regulation. Since the requirement of the liberalisation Bill has been made and I see Members not seeming to have much debate, why don’t we proceed to the next stage if it is agreeable that Parliament required that we moved both the liberalisation and the regulatory Bills in tandem? If it has been analysed and we find no big harm, I would like to seek your indulgence that we move to the Committee Stage if this is acceptable.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010” be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA RETIREMENT BENEFITS AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

3.07
Clause 1

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose that we delete clause 1 as an amendment to allow the Bill take effect as soon as it is assented to. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you explain, what are you saying?
  
MR TUMWEBAZE: You see, it has been recurrent in most of these Bills. The provisions allow the minister to appoint a certain date when the law should take effect. It has been in the wisdom of the committee that this is not necessary. As soon as the Bill is assented to and published, it becomes law. That is our reasoning.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So that you do not give the Minister time to appoint a date - once it is gazetted, it becomes effective on the date it is published. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the chairman of the committee has a point. Why? The time they presented the Bill, they attached the Certificate of Financial Implications and the minister never complained that they never had funds to operationalise it. I think as soon as it is assented to and gazetted, it should be law. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think this is justified especially since the minister has come here and said that this is very urgent. So, I put the question to the proposed amendment.   

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose to amend clause 2, the Interpretation, as follows: 
i)	 Insert the definition of “actuary” immediately before the definition of “actuarial valuation” to read as follows; “‘Actuary’ means a person recognised as such by the Institute of Actuaries in England or the Faculty of Actuaries in Scotland or the Canadian Institute of Actuaries or the Society of Actuaries of the United States of America or the Institute of Actuaries of Australia or a person holding such equivalent qualifications as the Board may by notice in the gazette prescribe.”

	The justification is that the definition is transferred from Schedule Four for ease of reference.

(ii) 	Substitute the definition of “administrator” with the following: “’Administrator’ means a person appointed by trustees to administer a scheme in accordance with such terms and conditions of service as may be specified in the instruments of appointment and licensed under this Act.”

	The justification is for clarity. 

(iii) 	Insert the definition of “auditor,” immediately before the definition of “Authority” to read as follows: “’Auditor’ means a person registered by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants (Uganda) (ICPAU) and approved by the Authority.”

	The justification is to ensure that retirement benefits schemes employ only qualified auditors. 

(iv) 	Substitute the definition of “custodian” with the following: “’Custodian’ means a financial institution whose business includes taking responsibility for the safe custody of the funds, securities, financial instruments and documents of title of the assets of scheme funds and licence under this Act.”

	The justification is for clarity. 

(iv) 	Substitute the definition of “fund manager” with the following: “’Fund manager’ means a person appointed by the trustees to advise on the investment of the assets of the scheme in accordance with such terms and conditions of service as may be specified in the instruments of appointment and licence under this Act.”

	The justification is for clarity. 

(vi) 	Insert the definition of the word, “tribunal” immediately after the definition of the word “sponsor” as follows: “’Tribunal’ means the Retirement Benefits Appeals Tribunal established under this Act.”

The justification is to provide meaning for the words used herein.  I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.
 
MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I agree with the proposed amendments but I would also like to add one amendment that is under clause 2(2) to replace the definition of “trustee” with the following: “‘Trustee’ is an individual or company appointed to be responsible for managing the Retirement Benefits Scheme in accordance with the scheme rules and legal requirements under this Act.”

The justification is that the definition in the Bill only refers to a person licensed under Section 41 of this Act. This falls short of the clear definition which should actually refer to management of retirement benefits schemes not only as required by provisions of the Act but also in accordance with the scheme rules in their respective schemes trustees. I beg to propose. 

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have no problem with that, except that for purposes of drafting, we use the word “means.” So, for purposes of this interpretation, it should be “Trustee means an individual or company …” we do not use the word “is”.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, accepted. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I also have no problem with that but I think “trustee” means “a person” and “a person” means both an individual and a company. So I do not see any reason we say, “An individual or a company.” It should be a “Trustee means a person responsible …” and of course, a person means both, “a natural person and a company.” There is no need for us to put individual or a company because we may need to get persons inside there. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So you are saying that “a person” is an umbrella term, which will cover all?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, “’A trustee’ means a person responsible for managing a retirement benefits ….”

THE CHAIRMAN: Any reaction? Therefore, I put the question to the proposed amendments of clause 2. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to make a proposal because supposing we go ahead and get something to be defined after closing that interpretation, it will be difficult for us. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I agree with you that maybe this clause should be dealt with at the end. But since we have started, should there be a need to revert to it, we shall, since we have gone so far but in future, it should come at the end because as you go along, you may find that there are certain terms that you need to define. I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 3: Establishment of the Uganda Retirements Benefits Authority. In sub-clause (1), insert the word “Regulatory” between the words “Benefits” and “Authority” appearing on the second line. 

The justification is for better formulation and harmonisation with clause 2, which defines “Authority” as such. I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe before we go to clause 4, in the gallery this afternoon we have students representing the Guild Council of the Uganda Institute of Information and Communication Technology. They are here to observe how the business is carried out. Join me in welcoming them. You are welcome! 

Clause 4 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 4 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 6, the functions of the Authority; 
    i. In sub-clause (1), insert a new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (c) to read as follows: “Approve an actuary or auditor of any retirement benefits scheme.” 
The justification is that since these persons are already registered under professional bodies, the regulator’s role should be limited to giving approvals. 
    ii. In sub-clause (2)(b) insert the words “and prudential norms” after the word “guidelines”. The justification is that prudential norms are very relevant in this sector. 

Mr Chairman, I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You should explain prudential norms. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Well, we did not see it fit to define them but prudential norms are practices that are considered prudent as far as that sector is concerned. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you have heard the proposed amendments. I put the question to them.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to introduce a new clause 7: Powers of the Authority, which were not envisaged in the Bill. Insert a new clause immediately after clause 6 to provide as follows:

“Powers of the Authority
For the purposes of carrying out its objectives, the authority may exercise, perform and discharge any of the following powers -
    a) Control, supervise and administer the assets of the authority in such a manner and for such purposes to promote the purpose for which the authority is established;
    b) Conduct any investigation or inquiry relevant to the retirement benefits industry in Uganda;
    c) Conduct any inspection and examination of books of accounts, records, returns and any document of premises of a licensed personal scheme;
    d) Issue guidelines, directives or instructions to any licensed person for the proper management of a retirement benefits scheme;
    e) Search the premises of any licensed person in accordance with this Act;
    f) Delegate any of its powers other than the powers of the revocation, licensing, delegation or variation of such a delegation; and
    g) Do such other things to ensure efficiency in the management of retirement benefits scheme.” 

The justification is to enable the regulator control the various market players and preserve the integrity of the retirement benefits industry. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRMAN: This is a new clause and details have been read. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, we are in agreement. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to proposal for the insertion of a new clause 7. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 7

THE CHAIRMAN: Of course they will re-number these clauses so that this old clause 7 becomes the new clause 8.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, Independence of the Authority -
i) 	In sub-clause (1), delete the expression “and shall not be subject to the direction, instruction or control of any person or authority.” The justification is that the expression is subject to abuse because we have realised that they are subject to Parliament and all that. 

ii) 	In sub-clause (2), delete the expression “directives of a policy nature and the authority shall comply with them” and substitute the same with the words “policy guidelines.” This provision should read as follows: “Notwithstanding sub-section (1), the minister may give the authority policy guidelines.” 

The justification is that the deleted expression negates the spirit in sub-clause (1) and may be abused by the minister. That is to say, what amounts to directives of policy nature is vague and wide. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You suggest to delete the expression “and shall not be subject to directions, instructions or control of any person or authority” because you say it may be abused; by who? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, the abuse is on directives of a policy nature and we said that directives should be reduced to policy guidelines. Whatever directives or advice can be in form of policy guidelines and which can be reviewed. When we talk of “and shall not be subject to the direction, instruction or control of any personal authority” its construction sometimes can be misleading. Someone can say, “I am going to report to Parliament, I am empowered to be under nobody’s direction apart from God.” So, we still see that it should be removed, after all the authority will be responsible to the minister and eventually be responsible to Parliament through the minister. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I find a little difficulty in that proposed amendment to clause 7(1) because if we delete the expression of autonomy where the authority is not subject to the direction, instruction or control of any person, a minister may become the authority and the authority will become toothless. So, for purposes of reinforcing the independence of the authority in doing its job, we should maintain that clause. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us hear from the Attorney-General. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, my view is that the expression be retained because it is a common expression for many statutory bodies and commissions. For instance, Article 120 of the Constitution, clause 6 says more or less the same thing: “In the exercise of the functions conferred on him or her by this Article, the Director of Public Prosecutions shall not be subject to directions or control of any person or authority” and many others provide as such. Independence really should not be confused with supervisory authorities because a supervisory authority is also provided for, in fact, constitutionally. Independence means that a body or person is seized with the obligation to make a decision unencumbered. In fact, that person is not subject to for instance, report to Parliament. If you take the Judiciary, for instance, a judge of the High Court is independent in as far as he is protected to make a decision but, of course, if that decision is not made within the full corners of the law, it can be challenged. 

MR WACHA: Normally after the Attorney-General, I think I would say I have nothing useful to add, except that I want the chairman to note that there is a difference between independence in the performance of functions and the giving of policy guidelines. The provision will not stop the minister from giving policy guidelines. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, having heard from the two learned men, I think what the chairman is expressing is that sometimes these authorities take this law to mean that they have nobody to report to. We would like to get comfort in the law to know where the reporting mechanism of the authority lies. They can make bad decisions and they should know that they will be held accountable.

THE CHAIRMAN: In view of the submissions made, do you have any position as the committee chairman?

MR TUMWEBAZE: I do not intend to depart from the learned opinion but actually we have a precedent where we had a ping pong between Parliament and the IGG over the meaning of the same expression. In our wisdom we felt that we should cure that. Otherwise, I concede to the learned position.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to put a sub-clause here to say that: “The authority shall report to Parliament about its actions or inactions.” The justification is to avoid a situation where the authority becomes the alpha and omega.

MR TUMWEBAZE: That is the problem that we were trying to solve. Maybe it can be improved on to say that the authority shall report and be responsible to Parliament through the responsible minister. That is if we do not have a clause on reporting.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have to put in a prescription about how often they should report because if we leave it open, they could take years before reporting. We should make the reporting bi-annual. They should give bi-annual reports to Parliament.

MR MUKITALE: We want to avoid a situation where we are at the mercy of the office bearer. If you have an IGG in good mood, he will report to Parliament and the same is true with the Governor, Bank of Uganda. This has happened to the Eighth Parliament. 

MR OMACH: These amendments we are trying to make are catered for elsewhere in the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, there is somewhere for the authority to report and that is in clause 27. Does that satisfy everybody?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That provides for annual audited accounts and this is the practice in every organisation. We want to have bi-annual reports. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The article is wider and it is not limited to finance. It says that: “The board shall, within three months after the end of each financial year, submit to the minister an annual report on the operations of the authority during the preceding year, which shall include among other things an audited financial statement and such information as the minister may require.” I think that satisfies us.

MR TUMWEBAZE: That is just a reporting formality but hon. Nandala’s amendment is trying to put a provision in addition to this above. We want to put it clearly that the authority is subject to the oversight function of Parliament.
 
THE CHAIRMAN: There is a minister in charge of the sector and he would be able to give us the reports.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 8

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 8, sub-clause (1) paragraph (a), substitute, for the following expression, “the permanent secretary” the expression “a representative”; 
(b) Substitute “or his or her representative” with the expression, “not below a level of a director.” 

The justification is to encourage permanency on the board.

Paragraph (d), insert the words “accounting, economics, investment management” between the words “law” and “or” appearing in the last line. 

The justification is that accounting, economics, and investment management, are important disciplines in this sector.

Insert a new paragraph (e) immediately after paragraph (d) to read as follows: “A person shall not be eligible to be appointed under paragraph (d) if such person is an employee or director of any company, firm or institution where such employment or directorship may lead to a conflict of interest.” The justification is to avoid conflict of interest.

MR OMACH: I agree with all the other amendments except replacing “permanent secretary” with “a representative.” The responsibility remains with the PS. Whether he assigns the duty to someone else or not, the responsibility still remains his. It should remain as “the permanent secretary of the ministry responsible or his or her representative authorised in writing. I would also like to make an amendment there: (d) is captured twice so there is (a), (b), (c), (d), (d) and the last one should be changed to (e). I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: You have heard the Minister. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I have no objections to the amendments of the chairman and the minister. The only thing I am having a problem with is “investment studies”. Investment study is a small subject under finance and accounts and there is no need for us to say, “Investment”. If you are doing finance, it will always cover investment appraisals and you will learn investment. If you do accounts, you do investments. What I am saying is that instead of putting a subject as one of the studies, we delete it because this professional qualification will take care of it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, so it is redundant in a way.  Let us hear from the chairman?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Amendment conceded. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay then. I now put the question that – yes?

DR EPETAIT: The proposed amendment to insert a new paragraph “e” immediately after “d” is not going very well with the title of that clause. The title is, “Board of Directors of the Authority” and you are now bringing a new paragraph after listing the board of directors. I think the proposal that the committee is moving should have its separate sub-clause and not be part of the categories of the people who are members of the board of the authority. I, therefore, propose that instead of calling it “e”, we treat it as a new sub-clause so that it is not mingled with the others.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you want to put there (i) and (ii) to call it (ii).

DR EPETAIT: To call it 8(ii) rather than calling it 8(i) (e).

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that is okay. Subject to those observations, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 9: Tenure of member of the board. In sub-clause (1) delete the expression, “… except that of the first members to be appointed to the board, two shall be appointed to hold office for three years.” The justification is that we find it vague and in any case, the minister can use his or her wisdom to stagger their appointments to ensure continuity.

In sub-clause (3), insert a new paragraph (d) immediately after (c) to read as follows: “For conflict of interest….” The justification is to include conflict of interest as a ground for removal of a board member. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you. I do not have an objection to the chairman’s proposal but I want us to be categorical that reappointment should be for only one more term. This is a big institution and if you appoint somebody continuously, you could destroy it. We should say, “… is eligible for reappointment for only one more term.” Otherwise, if you do not put “only”, they can come another time.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it okay, hon. Minister?

MR OMACH: I do not know why my friend would like to say, “Only one more term.” I think if a member of a board is doing well, he should be allowed to be reappointed other than putting that “only”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think that even good governance says that people should not go in such an institution for more than two terms. We are saying that the person has been appointed the first term and will only be eligible for re-appointment for only one more term and that means two terms – this is good governance. In these financial institutions, even many people have gone ahead to make it one term but for us we are being liberal and saying two.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, he wants to say, “Only one more term.” I now put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 10 talks about remuneration of board members. We propose to delete the words, “remuneration and …” appearing in the second line. The justification is that board membership is not a full time job hence allowances suffice. I beg to submit –(Interjections)- I would construe remuneration to refer to a salaried package of some full time work.  

THE CHAIRMAN: It is compensation for service rendered but if you feel unhappy, then we can –

MR TUMWEBAZE: We felt allowance as is with many other boards could suffice here. That was our take.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Amuriat.

MR AMURIAT: Then the title of the clause should also change because it is not going to apply only to the body of the clause. The title should consequently change. I do not know what the chairman thinks about it because it really looks funny to talk about allowances.

MR TUMWEBAZE: That is agreeable -

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean the term remuneration means salary? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Not explicitly so but it can mean a contract, kind of paid for job and yet there is –
 
THE CHAIRMAN: We do not want to be sophisticated in language use.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Okay.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that - yes?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have a problem with remuneration. Is transport an allowance? Can we define remuneration since we say it must not include salary?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we should leave it since it is better.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to ask my chairman if we can –   
 
THE CHAIRMAN: He has abandoned –(Laughter)- I now put the question that clause 10 stand part of the Bill

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR TUMWEBAZE: On clause 11, functions of board members, in sub-clause (2), paragraph (a), insert the words “Strategic and” between the words, “approve and operating”. The justification is to include strategic plans.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 12 is about the meetings of the board. We propose to re-draft the provision to read as follows; “The meetings of the board shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in Schedule Two to this Act”. The justification is for proper drafting. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 13 that talks about the secretary to the board by substituting for clause 2 the following: “The secretary shall report to the board through the Chief Executive Officer”. The justification is to streamline the reporting procedures. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with the board of directors. Already the only person who is on the board of directors is the Chief Executive Officer and now we are saying, the board secretary shall report to the board? I think the board secretary then has to be a board member. If he is not, then the person who becomes the secretary to the board will be the Chief Executive Officer as per clause 8.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 13 as in the Bill talks of the secretary to the board. We also had that understanding that in most boards, the executive director is like the ex-officio member of the board but quite often you find that there is a separate minute secretary. 

This clause was talking of his or her appointment as a separate person without being responsible to the Chief Executive Officer. If the board so deems it fit to appoint the chief executive to serve this role, so be it but our amendment is to streamline the reporting mechanism.

THE SPEAKER: Are you concerned with the address at which the report is taken? I thought the report is to the board of directors but are you just giving the letter box where the secretary takes the report?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, it is really not about that. You have appointed a secretary to serve the board. He follows up board matters. Now most likely, this secretary is not a board member but is a staff of the authority. So, the reporting we are talking about is really supervision. We feel for the day to day directions and for control, to use the expression, it is the executive director who manages this person.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is he the boss?

MR TUMWEBAZE: He is the boss. That is the spirit of our amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any comments?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have no problem but now the issue of him being - because to be on the board, you must also be gazetted as one of the members of the board as we have done for the chief executive officer. My understanding was that the secretary to the board was a chief executive officer. Now since he is not, then we may have to come back and put him here as one of the board members.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, there is no harm if we included, “who shall be an ex-officio member”.

MR CHAIRMAN: Who?

MR TUMWEBAZE: The secretary.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, most board secretaries are not members of boards but they service the boards. It is always the managing directors or executive directors who are ex-officio members of the boards. In fact, in clause 15(3), the executive director will be an ex-officio member of the board without a right to vote. The secretary services the board and of course is one of the staff members of the authority and will be supervised as such by the executive director.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, he is the boss then. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 14 is on committees of the board. In sub-clause (6) we should replace the word “Board” with the word “Minister” appearing in the second line. The justification is that the minister should be the one to determine any allowances to the board members and also avoid board members deciding their own allowances in the spirit of clause 10.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 15 in sub-clause (2), paragraph (a), insert the words “Academic or” immediately after the word “has” and before the word “professional”. The justification is to cater for academic qualifications as well.

Two, insert the words “accounting, economics” and I drop the words “investment management” because of the previous amendment; between the word “law” and “or” appearing in the last line. The justification is that accounting and economics are relevant fields in this sector. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, accounting and economics are already there. Am I reading a wrong Bill? You are now saying, “… has professional, academic qualifications in accounting, finance, economics…” but it is already there in the Bill. Won’t it be duplication?

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you saying, “Has professional qualifications in any of …?” Is that what was intended? I think that is missing there because it is not accounting then -

MR AMURIAT: The amendment will cause repetition because in that clause we already have the qualifications specified as accounting, finance, economics, insurance, law or banking and yet the committee chairperson seeks to bring in accounting, finance and economics which are already included in the sub-clause here. So, it will really be a repetition.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Then delete the last one. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, like it was on the board members, we intend to propose on the tenure of the CEO in sub-clause (1) that we delete the expression “for one more term” appearing at the end of the sentence. The justification is to give the board discretion to determine the tenure of the CEO. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the chief executive officer shall hold office for five years and will be eligible for re-appointment for only one more term. It is common knowledge; these are big institutions and if somebody is to go in every now and then, he can mismanage them. This would follow what we have done with the PPDA and I think NPA. 

So, I propose that we maintain and add the phrase, “Only one more term” and the justification is for good governance. If he mismanages it, let it be for ten years; and if he does good work, still let it be done within those ten years. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, the argument is understandable but the reasoning of the committee was that if this is not a principle adopted across all corporations or institutions and there are new areas like retirement benefits authority regulations where professionals are emerging, why rush to quickly impose term limits? The committee agreed that if it is a position that should cut across all institutions, then it is alright. But if it is not, we should not be selective.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to give examples of two laws which we have already passed: the PPDA -(Interjections)– no, the current PPDA law is two terms, NPA is two terms also. So this will not be the first time and what we are proposing to do is good. In fact, we are going to promote expertise. This chief executive officer can even become the chairman of the board for another ten years; so those are twenty years. That is not bad. So I insist we make it one term. Mr Chairman, you need to support this because you are going there next. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: We concede, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question that clause 17 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 18 on staff of the Authority, in sub-clause (1), delete the words, “Other Officers and” appearing in the second line. Our justification is that all board appointees are considered staff from the time they are employed by the Authority. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 19 talks about the funds of the Authority. We propose that we substitute the word “funds” with the word “finances” wherever it appears in the clause. The justification is to avoid confusion created by the Retirement Benefits Authority Regulatory Fund established in clause 20. I beg to submit. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I agree with the proposed amendment. However, I would like to propose another amendment to clause 19. I propose to replace clauses 19(1)(a), (b) and (c) with the following: 
    a) The operations of the Authority shall be funded by way of compulsory levy on licence fees and other fees payable from the assets of each retirement scheme. 
    b) The board shall determine the amount of such levies annually.
    c)  Where in the opinion of the board it would be inequitable to levy the schemes for all or part of the cost, it may seek funds or additional funding by way of appropriation from Parliament. 

The justification is that it is envisaged that the Authority will be self-financing in the long term and funds from the Government’s budget would only finance shortfalls and initials that have caused the establishment of the Authority. This will also ensure operational independence of the Authority, which the stakeholders emphasised during the consultations. I beg to move. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I want to suggest that since this Authority is an institution of Government and we have heard that we have institutions of Government that are almost similar to this; we have the PPDA and other institutions, I think the Attorney-General will advise us on whether this will be consistent with the laws that we have in place. To suggest that we take the proposal of the Minister the way it is, is also to move away from the responsibility of Government in terms of financing this institution. 

The current proposal in the Bill caters for what the Minister is suggesting. However, it also provides that in case there is a shortfall, Government can request for funds in the normal process of budgeting through appropriation by Parliament. So that proposal is catered for under clause 19(c). 

If we delete “a” and “b”, it means that Government is saying, “In case you get problems, take care of yourselves”. I think that is not right. This can immediately go to the other institutions that we are licensing to collect the benefits; it can have a number of implications. So I suggest that we leave the Bill the way it is because the current proposal actually adds little value to what we want to propose in terms of creating an institution that is independent and which is supported to do the job they are established to do.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I agree with hon. Bahati. The moment we leave these authorities without funding from Parliament, I think we are going to have a big problem. They should continue to be supported by Parliament lest they encroach on the retirement benefits of the scheme. 

These fees which they are going to charge must be regulated. The minister responsible for this sector should be the one to approve the fees. Failure to approve would mean that these people can sit down and put any amount of fees and that is very dangerous for the industry. 

So I propose that the fees to be charged must be approved by the sector minister. And this business of saying, “Finance”, what if somebody brought in his own labour? That is not finance. So the clause should state that, “The resources of the Authority shall consist of ….” 

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Member, I think this is catered for under clause 88, “The regulations that the minister can make”. If you look at it, it describes the fees payable under this Act. So I think he has a rule there under the regulations. It seems the consensus is that we do not disturb this clause and we leave it as it is. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I proposed this amendment to ensure that the operational independence of the Authority is really upheld. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The fact that for instance Parliament gives money to the Judiciary is not supposed to take away its independence. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if when Parliament gives money to institutions it does not remove their independence, then let Parliament remain. But I wanted to ask my chairman that can’t we say, “The resources of the Authority shall consist of …?” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I propose that clause 19 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 23 “Investment of surplus funds” by inserting the words, “in consultation with the Minister” between the words “may” and “be” appearing in the second line. The justification is to involve the Minister in the use of retained finances.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we were assuming the minister you are going to for consultation is competent. We have a problem because in some of these ministries, you get a fine artist in finance; or a historian. I think there should be some – if you are saying the board consists of competent people, we should allow them - but if you go to a minister who is not competent in finance or investment, you will have a big problem. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I do not agree with my colleague. The minister is by all means competent. Even if it is not about personal credentials, he/she is endowed with resources in the ministry to boost his/her competence.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 27 under annual and other reports, we propose to substitute for the expression, “Three months after the end of each financial year” appearing on the first line the expression, “One month of receipt of the audited accounts” referred to in section 26. 

The justification is to remove the conflict between clause 26 and 27 which envisage a submission of the accounts for auditing and submission to the minister all within the same timeframe of three months. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think the board will submit within three months and the chairman is right. We have made these roles; we have given submission of accounts four or six months - we need to cross-check. I think it is better maybe to either put it at six or four months. We should be realistic and not say three months. Maybe here within four months, but again, my interest is that after the minister has received the report, where does he take it? Does he keep it in his office? That is why I want to say that within two weeks, the minister must submit those reports to Parliament as per –(Interjections)- one week - you have got a report and it is not yours, you cannot add anything. 

Mr Chairman, I want to propose – I have no objection to the chairman’s suggestion but within two weeks the minister must submit the reports to Parliament –(Interjections)- that is okay. You count when they come back - you do not know.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you want to add the two weeks for the minister? Okay, two weeks is also a short period. Maybe we put one month for the minister to report. So I put the - 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I want to propose a deletion of the phrase “among other things” appearing in lines three and four of this particular clause. First of all, it is my contention that this is not good English. 

Secondly, what are these other things that we would want to appear in the report? 

Thirdly, we even give the minister discretion. It appears “and such other information” as the minister may require. I think this “among other things” is redundant and those other things if they were really necessary in the report could be asked by the minister. I wish to propose a deletion.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is an additional proposed amendment. Why don’t we deal with the first one, which was, I think three months and one month for the minister to report? Is that agreed? Okay, that is agreed. Then, do you want to add? He wants to delete – okay. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, in the report to the minister, there are other things other than financial matters. We cannot just have accounts with no proof. That is what we proposed. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought when a report is submitted to the minister, the minister is at liberty if he wants more information on certain things, to seek it so that it is not only when he reads the report and says, “Can you also advise me on this and the other?” It is a normal thing to do so that we do not have to do it here. Agreed? So, I put the question to the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 28, “Establishment of a retirement scheme.” In sub-clause (1), delete the words, “establish or” appearing in the first line and thereafter substitute for the word “establish” wherever it appears in the clause with the word “operation.” 

The justification is that the regulator seeks to regulate the operation and not the establishment of a retirement benefits scheme. There is no offence committed by establishing a retirement benefits scheme. It is like registering a company. It is operation of the scheme without a licence that constitutes the offence. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose the proposed amendment by the committee. My argument is premised on clause 6 about the function of the Authority. The Authority’s functions in 6(1)(a) are to, “regulate and supervise the establishment, management and alteration.” Even the establishment of a retirement benefits scheme is a function of the Authority. In any case, it is good for the Authority to have a hand in determining which scheme gets aboard because if we left it open, there could be so many quack retirement benefits schemes that would overwhelm the authority in controlling their operations. I beg that we reject that amendment and maintain that the Authority should also determine the establishment and operation of the scheme.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Let us try it; should it pose a problem in future; we can always amend. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Let me give you the reasoning behind this. If I am going to form a company, it is not yet a company unless it is registered; but I go through the establishment mechanisms. I do my articles and I do everything; should I now consult an Authority in my preparatory stage? That is our reasoning. The veto powers you allude to are given to the Authority –

THE CHAIRMAN: I think he is saying that by the time you come to rescue, the damage might have been caused. That is his fear.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I implore the chairman of the committee to concede. We want to avoid a situation where the workers get fleeced of their resources because quack retirement benefit schemes may get aboard and the Authority may get overwhelmed with controlling the numerous schemes and yet it will not have controlled their establishment in the first place. So, let us protect the workers and ensure that the Authority has a hand in the establishment of the retirement benefits scheme.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question that clause 28 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, the amendment to clause 29 is actually following the same reasoning. We intend to substitute for the word “establish” the word “operate” wherever it appears in the clause in sub-section (2). It was actually a consequential amendment from above, so I do not know whether it still stands.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question that clause 29 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, grant of licence to operate a scheme: clause 30, we propose that you delete sub-clause (2) and our justification is that the characteristics are key to a body corporate and not a trustee as envisaged in sub-section 31. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 32: Revocation of a licence. One we propose to amend sub-clause (1), paragraph (b) by inserting the words, “… is merged, amalgamated…” before the word “wound”. The justification is that if a scheme is merged, it takes up new identity and cannot maintain the old licence. It would require a new licence resulting from the merger.

Two, in sub-clause (2), for paragraphs (a) and (b), substitute for the word “sponsor” the word “trustee”. The justification is that the trustees are legally in charge of and responsible for the scheme. I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now when you say merger, are you talking about revocation or it expires? The two are not the same. Are you trying to suggest that when you merge, the licence which you have been using before expires or you say, “It is revoked?” Because revoking takes a step from the issuing authority but I think automatically if you have been operating as “A” and then you become “AD” you cannot use - I think what you are suggesting is that the licence expires by what has happened. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: I get your guidance, Mr Chairman. So what we are trying to cure is whether expiry becomes automatic by virtue of the merger or assuming the two companies still have their valid licences, our argument is that -

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what we are saying is “revocation and expiry of a licence” so that there are two limbs: one expiring and another one revocation - because of what you have done we revoke it. The two are not the same but you can put “expiry of a licence.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, when companies merge they make a new company. Under normal circumstances, they should apply for a licence to start. It is only in acquisition when one acquires the other that the other licence expires - the one which they have acquired collapses. So, I want to plead with our chairman that there is no big problem there.

The only problem I foresee here is, can’t these people have an appeal process? Because the way I am seeing it is that the moment the licence is revoked that is the end. Supposing you have annoyed the board members in a drinking joint and they come and say, “We are revoking the licence,” is there no appeal process? The way I have seen it there is no appeal. So, I think for fairness, we should put a process for appeal here. 

Mr Chairman, if you agree I can make a proposal -(Interjections)- the appeal process. You see when the board revokes the licence [MR TUMWEBAZE: “There is a tribunal.”] Is there a tribunal? Yeah! But then you have not put a tribunal here that they can go there.

THE CHAIRMAN: What about clause 86, does it have any solution to - because I see, “A person aggrieved by the decision of the Authority may within 30 days after the decision make appeal to the High Court.” Can’t that take care of that situation you are envisaging? Had you addressed yourself to -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think we shall look at that process when we reach there and see if we can make it better. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, still on clause 32, as you have pointed out, I think the proposal of the amendment by the chairman of the committee would have been better placed in clause 31 - the validity of the licence would have been placed under section 31, if we are to maintain the words “merged” and the other one. But as it stands now, in clause 32, it appears that if you merge, there is something bad you are doing which is not the case. So, I propose that the chairman concedes. If he insists on merging then we place it under 31 at another stage. Thank you.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, let us understand the background to this. Clause 32 talks about revocation of a licence. Look at (b) that we are trying to amend: “The authority may revoke the licence of a retirement benefit scheme if (b) a retirement benefit scheme is wound up or dissolved.” And we are saying, two schemes negotiate to come together and at the end of the day, they reach an agreement. Now, we are trying to bring in the Authority to regulate the operations by revoking their respective licences and giving them a fresh one. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The licence was issued to A and now when you merge with H, AH is a new name and therefore the licence cannot have been in AH’s name. The question of revoking it does not arise. It expires. So, what you could have done is to subhead this “revocation/expiry of a licence”. That would cater for the kind of proposals you are making.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have seen his point. He is saying, “A retirement benefit scheme is wound up on the…” - I think it should have been resolution and not dissolved - “A retirement benefit scheme is wound up or dissolved or merged…” In fact the moment we merge, that means those two go away. So, I think it is a point - “dissolved” (3) merged, amalgamated. When you amalgamate, you can amalgamate and leave one of them with a name. That is where there is a problem and I am not going with “amalgamation” but with “merger”. It is right. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we can add on from your guidance - “or dissolved or upon expiry of licence”. I think that caters for it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, Clause 38 is on revocation of the licence of a custodian. In sub clause (1)(b), delete the words “manage or” appearing in the second line. Our justification is that a custodian does not manage a scheme rather he or she provides custodial services to a scheme. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, under functions of the custodian, in sub-clause (1) delete paragraph (d) because a custodian should not delegate this function to a sub-custodian. In paragraph (e), add the expression, “in relation to the investments of the scheme” at the end of the paragraph immediately after the word “income”. This is for clarity purposes. 

Insert a new sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “The provision of subsection (3) shall apply to any sub-custodian or assignees or related parties of the custodian”. The justification is to ensure the custodian does not use any of its subsidiaries or related parties to bypass the restriction in sub clause (3). I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, clause 40 has a typo in between the words “she” and “has”. Please remove the word “is”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.
 
Clause 41

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 41, application and grant of licence of trustee; in sub-clause (1)(a), replace the word “and” appearing in the second line with the words “knowledge, experience or”. The justification is so as to include knowledge and experience and further make provision for “either, or”. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 42, refusal of licence of trustee; in sub-clause (1) (c), 
(i) Insert the words, “the applicant” at the beginning of the sub-clause before the word “has”. 
(ii) Replace the word “trustee” in the third line with the word “applicant”. This is because at the application stage, the person is not yet a trustee under this Act until licensed by the Authority. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 43, restrictions on licence of trustee; in sub-clause (1), replace the word “trustee” in the fourth line with the word “applicant”. This is because at the application stage, the person is not yet a trustee under this Act until licensed by the Authority. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, for clause 44, in sub-clause (1), substitute the word “shall” with the word “may”. This is in order to remove the mandatory/automatic renewal of a licence. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (1), insert a new paragraph immediately before paragraph (a) to read as follows: “To manage and oversee the operation of the retirement benefit scheme in accordance with this Act and regulations made under this Act”. The justification is that this provision is transferred from clause 60(1) (b) because it is the key function of a trustee to any scheme. 

Also, insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (d) to read as follows: “appoint a custodian, fund manager, administrator or an actuary”. The justification is that appointment of these persons is the responsibility of a trustee of a scheme.

In sub-clause (3), insert the words “custodian, actuary” between the words “administrator” and “or fund manager” appearing on the first line. The justification is that a trustee of a scheme should not act as a custodian or actuary of the same scheme. Also insert a new sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “The provisions of subsection (3) shall apply to any assignee or related party of the trustee”. 

The justification is to ensure that the trustee does not use any of his or her subsidiaries or related parties to bypass the restriction in sub-clause (3). I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (1)(a), replace the word “and” appearing in the second line with the words “knowledge, experience or”. The justification is so as to include knowledge and experience and further make provision for “either, or”. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (1) (c), replace the word “administrator” with the word “applicant”. This is because at the application stage, the person is not yet an administrator under this Act until licensed by the Authority. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50
MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, the amendment in clause 50 is of the same spirit. It is about the restrictions on licensing of the administrator. In paragraph (c) we replace the word “administrator” with the word “applicant”. This is because at the application stage, the person is not yet an administrator under this Act until licensed by the authority. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, under clause 53, the functions of an administrator, the committee proposes the insertion of a new sub clause (3) to read as follows: “The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to the assignee or related party of the administrator”. The justification is to ensure that the administrator does not use his or her subsidiaries or related parties to bypass the restrictions in sub clause (1). I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, under clause 56, refusal to grant a license for the fund manager, in sub-clause (1)(c) we propose that we insert the words “the applicant” at the beginning of the paragraph before the word “has”. The justification is for clarity.

Two, the committee proposes that we replace the word “fund manager” with the word “applicant”. The justification is that at the application stage, the person is not yet a fund manager under this Act until licensed by the Authority. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 56, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57

MR TUMWEBAZE: My Chairman, in the same spirit, under restrictions on the license of the fund manager, we propose that in paragraph (c) the House replaces the word “fund manager” with the word “applicant”. The justification is that at the application stage, the person is not yet a fund manager until licensed by the Authority. I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, this clause is about the functions of the fund manager. The committee proposes that in sub clause (1), we delete paragraph (b). The justification is that this is not a duty for a fund manager rather it is for the trustee.

In paragraph (c), the committee proposes that we replace the word “consultancy” with the word “advisory”. The justification is that the function of the fund manager should be restricted to an advisory function.

The committee also proposes that we delete paragraphs (d), (e) and (f). The justification for the deletion is that this is not the responsibility of the fund manager rather that of a trustee.

In the same vein, the committee also proposes that we insert a new sub-clause (3) immediately after sub clause (2) to read as follows: “The provisions of sub section (2) shall apply to any assignee or related party of the fund manager”. 
The justification is to ensure that the fund manager does not use any of his or her subsidiaries or related parties to bypass the restrictions in sub clause (2). I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 60, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 61

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 61, Mr Chairman, is about general obligations. The committee proposes to have it amended as follows: 

(i) 	In paragraph (a), insert the words “and instructions of trustees” between the words “rules” and “made” appearing in the second line.

(ii) 	The committee proposes that in paragraph (b), we substitute the word “sponsors” appearing in the last line with the word “beneficiaries”. The justification is that the scheme should be managed in the best interest of members and beneficiaries. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 62

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 62 is about the register. We propose that a new sub-clause (3), immediately after sub-clause (2), be inserted to read as follows: 
“(3) The Authority shall – 
(a) Keep an electronic version of the register which shall be accessible to the public; 
(b) Publish an updated register in the print media; 
(c) Ensure that the register is open for inspection by any person; 
(d) Protect the right of access to the register by any person; and 
(e) Make guidelines as to the inspection and copying of the register.”

The justification is to make a provision for the right to access the register. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 63

MR TUMWEBAZE: The committee proposes that we delete clause 63. The justification is that it is already catered for under the proposed amendment in clause 62.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64
MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, the committee also proposes the deletion of Clause 64 because it already provided for under section 75 of the Evidence Act of Uganda. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 67 is about publication of audited accounts. 
1. 	The committee proposes that in sub-clause (1) we insert the expression, “a trustee of” at the beginning of the sentence. The justification is to create a responsibility centre.

2. 	The committee also proposes the deletion of the word “together” appearing in the third line. The justification is that it is not necessary.

3. 	Substitute the word “report” with the word “opinion”. The justification is that the report is too big to display and the opinion is sufficient.

4. 	In sub clause (2), substitute the word “newspaper” with the word “mass media”. The justification is that mass media is wider and includes newspapers, popular magazines, radio and television. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 68

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 68 is on records and annual reports. The committee proposes that in sub clause (2), substitute the word “three” with the word “four” appearing in the first line. The justification is to harmonise with clause 66.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 68, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 70 is on the restriction on the use of scheme funds. The committee proposes as follows: 
1. Amend sub-clause (1) by inserting, immediately after paragraph (c), the following new paragraphs: “(d) used to make direct or indirect loans to any person; 
(e) Be used as security for loans; 
(f) Invested outside East Africa; or 
(g) Invested contrary to any guidelines prescribed for that purpose.” 

The justification is to safeguard the members’ contributions and further promote investments within the East African Region.

2. Substitute for sub-clause (2) the following: 
“Notwithstanding subsection (1), a prescribed proportion of the benefits accruing to a member in a retirement benefits scheme may be assigned and used by the member to-
(a) Secure a mortgage or a loan for purchasing a residential house from any institution and on such terms as may be prescribed in regulations made under this Act; 
(b) Pay for medical treatment in respect of the member on recommendation of the Uganda Medical Board.” 

The justification is to enable the member access his or her benefits if terminally ill.

I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 70, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 71

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 71 is on payment of contributions. In sub-clause (3), substitute the word, “two”, appearing in the third line, with the word, “ten”. The justification is to make it deterrent enough. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 71, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 73 is on actuarial valuation. 
1. In sub-clause (2), insert the expression, “at the expense of the scheme” at the end of the sentence. The justification is to make the scheme responsible for the expense of the actuarial valuation.

2. Delete sub-clause (3). The justification is that it is provided for in clause 2 under interpretation. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 73, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman and hon. Members, clause 77 is on the appointment of inspector. We propose to amend this clause by inserting the words, “custodian, fund manager, administrator” between the words, “Scheme” and “licensed” appearing in the third line. The justification is that the Authority should have inspection powers on all its licensees. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 77, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 79 is on the report of the inspector. In sub-clause (1) we propose to replace, “Chief Executive Officer” with the word, “Authority”. The justification is that the inspector should report to the board. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 79, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 80

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 80 is on the appointment of an interim administrator. We propose that in sub-clause (1) we replace the word, “Chief executive officer” with the word, “Authority” wherever it appears in the clause. The justification is that the Inspector should report to the Board. I beg to submit.

DR EPETAIT: I have a further amendment to clause 80, just a typographic error. Delete the word, “if” in paragraph (a) and (b) because it is already stated at the opening of the sub-clause.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 80, as amended, agreed to.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose that we insert a new Part IX, immediately after Part VIII, with the following new clauses:

“Part IX- Appeals Tribunal
Appeals
(1)	Any member of a retirement benefits scheme who is aggrieved by a decision of the administrator, manager, custodian or trustee of the scheme may appeal to the Authority for review. 
(2)	A copy of the appeal under this section shall be served on the manager, trustees or custodian of the scheme. 
(3)	A person aggrieved by a decision of the Authority in subsection (1) may appeal to the Tribunal.
(4)	Where any dispute arises between any person and the Authority as to the exercise of the powers conferred upon the Authority by this Act, either party may appeal to the Tribunal in such manner as may be prescribed.

Establishment of the Retirement Benefits Appeals Tribunal:
(1)	There is established the Retirement Benefits Appeals Tribunal for the purpose of hearing appeals under this part.

(2)	The Tribunal shall be an ad hoc forum consisting of a chairperson and four other members who shall be appointed by the Minister upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by regulations made under this part.

(3)	The chairperson of the Tribunal shall be a person qualified to be a judge of the High Court.

(4)	The chairperson shall be appointed by the Minister, in consultation with the Judicial Service Commission.

(5)	A person to be appointed a member of the Tribunal shall be a person with knowledge and experience in administration of retirement benefits schemes, banking, insurance, investment management, finance, law, or actuarial studies.

(6)	A person shall not qualify for appointment as a member of the Tribunal unless the person –
(a) 	Is of high moral character and proven integrity;
(b) 	Has not been convicted of an offence of moral integrity; 
(c) 	Is of sound mind; and
(d) 	Has not been declared bankrupt.

(7)	The members of the Tribunal shall be appointed by the Minister from the private sector.

(8)	The quorum of the Tribunal for purposes of a hearing under this section shall be the chairperson and any two members.

(9)	The expenses incidental to the administration of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Authority.

Powers of the Appeals Tribunal:
(1) 	On hearing an appeal, the Tribunal shall –
(a) 	Take evidence on oath;
(b) 	Proceed in the absence of a party who has had reasonable notice of the proceeding; 
(c) 	Adjourn the hearing of the proceeding from time to time;
(d) 	Make an order as to costs against any party, which shall be enforceable like an order of the High Court; or
(e) Issue a commission or request to examine witnesses abroad.

(2)	For the purpose of the hearing of a proceeding before the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall have powers of the High Court to summon a person to appear before it-
(a) 	To give evidence; or
(b) 	To produce books, documents or things in the possession, custody or control of the person named in the summons that are mentioned in the summons.

(3)	Where a Tribunal considers it desirable for the purposes of avoiding expenses or delay, or for any other special reason, it may receive evidence by affidavit and administer interrogations and require the persons to whom interrogations are administered to make a full and true reply to the interrogations.

(4) 	All summons, notices or other documents issued under the hand of the chairperson of the Tribunal shall be deemed to be issued by the Tribunal.

 Appeals to the High Court from decisions of a Tribunal
(1)	A party to a proceeding before a Tribunal may, within 30 days after being notified of the decision or within such further time as the High Court may allow, lodge a notice of appeal with the registrar of the High Court.

(2)	The party who intends to appeal against a decision of the Tribunal shall serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the other party to the proceedings before the Tribunal.

Rules

The Minister shall, in consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, make rules for the effective operation and management of the Tribunal.”

I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, I have no problem with the amendment but I think it is misplaced. It should be coming after clause 83 because clauses 80 to 83 are dealing with the interim administrator. If somebody is to appeal, it should be after we have established the interim administrator with his or her duties and responsibilities. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I will put the question and then we shall carry it to the right part. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now bring that one under this one so the other amendment, which we agreed on, follows 83. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 84

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 84 is on offence and penalties. Substitute the words “Chief Executive Officer” with the word “Authority” wherever it appears in the clause. Authority is a legal person and more encompassing. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 84, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 85

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, this is a new clause. We propose to insert a new clause called “the general penalty” immediately after clause 84 to read as follows: 
“General Penalty 
Any person who- 
(a) 	Contravenes any provision of this Act which is expressly stated to be an offence but for which no penalty is prescribed; or 
(b) 	Fails to comply with any direction given by the Authority under this Act - 
	Commits an offence and shall be liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding twenty four currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or both”. I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the new proposed clause 85 as read out.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete clause 85 as it is provided for under the proposed new “Part IX”. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposed deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 88 is on regulations. In sub clause (1), substitute the expression, “may with approval of Cabinet” with “shall in consultation with the Board”. The justification is that the Board is more relevant and practical in this case. 

In sub-clause (2), insert the following new paragraph (i) immediately after paragraph (j): “(i) prescribe guidelines for the portability of scheme funds from one retirement benefit scheme to another retirement benefit scheme.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 88, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 89

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 89 is amendment of schedules. We propose to delete sub clause (1) as we feel it is not necessary.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 89, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to.

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 92 is supremacy of this Act. We propose to insert a new sub-clause (3) to read as follows: “Any written law which conflicts with this Act shall be amended to bring it in conformity with the Act”. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 92, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 93

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete clause 93 - power of the minister. Our justification is that the procedure is irregular and the concern is taken care of in the proposed amendment in clause 92.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 94

MR TUMWEBAZE: Licensing of existing schemes, custodian, trustee, administrator or fund manager: We propose to substitute the word “three” with the word “twelve” wherever it appears in the clause. The justification is that it is practically impossible to have the Authority operationalised within the three months of commencement of the Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 94, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2, agreed to.

Schedule 3

MR TUMWEBAZE: Under Parts I and II, delete paragraphs 2(e) in Part I and paragraph 2(c) in Part II. The justification is that they are not relevant in this case.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 4, agreed to.

The Title

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend the title by inserting the word “regulatory” between the words “benefits” and “authority”. The justification is for better formulation and harmonisation with clause 2 which defines the Authority as such.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled “The Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010” and has passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPROT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House on the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA RETIREMENT BENEFITS AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010” be read for the third time.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010,” be read for the third time. Hon. Minister, before I pronounce that is where you can make your application. 

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to recommit clause 19 to include two issues, that is, compulsory levies and licence fees. This is to give the Authority opportunity to collect money from other sources other than relying on the Consolidated Fund. This should make the Authority more independent from Government. I beg to request for this recommittal.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we recommit clause 19 to allow the minister to make necessary amendments as spelt out. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA RETIREMENT BENEFITS AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

5.06
Clause 19

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we insert two other clauses under clause 19: One, compulsory levies; and two, collection of license fees.

The justification is to ensure good governance and also to advocate for some level of operational independence as far as financing for the Authority is concerned. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report there to. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that on recommittal, the Committee of the whole House has considered clause 19 of the Bill entitled “The Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House on recommittal of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE RETIREMENT BENEFITS AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010” be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

“A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE UGANDA RETIREMENT BENEFITS REGULATORY AUTHORITY ACT, 2011.”

THE SPEAKER: The Bill has been passed. 

Hon. Members, you remember that we changed the Order Paper and made No. 3, No. 4 and vice versa. I do not know whether you are ready to consider it because I was going to proceed with the Supplementary Bill? However, I want you to scrutinise it because what I gathered last time was that there were some serious disputes on the contents, that is, the quantum of the supplementary. I therefore believe that we can proceed with this as you go and scrutinise the quantum so that we deal with this matter tomorrow. I would, in the meantime, ask the committee which dealt with the loan request to table their reports so that you go through them overnight in preparation for discussion tomorrow.

5.09
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, when I saw the item on the Order Paper that Government requires this supplementary, a lot of questions came to my mind. I do not know how many times we have given supplementaries this financial year? To me this is a sign of poor budgeting on the part of Government. Two, it indicates recklessness on the part of Government. 

Three, within less than a month, we shall be giving Vote-on-Account to Government to run its services. So, what is the rationale of asking for supplementary when we had just passed a supplementary in January? Today or tomorrow, I want it on record that we are not ready to entertain a supplementary requisition from Government; no, not at all!  In any case, there is no quorum. 

THE SPEAKER: That business of supplementary is not part of the business on the Floor at the moment. 

MR WADRI: I will sit down but we shall have it tomorrow; I can assure you.

5.13
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, you have given pertinent guidance on this matter. On the Government side, we would like to agree with the direction you have given that we move on to the loan. The chair of the Committee on National Economy and the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Energy are here. The House should receive the report and I am sure we can debate this issue. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Just let them present the report and the debate will take place tomorrow.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US $10 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) AND US $11 MILLION FROM SAUDI FUND FOR DEVELOPMENT FOR FINANCE FOR FINANCING  OF RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, I believe that you could summarise your report because you have given us copies. 

5.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I should surely be able to summarise since this is very straight forward financing and we have discussed related financing. 

Honourable colleagues, on behalf of the Committee On National Economy, I now present the committee report on Government request to borrow US $10 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) and another US $11 million from the Saudi Fund for Development for the financing the Rural Electrification Project (REP). 

On page 1, the committee did have a joint interface with the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources, together with the implementing Ministry of Finance and I want to lay on the Table the documents used during the scrutiny, both the loan agreement for the Saudi Fund for Development and for the BADEA fund, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development’s Rural Electrification Manual for Uganda, because we did request the ministry to give us the master plan of how they intend to reach the whole country.

We also got the progress report – the Indicative Rural Electrification Master Plan report from REA, which we also want to lay on Table and a brief to Parliament. I would like to request that as they distribute the reports, they should also give members the brief to Parliament. I beg to lay these on the Table, Mr Speaker. 

On page 2, clearly this is in line with the National Energy Policy which was formulated in 2002. Uganda had a challenge in 2001 when they realised that we needed to step up our rural electrification access to 10 percent by 2012 and that is a challenge that we are still grappling with and yet we have a vision that by 2035, we should have universal access to rural electrification.

So, the two financing facilities of BADEA and the Saudi Fund for Development are intended to reach out to the eight rural areas on page 3 of Mayuge–Bwondha landing site, Kasambira-Bugulumbya-Bukutu in Kamuli District, Kapchorwa-Bukwo-Swam, Mityana-Lusalira, Lake Victoria free trade zone-Masaka–Rakai area, Apac–Chegere-Alemi, Hoima-Nalweyo, and finally Kitgum-Namkora-Padibe areas. It largely has a national outlook and this is in line with the National Development Plan. 

Access to energy is critical for industrialisation, if this country is to become competitive. As I have already said, our current access is 6 percent of our population and that is not the way to go. 

On page 4, we have gone ahead to give the details described in terms of kilometres. The table on page 4 gives the graphical tabulation of the kilometres covered per region, ranging from Kapchorwa with 142 kilometres ending with Kitgum-Lamwo with 154 kilometres, giving a total coverage of 658 kilometres. 

On page 5, the components are very clear. The first component 7.1 is construction of distribution networks. This, among others, involves supply of materials and installation for that distance of a 33KV medium voltage line using wooden poles; 159 units of distribution transformers; 274 kilometres of voltage line. 

The second component is engineering design and construction supervision. Much as we have already shown the regional outlook, the intention is balanced regional development; centres having no access to electricity and no connectivity to existing power grids; sufficient clientele to use the electricity in the area; availability of clients for future expansion; availability and accessibility to existing power grids; key economic activities like trading centres, SMEs, social services like health centres and schools and mineral processing. Of course this does not take away the ultimate intention of universal access of 2035. This is because of the financing and prudent given limited resources. 

Table 9 is what I have already read but this time it gives in financial terms what amount is allotted to each component and it gives the percentage terms. So, the table on page 6 ending on page 7 gives the details of what I have already explained and also since it is a twin financing, the table on page 7 gives what the Saudi Fund is handling, what BADEA is handling and whatever the counter part Uganda Government does commit to handle. 

The terms are largely concessional; both the BADEA terms and conditions of the loan on page 8 of the US$10 million figure: a one percent interest and the maturity 40 years including a ten year grace period. The Saudi Fund loan is US $11 million, one percent, 30 years maturity including ten years’ grace period. 

The conditions are on page 9 and on page 10. The implementation of this project will be undertaken by the Rural Electrification Agency under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development’s provision and REA will be responsible for planning, implementation, management, supervision, accounting and co-ordination. 

The implementation period and scheduled project will be implemented and completed in 24 months and is expected to start in October 2011 to be completed by 2013. The implementation period however maybe extended with the prior approval of BADEA and the Saudi Fund for Development. 

I wish to rush very fast through the observations. The committee does observe that although a number of major milestones in implementing the rural electrification programme had been earmarked, Government target electricity-for-all by 2035 may not be realised mainly due to the inadequate and inconsistent appropriated budget fund of this programme. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee urges Government to commit adequate funds to support rural electrification programmes through accelerating efforts of adequate resource mobilisation to develop the required infrastructure and scale up access to meet the target. 

This will also give confidence to the development partners about Government commitment towards rural electrification and also take care of ongoing pressure for electricity access all over the country. And here, we are talking of generation, transmission and distribution.

Further, the committee urges Government to desist from acquiring partial loans and instead go in for holistic loans as this will greatly enhance their bargaining power. Whereas the ministry has a very good master plan, the mood of finance does not match the plan. We need to see a better plan for financing rural electrification.

The committee observed that way-leaves and land compensation costs consume valuable funds, which would otherwise finance additional infrastructure to provide services; drag the implementation of projects as threats of litigation are invoked and quite an amount is spent on seeking consent for use of people’s land, thus impact negatively on how far Government can achieve its rural access targets.

We do recommend that Government accelerates the use of more enhanced levels of awareness through sensitisation of masses and through deliberate involvement of local leaders; in order to find amicable easing of the land compensation issues and lessen the mitigating factors for the common good.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, since these are recommendations which are clearly written and every Member has got a report, you point out your recommendation and quickly move on such that we can handle other reports.

MR MUKITALE: The existing pattern on page 12 is also a problem. Everybody wants to be serviced with power on his own hill and his own village yet under an urban setting it would be much cheaper. 

While connection rates on the rural networks continue to grow slowly, there was a reported improvement in rural electrification over the last ten years.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government works out other mechanisms of consumer credits hence increasing access to majority poor who reside in rural areas, and the pre-urban. 

The committee further recommends that the lessons learnt and experiences gained by various institutions involved in the rural electrification programmes, especially REA, should be used to put in place the right mechanisms for a successful rural electrification programme. 

On page 13, we observed that there is political pressure from leaders and communities to have electricity projects extended to their areas, outside the set criteria. I know we are all leaders who need this back at home but we are saying that focus should be put on the agreed grid.

We want to recommend that Government should not only promote foreign, private sector participation in the area of increasing hydro-power generation, which is grid power, but also explore mechanisms of promoting the participation of other less degradable, affordable, renewable energy such as solar electricity for areas which are fairly far away from the grid.

There is inadequate local private sector capacity to invest in the power industry and undertake construction of infrastructure. This has resulted into the bulk of renewable energy projects supported by the programme to be undertaken by foreign developers, limited credible bids for construction works and limited bids for operating built networks and delayed project development processes.

The committee wants to urge Government to accelerate finalisation of the national construction policy and undertake training of local contractors and provision of technical advice and consultancy. We still find a lot needed for capacity building of local contractors to be able to take on this responsibility.

The committee observed the low productive uses of electricity, which reduce financial viability of rural electrification initiatives. Because end users are not using electricity productively, there appears a low demand factor and revenue accruing to the end users remains low. Ultimately, this reduces the economic benefit of the programme. We recommend them to embark on rigorous sensitisation programmes for the masses especially the targeted programme areas.

The Rural Electrification Strategy and Plan 2001-2010, which outlines the framework within which rural electrification should take place in addition to the Indicative Rural Electrification Master Plan(2009) sets out specific guidelines on how rural electrification schemes should be prioritised and implemented. However, the guidelines fall short when it comes to transparency in the identification and prioritisation of grid extension.

The committee recommends that the existing strategic plan that is guiding rural electrification, which is being reviewed by Government, should ensure the inclusion of guidelines on how to improve transparency and prioritisation of grid and community schemes. For example, it should be clear on the selection criteria, and make analysis publically available.

Local governments and existing operators should be involved in identification and design of new schemes.

In conclusion, the committee has noted that in the context of Uganda’s economic development and poverty reduction strategy, the Government is aiming at massively increasing access to electricity to the country’s population, which is largely poor. This proposed project is, therefore, part of the government strategy to improve access to electricity and connectivity in the country. 

The project is technically feasible, socially desirable, economically relevant and environmentally sustainable. 

The committee supports and recommends to this House to approve the government request to borrow US $10 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) and US $11 million from Saudi Fund for the Rural Electrification Project. We insist that in future we expect bigger projects reaching out to more areas than these loans, which were negotiated long ago.

THE SPEAKER: we are not having the debate today. I want him to read the other report on the loan.

MR ARUMADRI: I want some guidance as to whether it is possible if the committee can consider expanding this loan. Whenever a motion for a resolution to borrow money for electricity is brought to this House, I really develop goose pimples. The chairperson has just said that this loan is distributed to all the four regions of the country. You cannot talk about Northern Uganda and leave out all the eight districts of West Nile [HON. MEMBERS: “Nine.”] Nine now! This night, can something be done –(Laughter)- because my ten years of sitting here will come to naught if I do not carry anything home? 

I am so sad at heart that every time there is talk about electricity and borrowing money, West Nile is not mentioned. (Applause) Mr Speaker, you are the third highest personality in the hierarchy of this country, I pleaded with you the other time –

THE SPEAKER: I will plead for you. 

MR ARUMADRI: I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You know what the hon. Member has stated is to put the Ministers of Energy and that of Finance to come here and tell us what arrangements are being made for West Nile to - if not from this loan, are there alternative finances that you are going to use to address the problem? So, they will explain. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW 75.0 MILLION EUROS FROM AGENCY FRANCAISE DE DEVELOPMENT (AFD) OF FRANCE, AND EUROS 75.0 MILLION FROM THE EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK (EID) TO SUPPORT THE KAMPALA WATER – LAKE VICTORIA WATSAN PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Briefly summarise.

5.37
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Mr Speaker, I thank you. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I want to present yet another critical, utility facility of request by Government to borrow 75.0 million Euros from Agence Française de Développement (AFD) of France, and Euros 75.0 million from the European Investment Bank (EID) to support the Kampala Water – Lake Victoria Watsan Project.

When we received the request as per our procedure, we went ahead to interface with the Ministry of Finance, the sector Minister of Water and Environment; we visited the site; interacted with other stakeholders because the intended site is partly an NFA catchment area; and NEMA. 

I now lay on the Table the minutes of the meeting, members concerned, and responses which were raised while in the field. 

I also want to lay on the Table the agreements for the two facilities and the minutes when the ministry officials appeared before the committee. I now lay them on the Table.

Since I am summarising, I would like to say from the onset that Uganda has largely been working on water projects with very little sanitation projects. The last time we had a Kampala sanitation project was during the first loan. 

We recommend that at least this time – because we made it clear in the other request that we wanted a loan that takes care of getting water but also managing the waste.  So, I want to commend this as the first project that has comprehensively looked at the component of water delivery but also managing the waste and that is why the title is “Watsan” – “water” and “sanitation”.

On page 3, I must mention here - since you are going to read - that this project was conceived seven years ago. The need we are financing is a seven-year-old need and so we need to understand from the onset that the project cycle, like we have been saying in other sectors, seems to be taking very long and the need we are giving right now does not match the requirement we have. 

So, let me read just two paragraphs of the background. The Kampala sewerage system that was built over 50 years ago covers only small fractions of the central business district of Kampala and currently serves less than 7.5 percent of the population and as a result, the bulk of the people rely on poorly managed sanitation.  

Hon. Members, you are aware that most of us use on-site sanitation instead of the network thus the increased incidences of water and sanitation related diseases. This prompted Government to initiate a feasibility study way back for a long term sanitation development programme to run up to 2033, which is elaborated in the Sanitation Strategy and Master Plan for Kampala City as was developed in 2004 and updated in 2008.

The 2008 feasibility study identified some critical interventions to be carried out in the first phase of 2008/2013, which targets address the most pressing sanitation needs for the city with main outputs of rehabilitated and expanded sewerage system, including the 53,000m3/d waste water and 500m3/d sludge treatment – you will see some of these details. I would request that we give the brief to Parliament for some of these details. If you can allow me, I will skip this since you will be able to read and I now go to the observations.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we really interested in is, “What is this money for?” You have told us, “Water.” What we are interested in are the terms and the management because we are going to read the report for ourselves. 

MR MUKITALE: I thank you for your guidance. If I can move straight to page 7, the project components after mentioning that on page 6, the Greater Kampala conurbation, the project is looking at areas of Mukono, Entebbe, Mpigi, Wakiso, Kasangati and the coming up of Bombo. So, it is intended towards that line. 

Now on page 7 about project components, the first component is upgrading and rehabilitating of the Ggaba Water Treatment Plant complex to increase capacity – 

THE SPEAKER: So, what you are saying is that this project is not only to benefit Kampala District or hon. Lukwago’s territory but caters for other areas. This is what we are interested in knowing.

MR MUKITALE: You are spot on, Mr Speaker. This project is designed in line with the old Greater Kampala conurbation much as the Bill concentrated on only hon. Lukwago’s Kampala. However, this project is looking beyond that.

The capacity we are talking of is to improve from 185,000 cubic metres per day to 230,000 cubic metres per day. We made a contrast with what Dar-es-Salaam and Nairobi are doing and they are well over 500,000 cubic metres.

We also intend to construct a reservoir, clean water pumps and a new sludge treatment plant for mechanical removal of the chemicals.

The second component is network restructuring and rehabilitation to include restructuring and extension of the existing distribution network through the construction and rehabilitation of transmission. 

The third component is extension of water to informal settlements to include among others - you have seen the 20 selected informal settlements. These are the new areas you are seeing coming in these four to five districts we have talked about.

On page 9, I will go to the implementation. Joint financing is envisaged for all components excluding tertiary network expansion, land acquisition, property compensation and taxes, which shall be provided by the Government of Uganda’s National Water and Sewerage Corporation as counterpart funding.

The lenders endeavour to harmonise the procedures for the preparation and implementation of this project in line with the Mutual Reliance Initiative and on the basis of respective agreements between the lending institutions.

You will read these details of implementation; how National Water and Sewerage Corporation will procure consulting services and the other details.

So, page ten gives us the financing details of Component One, with 30 million Euros, Component Two with 70 million Euros, 86 million Euros for Component Three, and 16 million Euros for Component Four.

We have also given details of sources of funding vis-à-vis other development partners like KFW, Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund, EIB and Government of Uganda plus the National Water itself. The terms are on page 11 to page 12. 

The conditions are clear evidence that the project executing agency has obtained all the necessary consent, authorisation licences. You will read the conditions for AFD disbursements, which include, among others, evidence that the AFD Finance Contract has been duly approved by Parliament of Uganda and that is why we are here. Evidence of any filing or registration, deposit or publicity, requirements of AFD Finance Contracts, have been laid on the Table.  

Delivery by borrowers prior to non-objection of AFD and grant between the borrower and the project listing; you can read the details.

Page 13, the European Investment Bank conditions are nine and on page 15, the committee gives the observations:

The committee decries the high rate of deforestation and encroachment on the intended site of Katosi Forest Reserve leading to environment degradation and destruction of water catchment areas. We, therefore, recommend that Government embarks on the afforestation and reforestation drive and eviction of the encroachers. 

We found the unfortunate story that just during one campaign year, by the time National Water identified the premise with NFA, it was a thick forest. By the time we finished an election, it was bare and people were growing maize and planting bananas. So, you can see what damage campaigns can at times do when councillors and I hope not MPs, promise people bibanjas in the forest.

The committee also recommends and urges Government to embark on bundle demarcation and gazetting of wetlands in order to protect the eco-system and to further sensitise the populace on the importance of wetlands, forests and issues pertaining to the environment so that the population too becomes a partner in the protection.

I have already talked about the challenges of political leaders during election time. I can only add that the reason why largely National Water is moving away from Ggaba is that the area has been largely polluted and there are sanitation challenges because of tampering with wetlands and because of losing the natural filtration. We are now running to Katosi where there has been clean water. Unfortunately, after identifying the area, the place has been cleared.

We are actually requesting if the minister could, even during the project implementation, take over the premise and reforest it because the original purpose will be lost.

The committee noted that adverse pollution - we have already talked about this. We are saying that there should be strict enforcement of environmental laws in order to curb or better still eliminate pollution of Uganda’s waters bodies. Here National Water is interested in the water quality.

The third observation is that, in spite of Parliament’s continuous recommendations for the last four years for the Government to scrap 18 percent VAT on water, it still has not been taken into account keeping our water bills very high.

In the Eighth Parliament alone, we have made three reports both from the Committee on Natural Resources and the Committee on National Economy where I have been a Member throughout recommending the scrapping of VAT. We think this is still a very big problem.

The committee reiterates its earlier position as far as scrapping VAT is concerned on water. This will make the water more affordable and increase accessibility to safe and clean water to the urban and peri-urban poor, which Government is trying to achieve. 

The fourth observation is on page 17. We further noted that with the low profit base of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, it may be hard to repay this loan in the stipulated time which may leave it with no option other than to increase the water bills. We, therefore, agreed and recommend with Government that it takes up the loan as an investment in the water utility.

It was also noted that National Water still concentrates more on water productivity and distribution and yet approximately 80 percent - I have already mentioned the waste management challenge. We need to find more money for sanitation and possibly have a greater Kampala - the four-five districts sanitation issue sorted so that this syndrome of every house with a septic tank can be avoided.

Further still, the committee urges National Water and Sewerage Corporation to invest in the production of bio-gas as a sub-activity under waste management in order to reduce on the sewerage injection. There was a concern now that the project is going to Lubigi. Are we going to pollute Lubigi and the related rivers which go back to Mityana and other areas? The ministry will be explaining that if bio-gas is produced there and care is taken then that could be taken care of.

The committee further noted that the project overall strategy aims at meeting the water demand of a rapidly  increasing population in the greater metropolitan Kampala and increasing supply security until 2025.

The committee therefore recommends that Government re-aligns its Kampala Sanitation Master Plan with the sub-component of the project in order to come up with a bigger project for long term solutions in relation to increased access to clean and safe water, water processing and maintenance, waste management and improved sanitation.

The point we are trying to emphasise here is that to avoid a repeat of the colonial Ggaba I, Ggaba II and Ggaba III where Kampala was a small town, we are expecting to deal with a bigger Kampala of five to six districts. We should then re-align this project to be the Phase I of the bigger supply required up to 2035 of the bigger Kampala of that time. You do not have to keep rotating the sites of clean water. 

In conclusion the committee, after detailed consideration of the Watsan loan request, has noted that the proposed project is of utmost importance to the growth of the economy although about six-seven years late and is geared towards poverty alleviation and achievement of the MDG goal of having a greater number of people access clean water and safe water and improved sanitation by the year 2015. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, further still, the committee also noted that the proposed project will consequently support Government efforts in meeting the MDG related projection in child mortality and environmental sustainability. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the committee therefore supports Government and recommends to this House to approve the Government’s request to borrow 75 million Euros from Agence Française de Développement (AFD), and another 75 million Euros from the European Development Bank to support Kampala Lake Victoria Watsan Project. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman and the committee for the report. Hon. Members, we have received two reports. One is on rural electrification and the other one is about water in our area here, Kampala and beyond. But on electrification, the honourable member has made a complaint – it is not producing any results. While we are debating rural electrification and West Nile is considered rural, I would expect the minister concerned to come here and commit himself to solving that problem which has been coming on the Floor every day. 

So, I implore you to go and read the report in detail so that you can prepare your contributions to these loan requests and also the supplementary, which we shall handle tomorrow afternoon. 

With this, I thank you very much for being patriotic; displayed by your attendance. Please, also tell the other colleagues to be patriotic by attending parliamentary proceedings. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to deal with the business as stated before. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 5.57 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 April 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)
