Friday, 25 April 2003 

Parliament met at 10.20 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to remind you that because of a lot of pending work for us, we decided that we would be sitting from Monday to Friday. On Fridays, we shall sit in the morning up to midday, then on Mondays we shall sit in the afternoons. It is necessary that we sit for all five days if we are to clear the pending work before us. This, I note, is our first Friday morning sitting. Try to instill it in you that we shall be sitting every Friday morning, until the end of the current Meeting of the Second Session. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I beg for your indulgence that I raise two separate issues all at once. 

Number one, you may have noted that there are people who are camping outside our gates, allegedly over a matter we have just completed, of the Land Act. I talked to some of them as I was entering Parliament and they mentioned that the issue that brought them to Parliament - from one of our districts - concerns some of our colleagues and the matter we have just completed. I am wondering if it is possible for either the Government, that is the Minister of Lands, the Minister of Local Government or the area Members of Parliament to enlighten us on this issue. 

My fear is that we are getting a bad name as Parliament, if people have to come from the constituencies to camp outside our gates to express their concerns. 

The second point, with your permission, is the matter of the road to my constituency, which is causing accidents. It is the one from Bugiri to Busia. This road was recently completed and I do not know whether it has been handed over to the state. However, one side of the road coming from Kenya is irreparably damaged. It is causing accidents and damaging people’s cars. I am wondering if the Government could give us a statement on whether this road has been handed over to us. Have we have paid for it? What do we intend to do? Do we intend to take remedial measures so that it is passable again? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I made some inquiries about these people who are gathered outside out gates. I also heard it from the press about why they are gathered. My information is that they have not come to petition Parliament. They have come to the President’s Office. They want to see the President. Last time, a similar group from Luwero also camped on our land. They never came to petition Parliament, they wanted to talk to the President and to make their point known to the President. 

In view of this, and since we may have more of this - because I am also going to carry people from Otuke in buses and lorries to come here, and I think people from Acholi, Teso and Kapchorwa should do the same because that is the only way out. You know, the nearer you are to Kampala, the better. For those of us who are suffering and we are far away from Kampala, people do not know about it, and diplomats do not hear about it. So, we are now also going to hire trucks, lorries and buses to bring people to Kampala. 

However, there should be a bit of difference. When people come to see the President, we should not mix it with Parliament. There should be an arrangement whereby when these people come to see the President, they are guided to State House and they camp in front of it. Alternatively they should camp inside the President’s Office here, because where they are is our land, and there is a big difference between Parliament and the President’s Office. When they come with complaints to the President, they should be told where the President is so that my friend, hon. Awori, does not get misguided to say, “Parliament should speak for them,” and so on. 

Definitely they have not come to petition Parliament. They are mistakenly thinking that by camping there somebody from STate House will see them from the rooftop and possibly attend to them. So, we should guide them to go to State House Nakasero or to go to the President’s Office, which is nearby. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is a question of proximity. That area does not belong to Parliament. It is a no-man’s land. The President’s Office is there; there is Parliament and also the Ministry of Finance. Who is going to employ a person to guide people in no-man’s land about where to go? Certainly it cannot be Parliament because it is not within our boundaries. 

However, since you have mentioned it here, perhaps somebody will take it up so that they post someone in the area to guide people as to the right place to go to. But it does not belong to Parliament. In any case, hon. Aggrey Awori, I do not see any problem with people - this is a Parliament of people. If people have a concern to bring to Parliament, they are free to come to the yard to present it so that we could deal with these matters. We should not send them away. If it is meant for us, we have a mechanism of handling it. But this is not meant for us. 

Secondly, it is not true that we have completed the Land (Amendment) Bill. If you think what has happened is relevant to the amendment, you could always bring it up. But as I said earlier, the way the Land Act was passed has caused problems. We have to seriously look at it so that we cure the defects, if any, so that we do get further problems. However, we should be very objective when dealing with this matter rather than being emotional.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What is happening today is not different from what I had wanted to raise last week and you advised that we wait for the Minister so that he could take the matter up. I interacted with these people in the morning when I was coming. The circumstances by which these people have been affected are not different from what happened in the first week when the people who were migrating and going to resettle in Kibaale were intercepted. 

They said they were sent back from where they came. Mr Speaker, whereas our Constitution guarantees and gives all Ugandans the right to move freely and to reside and settle in any part of Uganda as long as he is doing it legally, these people – according to my information- are just resettling. They sold their land and bought land in other areas of the country but in reaching there they were by-laws passed by the District Council in Kibaale District. 

The issue is that it was decided, and it was written in the paper that it was following a resolution by the district authorities to ban immigrants, because the district was over-populated. So, this has become a precedent. People have taken it upon themselves to chase away others from what they call “our land”. I even delayed to bring this to the attention of the Minister concerned because I wanted to get some more information. 

We have got information that some land is even being sub-divided further. Land, which belongs to people, is being sub-divided and given to various people. Mr Speaker, the Minister has responded through the press. Could he perhaps make a ministerial statement as to how he is going to handle this issue?  Otherwise it is going to be a catastrophe in the nation and it will affect all areas in the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS BEATRICE BYENKYA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Well, I just want to give the correct information. Whatever has happened now has no relation with what hon. Banyenzaki is saying. The people that have taken refuge outside the Parliament had gone to squat on somebody's land very well knowing it belonged to somebody. It is a case that has been dragging on for two years or more now. 

The land belongs to Herbert Kimera. But some people told others, “There is a piece of land, it appears it belongs to nobody”, then they came and occupied it. When they came, the owner of the land persuaded them to leave, that he wanted to use it for something, and they just said, “It does not belong to anybody”. Well, the person went through the LC courts but failed to evict the people from the land. It became a court case, which went on for a year or so, and eventually they were evicted from the land in April last year. 

On being evicted, they took refuge at Hoima Public School, and the district beckoned the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness. The Ministry sent hon. Amongin Aporu, who brought in some things that they used for some time but ultimately they were removed from that place because school was re-opening. Then they went to the Ssaza headquarters of Buhaguzi. 

The district was mandated to look into the matter and was given the responsibility to see that they were resettled. It is an issue that is being handled by the district but rather at a slow pace. The people were over 475. Those ones outside Parliament do not measure up to that number. So we are also beginning to ask ourselves, “where are the rest of the people that were with them”? Unfortunately, because in the House there is this Bakiga-Banyoro issue going on, it is now being used. It is being muddled up with this, yet it has nothing to do with Banyoro or Kibaale. So please, leave it out. Handle matters as they are. That is the basic truth. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BANYENZAKI: Perhaps I could make a clarification here. I am not saying that these people are the same group that was intercepted in Kibaale. I am saying it has some similarity to it. There is a relationship between the two. It is similar people that are being harassed in Kibaale, because the matter -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have had a vivid account from the Member for Hoima, who is conversant with the facts of this particular case. Unless you want to contradict her, I think hers is the account we should accept.

REV. DR SSEMPANGI: Mr Speaker, the matter being raised by the honourable member may be similar to what is happening in the District of Mubende. The word she used is “immigrants”, but these people come as land grabbers -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Rev. Ssempangi, you are expanding the matter. Some other person may also say, “this is happening in Pallisa”, then where are we going to end? This was in respect of the people who are out there. I believe that she has given us a plausible account, there must be somebody concerned who will investigate this matter in Government or in the district. Let us just narrow it down to that.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your permission, I would like to draw the attention of the House to a matter that I believe is of importance to this country. Yesterday the chair of the Committee on Budget, hon. Kiraso, complained very strongly about the absence of the Minister of Finance when a bill concerning his ministry was before this House. 

Today’s edition of the Monitor has as its heading for the editorial that, “Finance Ministry is casual.” The editorial is about a formal appointment that the Netherlands Ambassador here had with the Ministry of Finance. The Government of Netherlands was offering our country, 2 million Euros, and they were supposed to sign initial papers at the said appointment. A whole Ambassador went to the Ministry of Finance Boardroom at 3.00 p.m. and sat for 45 minutes but there was not a single minister or ministry official to deal with the matter about which he was there. 

Given the above, what is happening in the House as regards the Ministry of Finance is certainly bad. We shall reach a stage when the Finance Ministry is going to break the camel’s back in this House. And I saw in the New Vision a small caption where hon. Kutesa was reportedly apologising to the Ambassador. I think that was at an individual level.

Mr Speaker, given the gravity of this and the damage that this is causing our country - because this morning on BBC they were reading the papers from Uganda and they referred to this matter -that means the whole of Africa has heard about this. 

Given the gravity of this, it would only be appropriate that the Minister of Finance made a formal statement on this scandal. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I speak with humility because for two weeks now I have been trying to seek clarification on a matter of public concern, a matter of Parliamentary concern and a matter of state concern. You have all along been advising me to wait until great people feature. For two weeks now they have not featured. Why do you not do me a favour, on behalf of the people I represent, that I present my concern? The concern is of an emergency nature and the present ministers could report back appropriately.  

THE SPEAKER: You have the Floor.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Following the passing of the Political Organisations Act last year, Article 269 of the Constitution has become redundant. Article 72(1) of the Constitution guarantees the right to form political parties. That means whoever launches a political party is not launching an NGO, he is not launching a trading company;  he is launching a party to contest power. 

The Political Organisations Act has not started working. At the time, when political parties like CP were contemplating carrying out some minimal activities in consonance with the Act, the Constitutional Court nullified two important sections of the Political Organisations Act, namely section 18 and section 19. Mr Speaker, I am seeking the following clarification very briefly:

Could the Leader of Government Business, through me, tell the people I represent whether a new bill will be floated should the Appeal Court hold the same verdict, as might be the case?

As the political parties wait for the results of the Appeal Court, do they do nothing? We are supposed to be acting somehow in accordance with the POA.

Has the Attorney General filed an appeal to contest the ruling and is the appeal necessary now that things are changing? If not, why does he not save the taxpayers money by holding onto the present court ruling?

Does Government not owe an explanation to the people you and I represent, on the political implications of the successful challenge mounted on the POA by DP and the Reform Agenda on the Act? The Political Organisations Act is our law as Parliament and when it aborts, we must be concerned. This is why I think this matter is one of public concern.

Lastly in terms of a very serious challenge, if the Conservative Party convenes a political rally - as it is planning to do on the 1st of May this year - which law shall we have broken? This is the challenge, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I direct that a copy of the Hansard reflecting what you have said be sent to the Leader of Government Business and the Attorney General for appropriate response.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You remember on Wednesday the 23rd, I reported to you and this august House about the situation in Erute County North, of about 290 people who were abducted. According to today’s New Vision, 20 people who were abducted were released, and these are the elderly people. The rest who are still in captivity are young and able people who may be seduced to join the rebel ranks. 

Unfortunately, ten school pupils from Akori Primary School in my own village happened to be among those who were abducted. Indeed, the attackers came at about 9.00 p.m., tortured people until 10.00 a.m. in the morning, and they just walked back safely. Mr Speaker, yesterday they were back, they tortured people in Atukum Parish, and they abducted a number of people. They also looted foodstuffs and merchandise and they went back safely. Yet there is a detach, which is hardly a kilometre away from where the rebels were operating. And you now wonder what these LDUs have been doing! Either they are few in number or they have inferior ammunition.

So, the people of my constituency are now preparing full gear to do work. They want to visit this Parliament to ensure that they are told why their situation has never been addressed seriously.

Secondly, they want to visit Karamoja, Moroto and Kotido to ensure that they hear from the community of Kotido and Moroto as to the reasons why cattle rustling cannot stop. At the moment, we are talking about restocking but I think that will come to a dead end because all the restocked animals have been rustled again. 

Thereafter, they want to come and meet their colleagues in Luwero Triangle and discuss with them if there is any relevance to them in what is taking place. Then they will come and meet His Excellency the President and possibly the Minister of Defence. They want to speak to them about why, even after they have formed a battalion from among themselves, they cannot be trained to protect their property themselves. So, this is the situation in which we are preparing to implement that. Currently the people are sleeping in the bush with neither medical facilities nor food relief, and the Government programmes have all been distorted. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable member, two days ago, there was a request by hon. Omara Atubo to have a debate on the security situation in the North and East. Following that I made consultations. I thought we could do it this week but it could not be. I point to Tuesday as a day when the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Defence should come and address us on this issue and then we shall have a debate on it.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Michael Werikhe): I thank you, Mr Speaker. There were two issues raised by hon. Aggrey Awori, and supplemented by hon. Atubo.  However, I will specifically address the question regarding the road between Busia, Malaba and Bugiri.  

 On the issue of our fellow Ugandans who are just infront of Parliament, it is true we were concerned as Government and we are investigating this problem together with their appropriate local authorities.  At an appropriate time, Mr Speaker, we will provide the House with the detailed information.  Right now we are not in a position to do that; however, we have taken note of the concerns of the honourable members.  

On the issue of the road that is between Busia, Malaba and Bugiri, this road was contracted to Strabag as the construction company and work commenced.  However, in the process of resealing the road there are certain sections that developed faults or failures.  

Mr Speaker, in the contract as the normal standard of practice there was enshrined provision regarding the correction of faults or failures in the process of resealing the road.  This has been noted especially between Busia and Bugiri but not the entire stretch. There are certain sections which are good so the teams of engineers from the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications together with the contractors have already visited those sections that have failed and currently we are re-examining the designs with the view to correcting those defects.  

The road is not yet handed over because there is a grace period allowed to study whether the work has been done to the design that was contracted or agreed upon.  So as the client, that is the Government of Uganda, has not yet resealed or the road has not yet been handed over, we are arranging to have those corrections done before the road is handed over.  Therefore, I would like to assure hon. Aggrey Awori that those sections that have failed are going to be corrected.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  On the issues raised by hon. Latigo, first of all, about the absence the Minister of Finance when the Financial Institutions Bill was called for debate yesterday, all I have to say is to tender our apologies.  We are five ministers in the Ministry of Finance but the job of resource mobilisation and foresight of the entire economy is so immense.  It involves a lot of travelling in and out of the country.  What happened yesterday is that my colleague in charge of Privatisation who steered the bill in the committee abruptly felt unwell, and when he felt unwell there was nobody in office to inform the House to stand over the bill.  

The Minister of Finance is out of the country on a very important assignment.  I am holding the fort, but it transpired that yesterday I was up country consulting the Chief Executive, the President, on a very important matter.  Hon. Musumba in charge of Planning is also out of the country.  Hon. Sam Kuteesa is on leave but even yesterday he was in office attending to another matter and he did not know that hon. Kasesene felt unwell.  Nevertheless, honourable members, I really do apologise profusely and regret whatever inconvenience was caused to this august House.  

Then on the failure to turn up for signing with the donors the other day, I must say it was as a result of uncoordinated programs.  We had a very important budget meeting with her Excellency, the Vice President.  We knew we were scheduled for the morning meeting but all of us, myself, the Permanent Secretary and the Deputy Permanent Secretary who could have attended to this signing were tied up in that meeting with the Vice President until 4.00 p.m.  It only transpired that the person we sent to put the signature did not succeed to get in touch with the Ambassador.  So we definitely regret and promise that it will not happen again.  

But as you can see, it was not out of negligence; it was not out of disrespect for the Ambassador but it was because circumstances were such that we could not handle that aspect, but everything has been rectified and apologies have been extended to the donors and they have accepted the apology.  I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, as I said, I appointed Tuesday as the date for Minister of Defence and Minister of Internal Affairs to come for a debate on security situation in the North and the East and maybe other parts of the country.  Now, the minister is here, I want to repeat that on Tuesday you are expected to come here with Minister of Internal Affairs and Minister of Defence to deal with the issues raised this week over security matters.

Honourable members, you remember yesterday I told you the appointed committee of four honourable members to draft the terms of reference and I had given them Monday as the latest date to report. I am happy to report that the chairperson has reported to me that they have finished drafting the terms of reference and therefore I want to adjust our Order Paper to allow the chairperson to brief us on the terms of reference so that we signify our approval or improvement on those terms.

DR OKULO EPAK  (Oyam County South, Apac): Rt Hon. Speaker, I want to thank the august House for entrusting us with this assignment and I beg to report.  

Parliament appointed a select committee to propose amendment to the Land Act to cater for the family land rights under clause 39A of the bill now in consideration in the House.

The Rt Hon. Speaker appointed another committee to draw the terms of reference for this assignment.  The committee met on Thursday, 24 April 2003 at 4 p.m. in the south committee room and formulated the terms of reference, which I now have the honour to present to the House.

Terms of reference. Terms of reference for the select committee was appointed to address the amendment regarding the family land rights as proposed by the committee on Natural Resources.  Parliament established a select committee to study and draft a suitable alternative amendment on family land rights to what was proposed by the Committee on Natural Resources in Clause 39A.  

The following are the terms of reference for the select committee: 

1.Consider the significance as well as the social and the diverse cultural implications of including in the land law matters of family land rights.

2.Refer to and study Articles 26 and 31, and other relevant provisions of the Constitution regarding their implications on the proposed amendment.

3.Study the adequacies or inadequacies on this matter in the existing laws, in particular those pertaining to the family law, succession law, the administration of the estate of the deceased’s law and the rights of family members thereto.

4.Consider further whether section 40 in the present Land Act does not address this issue adequately.

5.Study the relevant situation in African and Commonwealth countries, especially the UK.

6.Study the implication of the proposed amendment on the land market and use of land as collateral in the banking transactions and on the economy as a whole.

7.Investigate any other matters incidental to the proposed amendment.

8.Report to the House within one week from the time of adopting these terms of reference.  I beg to report.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Honourable members, you have heard the report from the committee chaired by hon. Okulo Epak.  Now what is your view?

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank the committee for doing its work expeditiously.  I would like to refer the House to terms of reference No.5, wherein the committee suggested that the other committee studies the relevant situation in Africa and Commonwealth countries, especially the UK.  I just wanted to find out from the committee how relevant it would be to study the situation in the United Kingdom?

REV. DR SSEMPANGI: Mr Speaker, in No.1, where it talks about “social and cultural”.  As a church member, I would like to add “religious,” because I understand the Moslems have a particular way of assigning land after the deceased.

THE SPEAKER: So you want to add religion because it is not covered by social and culture?

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I note that the references, which the committee is going to consult, are very wide and expensive. I wonder why they have given themselves only one week to do such extensive work!  I would have liked them to do it properly for at least two weeks.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as far as they are concerned, they can complete it within one week.  But if for a good cause the committee cannot complete the assignment, definitely we have the mandate to extent it.  But that is not a serious problem; it can be contained.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to start from what the chairperson did not comment on and these are the signatures.  I note you picked five people: two women and three men.  Hon. Olive Woneka did not sign this report.  Does it mean she did not participate in these deliberations?  If she did not, what was the hurry for if the committee was given up to Monday to submit this report?  I propose that hon. Olive Woneka should participate since it was in your wisdom that she should also be on this committee.

I would also like comment on time.  According to the Hansard, you gave the committee two weeks.  This was announced on the 14th, according to our records.  I would like to find out from you when was this time supposed to start and lapse?  Was it supposed to start upon receipt of the terms of reference, or was it supposed to have started when you announced it on the floor of this House?

My third comment – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we said 6th May. If we refer to the approved Parliamentary week, that is the seven days of sitting, it will again coincide with the same date.  But should you find that you can’t finish the work within that period, I don’t think this is a problem, we can always come and report and say: “Well, we are unable to finish, please give us more time”.  I think Parliament will oblige.  But what do you think we should do?  Do you want to be specific and we say 6th May?  Suppose on 6th May you are not in position to present a report, does it mean that you will end there?  Definitely, we will extend the period.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr speaker, I raise this point because when you look at the terms of reference, the work that is supposed to be done is referring to tasks such as studying and investigating.  Really, if you are going to study and investigate, I do not know how much you can do in one week?  I also want to submit that the Committee of Natural Resources had already done some amount of work on this issue.  So, if we are going to start working as if no work has been done, then it becomes a bit complicated. Because when you look at the time we have, we only have about 12 hours in a day and eventually you will have 84 hours if it a week; if you work up to Sunday it will really be very difficult.  When you look for example at – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, my understanding of studying will include you examining what the committee had done, agree with it or improve on it.  So to study takes into account many other things including the committee’s report.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I had not finished.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I submit that it is too wide and if, for example, you look at No. 2, reference is being made to articles of the Constitution and there are many more articles on Land in the constitution. I think what was submitted to study was the Land Act of 1998 and any other relevant laws would have covered what is stated in No.2 and what is stated in No3.  Because if you started highlighting which particular sections, you will find that section 28 of the Land Act is missed out, and yet this is the particular section that talks about customary land tenure.  So, I find that split and at the same time it makes the task wider.

Finally, on No. 5, I do not see why we should spread it to the UK just like it has been mentioned. Because, if we are aspiring towards the East African Federation, then the study of Africa or East Africa should be good enough.   Thank you.

MRS BIIRA BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to express my appreciation at the speed with which the committee has produced the terms of reference. But there was a bit of gender imbalance when the decision was being taken, because I thought the purpose of putting there two honourable female members was to put some gender balance in as far as the family is concerned.  That one is noted.

Secondly, the Committee of Natural Resources has had its report delayed because this proposal could not be decided upon by this House, and some of the reasons given was that it needed to be harmonized with other laws. The Executive proposed that we needed a wider study and consultation.

Now, when I look at these terms of reference, they are so wide that they will continue to hold the report of the committee from being passed by this House.  If I also look at what was proposed by the select committee, especially, where the select committee was proposing that one of the terms of reference should look at the 1998 Land Act and the Amendment Land Act of 2002; it was all impressive, but No.4 has just picked out one section.

I thought the earlier recommendation of harmonizing the committee’s proposal with other relevant laws was covered in No.3 and No.2, which is in the Constitution.  What am I saying; that these terms of references have just expounded and narrowed the proposal by the select committee.  Yes, by enlisting No.4, it has just narrowed it, that is my concern.

Finally, the view of the committee was that section 40 was not adequate.  It was not very clear about the principal of establishing family land in the Land Act. It was not comprehensive on defining the family rights on the land.  That is why the committee firmly came up and proposed another clause 39A, which could be more comprehensive on family land rights.  That is my observation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, I think the select committee was set up after the House had received the committee’s report, but it was necessary that the House in its wisdom set up another select committee to examine this report and come up with recommendations. So, I think we cannot say the committee said this as if it was final, because if it were final it would not have been necessary to set up this select committee.  

It is true that the select committee also made some suggestions on the terms of reference but as we said, when you set up a task force, you give it an assignment.  It is not for the task force itself to determine the assignment.  So that is why we agreed here that it is necessary for us who have set up the select committee to give it an assignment, and therefore, it is proper that we set the terms of reference.   I do not know how they have reached them, maybe they have taken into account the ideas of the select committee. 

I think you have to look at term No.7; term No.7 is an umbrella term in that if there is anything which should have been considered, it has not been expressly mentioned here, but it can come up as long as it is relevant. But now these proposals given by the committee we set up, it is up to us really to decide which one to add. But this is a paper which we are using to finally determine the terms of reference.  That is my understanding.

MR KAKOOZA: Motion.

THE SPEAKER: Motion? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much.  I would also like to thank the committee for using the little time available to come up with some specific proposals. However, I would like to make four brief remarks.  One, it is on record that I challenged the main report of the Natural Resources Committee on Land.  In the same vein, it would have been fair enough for my name to be included on the select committee, because I presented a minority report.  It might be late, but it is never too late.

Secondly, my impression is that the terms are good, novel, but they make too many diversions and generalisations.  The matter of Land was first discussed in the Constituent Assembly (CA) and it was narrowed down in form of an Act of Parliament, which is the Land Act.  Article 40 attempted to say something about family rights.  We now need a more concrete provision, if we are in search of a more concrete provision. Mr Speaker, we should also be concrete in the terms of reference.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, if I were on the Okulo Epak Committee I would have tended to ignore No.5 because –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi for taking information. No.5 is very important because we are making a law and all of us know that our jurisprudence is based on the English legal system first and foremost. But most importantly, the system of land holding that we apply here, which is called the Torrens system, is borrowed from the United Kingdom. So when we are making a law, we really should not pretend. We should look at that developed system and see what it provides. I personally see no harm in looking at the English law. I thank you very much.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable minister knows that within the Commonwealth there are countries other than the United Kingdom with laws related to the Uganda situation. Why, specifically, the United Kingdom? 

In their recommendation 4(3) I would expect the committee to have taken the trouble to realize the quantifications of Article 237 of the Constitution, notably on the distinct systems of land tenure.  Whatever you do must be in consonance with those systems, especially in regard to the culture, norms and traditions of our people. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, should we not allow the chairperson to explain and then we consider each term of reference and give it a nod or otherwise?

Dr Okulo Epak: I thank the Speaker and those who have made comments. Let me start with the last comments from hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. 

Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi says this proposal should have been more concrete. How I wish he could have suggested the concrete material to cement this one, because now it leaves it to the imagination. In what way should it have been made concrete? I wish he could have assisted us. 

Five, which will also answer others, is the reference to the United Kingdom. I may wish to draw your attention to the fact that when we were dealing with the land law here in the Sixth Parliament, DFID offered financing to make the regulations. In fact they are the people who originally provoked this idea of co-ownership, because of their financing. (Interjections) Yes, it is true! When DFID was financing the preparation and implementation of the land law, they almost pointed out that this was essential. So we would like to see what they actually say in their law, from which we could benefit. 

I mean, if they are just telling us things that they also do not have in their own law, then we should also know the reason for this. That is why reference to the United Kingdom was made. However, we have also borrowed a lot on land law from the Indian laws, and I think Commonwealth accommodates that one.

Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is a member of the committee. Honestly, the provision the committee was proposing refers specifically to registrable land, not to customary tenure. And registrable land would obviously include freehold, mailo and leases. So, unless it was by way of emphasis, we did not have to list the tenure systems. In any case, terms of reference No.2 provides for the studying of Articles 26, 31 and any other relevant provisions –(Interruption)

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, hon. Okulo Epak for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to clarify the position that hon. Okulo Epak is giving to the House that the committee was only talking about registrable land and leaving out other tenure systems. 

The 1998 Land Act also introduces the concept of having certificates of customary land tenure. The spirit of it is that ultimately all land will be registrable. That was the basis. We were not leaving out the customary tenure system at all, and therefore not leaving out any region in the country.

THE SPEAKER: Well, when you read the first term of reference it says, “Consider the significance as well as the social and diverse cultural implications of including in the land law matters of family land rights.” Definitely that one will also take care of any other systems, including the cultural implications on land and family.  

DR OKULO EPAK: On the clarification, once customary land tenure becomes registered, then it is registrable land. If it is not registered, it is not registrable land. So I do not think there is a difference, because how are you going to list names of people on a certificate that does not exist? Because if it is customary communal tenure and there is no certificate, there is nowhere you could add the name of anybody. So, “registrable” accommodates the wish of the hon. Member representing Kasese. 

Once customary tenure has passed from the armophous system to certificate of ownership or whatever it is, then it is registered. Therefore it is registrable and you could include names on it.

The hon. Member for Kasese said that the Executive said that while dealing with this matter, we should harmonize all laws. We took this into consideration. That is why we widened it but also became more specific. We widened the laws that should be referred to, unless the honourable member is saying all the laws are not covered, then I would suggest that No.7 covers any other thing that has not been mentioned. 

It is always good to have such a provision in terms of reference, to cater for things that have not been mentioned specifically. I think that is the area where this committee would make even reference to the work of the Committee on Natural Resources.

The question of timing, Mr Speaker, you have dealt with adequately. 

About hon. Woneka, we were asked to submit the report on Monday. That means that by Monday, the report should be ready, so we had only yesterday and probably today to work, unless we were prepared to work over the weekend. 

When I consulted all the other members who were accessible, a number of them said they would not even be available today. If they were not going to be available today, they were not going to be available on Saturday; they were not going to be available on Sunday; and therefore, we would not have a report to present on Monday. 

I tried to reach hon. Wonekha yesterday from morning and the whole of the afternoon, all in vain. Fortunately, one of the members, hon. Kabwegyere, reached her.  She rang me this morning, she apologized that she was not accessible yesterday because she was very busy at another meeting that was going on in Hotel Africana. She told me that she did not mind the fact that she was not there. She said she was assured by hon. Kabwegyere that what we had done was quite accommodating, and she gave us a go-ahead. 

So, we could not even find her to sign the document. She was not in the precincts of Parliament almost the whole of yesterday. (Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Okulo Epak. The information I want to give you is that, hon. Woneka is attending the Amani workshop, which goes on until Monday. She actually called me this morning. It was me who gave her your number and enabled her to call you. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are dealing with a matter of principle, and I think this is what we should look at. Hon. Dora Byamukama implies that out of five people, when one person is not present, the committee should not sit. That is a principle we must agree on, when the committee is composed, or even when this House is composed, like it is now. I have counted now, there only just under 10 members who are not male. In which case, this House should not pass a resolution or pass any decision just because the female composition is not adequately presented. 

I think this is a principle. Because, hon. Kabwegyere, as a member of this committee, would feel very insulted if the work that is presented here is not judged by its merit, but is judged only because one person did not attend. So, we should not have had the meeting, we should not have decided, we should not have transacted the business of the House. We should have waited for somebody who genuinely was out of reach, and who has –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these terms of reference have been read to us, we are at liberty to improve on them. Even in the absence of hon. Olivia Wonekha and the others, we can improve on them. So, I really suggest that we proceed to deal with the terms of reference as drafted by the committee. Where you think you have an idea to improve on them, we improve and then we proceed. So, if you have an idea to improve, I will definitely give you an opportunity. 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I am one of the supporters of a reasonable inclusion in the law, with regard to the protection of the family –(Interjection)- I said I am one of them. Mr Speaker, I do not want the people in my camp to project a situation in this House as if this is a matter between men and women. If we do this, we are going to lose an otherwise good cause. 

The fact that one member of the House was not able to attend the drafting committee meetings should not be overemphasized, just because she happens to belong to the other sex. It will harden the people we want to bring to our side, and they will believe that maybe this is a matter between men and women, and since we are men we should – 

So, Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to my colleagues, including hon. Byamukama, that we allow the matters as they are and simply go through these terms, as you have guided us.

DR OKULO EPAK: Honestly, I have a lot of respect for hon. Byamukama Dora, and I wish she could also reciprocate. When I say I tried my best the whole of yesterday morning and afternoon to reach hon. Woneka - I tried my best to reach her by phone, my secretary and – (Interjection)- we do not have to plead here, there is no court. I think we have to trust one another. Otherwise, the question of being honourable Members of Parliament ceases to be there. 

Mr Speaker, I think those were the major issues raised. On the question of including religious organizations, surely, if one does not feel that the social and cultural aspect covers it, by way of emphasis it can be included. I have no problem, you can go on detailing as much as possible. Since now we have more women Members of Parliament in the House than hon. Woneka, obviously I think they should be at liberty to improve this proposal, so that it accommodates everybody. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I read the first term of reference. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Then we move on to No. 2 –(Interruption)

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I propose that we refer to relevant provisions of the Constitution rather than restricting ourselves to Articles 26 and 31, because there are other –(Interjections)- okay, that being the case, I would like to insert another article, Article 33, because it is very straight and assertive on exclusive affirmative rights of women. So, if we could say Article 26, 31, 33 and others, you will have brought me on board. Thank you. I beg to propose.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I would prefer the committee also refers to relevant sections of law, not only the Constitution. I am pointing this out because in the proposed amendment, there is a proposal that children of majority age be left out.  When you look at the children of majority age –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are going to come to No. 3. You will see that they refer to other existing laws. So, I put the question on No. 2. We have now inserted Article 33. 

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER: I think you said No. 1 should include religion. 

MR KADDUNABI LUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want No. 3 to specifically read, “Study the adequacies or inadequacies on this matter in the existing laws, in particular those pertaining to family law, sharia law…” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the term “law” is wider than sharia law. The term “law” will include customary law, which sharia falls under. Actually, in a way, it is family law.  Therefore, it is covered. But do you think we should include it?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: It is covered, honourable member. I assure you.

MR JOHN KAWANGA: I only wish that after “…succession law, the administration of the estate…” they should add the Registration of Titles Act, because that is one Act that specifically handles this.

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion by hon. Kawanga that we also include the Registration of Titles Act. Should we include it?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we have included it.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, since we are talking of sharia law and family law, since we are studying all these laws, we could also add the Marriage and Divorce Act, to synchronise everything.

THE SPEAKER: That is family law. It is again wider. It is covered.  

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. As you said, religious law or sharia law is covered, how will No.1 read now? Or is it covered under No. 3? If it is in No. 3, how will it read?

THE SPEAKER: No, when you say law, there are many laws. We have what we call case law, where the case is pronounced by the court, we have statutory law, we have customary law. Actually religious law - and I did study Islamic law - is considered as customary. Therefore, it is a law.  So, you need not go on to particularise - criminal law, tort - once you say, family law, it covers anything. 

MR KADDUNABBI: But, Mr Speaker, if we have Kadhi courts, they will definitely go by the sharia laws. It might not be sharia law as you said, but I want to know, what harm will it do if we included it here, so that the Moslems inheritance or rights are taken care of?

THE SPEAKER: It is because when I talk about a house, I do not talk about rooms in the house. I have said that sharia law is a law, and the term law covers any law. Because if now we put sharia law, then there may be Hindu law, there may be this and the other. So, the other one is a wider term. Take the wider term, other than the narrow concept of the law, which you are trying to include. I assure you, this is how we deal with this issue. Are you satisfied, honourable member? Is that clear? 

MR KADDUNABBI: I take your guidance, Mr Speaker. 

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, listening to you expounding on this point, I am getting increasingly convinced that there is no need to point out all these laws. We could say, “Study the adequacies or inadequacies on this matter in the existing laws” and we stop there. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we can do that. Now, there is an amendment by hon. Kabakumba.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, if you just stopped on relevant laws –(Interjections)- But I do not see any problem in particularising some of these.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment by hon. Kabakumba.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, let us go on to No.3. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now we go to No. 4.

MS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Section 28 of the Land Act touches on rights of marginalised groups under customary tenure. So, it should be included.

THE SPEAKER: So, you want to add section 28?

MS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

Term of reference 4, agreed to

Term of reference 5, agreed to

Term of reference 6, agreed to

Term of reference 7, agreed to
 
THE SPEAKER: Now, we come to No. 8. Is it problematic?

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, it is obvious, from the assignments we have given the committee from one to seven, that they cannot accomplish the task in one week. When you give someone a task, you give them resources and sufficient time in which you expect work to be done.

THE SPEAKER: So, what amendment do you want to propose?

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I want to propose that the committee reports within one month.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have already mentioned that both the minister who provided the bill, and the committee that made the report, are anxious for the Land (Amendment) Act 2003 to be passed by this House. We are anxious for the tribunals to be in place because there are so many land disputes going on out there. The demand is so high, and there are budgetary provisions. We need to spend that money by putting the tribunals in place.  

I would like to propose that we stick to what was passed in the House on 14th, that the committee be given 2 weeks, ending on 6th May. Let us come to 6th May, if the committee has not completed, it is normal in this House, and it will be naturally extended.

THE SPEAKER: So, the amendment, honourable members, is that you report to the House by 6th May. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MR JACK SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I need some clarification. Maybe I should be educated a little. When you talk of family land, are you talking about land where a lady stays with a husband, or also land which is owned by the parents of the lady? I want this properly clarified.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the spirit behind this is to talk about the land on which the members of a family live and sustain themselves.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I will give an example of myself. My wife has land on the side of her parents. We also get food and some things from that side. I think we must be faithful to both sides, Mr Speaker - (Laughter). If we only talk about the man’s land where a wife comes and joins the husband, when there is land on the other side where the lady came from, surely we must understand – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sabiiti, the food you get from your in-laws is a donation - (Laughter).

MR SABIITI: I think, Mr Speaker, this is a matter which may bog down the debate when we come here. Surely, we should address this matter very seriously. Much as I support women’s rights on land, I would also like my interest to be taken care of on the other side.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, hon. Sabiiti for giving way.  Hon. Sabiiti happens to be my very good in-law. I think people think women are so selfish. The understanding is that, if I own land where I am born, that is Nkooba, and after marrying Capt. Masiko we agreed -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, we have just approved the terms of reference for the select committee to do exactly what we are discussing.  Is it procedurally right to pre-empt the work which is going to be done by the select committee? My understanding is that when the select committee is sitting, Members of Parliament who have an interest or an idea to present are free to go and sit there.

THE SPEAKER: Exactly. I think this completes our decision on the terms of reference. I now put the question that these terms of reference be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, chairperson and members of your committee, and I thank the House for disposing of this matter. It is now up to the select committee to embark on this assignment and report as stated in the terms of reference.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW 50 MILLION UNITS OF ACCOUNT FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) OF THE ADB GROUP FOR THE PURPOSE OF CO-FINANCING THE POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY PROGRAMME (PRSP)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a resolution of Parliament be made to authorise Government to borrow from the African Development Fund (ADF) of the African Development Bank Group, for the purpose of co-financing the Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme (PRSP), and that the resolution be in the following terms:

WHEREAS a loan agreement for units of accounts 40,460,000 is to be concluded between the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of co-financing the Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme; and 

WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source, subject to other constitutional provisions; and under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament; and 

WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorisation.  

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorised to secure the said loan from the African Development Fund for co-financing the Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, go ahead. It is seconded.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the PRSP is part of a new loan arrangement for extending budget support, which gives Government greater control over the funds provided by donors. As we all know, it is a departure from the initial arrangement of project support, where donors used to provide money for specific projects. 

The objective of this loan is to provide additional funds to support Government priority programmes already identified in PEAP. And these programmes include agricultural modernisation, primary education, primary healthcare, rural feeder roads, and water and sanitation.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this particular amount has already been appropriated by this House in the Budget. So, I plead that members support this borrowing.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Mr Speaker, honourable members, I would like to present to you a report of the Committee on the National Economy, on the loan request for Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme for 50 million dollars from ADB. 

This august House, as per the Rules of Procedure, referred this loan request to the Committee on National Economy. I now wish to state its observations and recommendations. 

This credit was negotiated with the African Development Fund (ADF) of the African Development Bank (ADB). The total amount requested for is US $50 million. 

The objective of the loan is to provide additional funding to Government programmes already identified in PEAP, specifically agricultural modernisation, primary education, primary healthcare, rural feeder roads, water and sanitation. 

Method of Work:

The Committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the technical staff of the same ministry. 

It further analysed documents related to the credit, which included the Draft Credit Agreement and the minister’s brief.  

Financing:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a new loan arrangement for extending budget support, giving Government greater control over the funds provided by the donors. The PRSP credit will be released in instalments of US$ 25 million annually, to make the overall funding of US$ 50 million in two years.

The terms are as follows:

    • Repayment period of 40 years
    • Grace of 10 years; and
    • Interest rate of 0.75 percent per annum. 

Other conditions for the release of the first instalment are: 

    • Government may tender an appropriate micro economic framework demonstrating satisfactory progress in implementation of reform measures.
    • Improved financial management, accountability and anti corruption measures.
    • Strengthening the justice, law and order section
    • Improving quality of education and health

Observations and comments: 

Mr Speaker, this credit request is in form of general budget support, and is consistent with the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). The fund should be channelled through the Consolidated Fund, to be disbursed through the treasury system. Misallocation and diversion of such funds will therefore be controlled by the established mechanisms.  

The Committee further noted that the conditionalities for the first lease are already in place. These include:

    • Establishment of a reformed Tender Board. 
    • Creation of contract committees in some procurement ministries, departments and Government agencies

The Committee reminds the House that a big percentage of Government expenditure is on procurement of goods and services. This has been a major source of corruption due to incompetence resulting in cases like expired medicine, poor quality food among others.

    • There has also been upgrading of skills of unqualified teachers through the TDMS. This has been complimented by improved distribution and utilisation of textbooks across the country. 
    • The health sector procurement plan for 2001/2002 has been formulated. We are waiting for the one of 2002/2003.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, whereas the above conditions for the first lease are in place, the Committee observed that the strengthening of the justice, law and order section has not been adequately addressed. 

There are complaints of backlog of cases, congestion in prisons and the alleged detention and torture of prisoners.

The Committee further observed that the first instalment would be released since most of the conditions have been met. 

The Committee noted that the following conditions, among the many, should have been set in motion in readiness for the second tranche:

    • A bill establishing an autonomous Auditor General’s office; 
    • Presentation of the report on the leadership code of conduct;
    • National Drug Policy and Strategic Plan on pharmaceuticals; 
    • Human Resource policy for Health Sector.

Recommendations:

    • Government should report to Parliament the performance of the first tranche of US$ 25 million in relation to the indicators set in the agreement after the end of one year after its approval.
    • Government should brief Parliament on how the conditions set for the serial instalment have been put in place for the first release.
    • All credit agreements to be included in the budget should be brought to Parliament for approval as stated in Article 159 (2) of the Constitution. These funds should be used for development programs and not recurrent expenditure.

Conclusion: 

Honourable members, the Committee will start to monitor the performance of this and other loans approved by Parliament to ensure that these monies are doing what is contained in the project implementation plan (PIP). 

The Committee appreciates the co-operation from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in discussing this loan request, and it is grateful to ADB for its continued support to the national economy. The Committee requests this House to approve the US$ 50 million pending, the recommendation above. I thank you and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman and members of the Committee.

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Committee for the good report on this loan. However, I would like to point out a few areas where I am worried. The Committee has rightly pointed out, on page 2, bullet 3, under "other conditions for the release of the first instalment", that: ’Improved financial management, accountability and anti corruption measures'. 

I recall that we recently passed the accountability bill, but there are some areas where I think there is wastage, which is not well accounted for. For example, the objective of this loan is to provide additional funding for Government programs already identified in PEAP, and one of them is primary education. But when you look at this sector, there is a lot of wastage.  

In 1997 when UPE was started, there were 2.14 million pupils in primary 1. These pupils are already in primary 7 this year. Out of the 2.14 million pupils, there are less than 600,000 pupils in primary.  That means either they are repeating or they have dropped out.  If they are repeating, that is what it is supposed to be.  But where do you get the children to make them 7.4 million? From the census, you see between six and 12; children should be less than six million! 

Whereas we have 7.4 million pupils in primary education, that means we have an excess of 1.4 million either repeating, and you are wasting money on all these – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the honourable Member for giving way. In UPE, from what I know, there is no repeating. Actually, pupils are sent to the next class regardless of whether they failed exams or passed. So, the explanation that is adequate to your argument would be dropouts, and not repeating.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member on the Floor for giving us those statistics. But there is something I failed to catch properly from him. He said in 1997 when UPE was launched, there were 2.14 million pupils. Was that only in primary 1 or in the whole of the primary school, from primary 1 to primary 7? Then he went ahead to say that today there are 600,000 children in primary 7. 

So, were the statistics relating only to the class of primary 1 in 1997 who should be now in primary 7 and it has 600,000 so that the drop is over 1.7? What were the statistics that the honourable Member was giving to the House? That is what I want to be clarified, Mr Speaker.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you very much, honourable members. In January, they gave us statistics on education. Of course we have statistics right from 1997, which are normally quoted even by the President. I will start off with the repeaters.  Thank you, hon. Amuriat, for that information. Actually that information is public knowledge that the policy here is no repetition, but the practice is that people repeat. This is why I am calling it wastage.  

To answer him together with hon. Katirima’s area where he needs clarification whether the 2.14 million was in primary 1, the total enrolment was 5.4 million – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the information we have been getting from the Minister of Education is that the enrolment in primary schools when they started was about two point something million. There has been an improvement in total enrolment in primary schools to about now six or so. Because, if you want to put two million only in one class, even the national youth census will not support you. Now, if only pupils in primary 1 were 2.1, of what total population of the country? But the report we have been getting is that it was two point something in primary schools. Now with UPE it is six million. 

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This assists me to clarify my point better. In 1996, the total enrolment was 3.01 million in the whole primary section. In Government-aided schools, they were 2.5 million and in the private schools they were about 0.5 million. The total enrolment was 3.01 million. When UPE was launched by His Excellency the President in Decenber 1996. In 1997, the whole enrolment from primary 1 to primary 7 rose to 5.4 million pupils. Out of those, 2.14 were in primary 1 - I hope that is clear - and these are the people I am talking about who should have – (Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: I would be happy if the honourable Member on the Floor could tell us his source of statistics so that we refer to it because he seems to be even opposing the Chair.

THE SPEAKER: I think he can develop other points. This information we shall get from the Minister of Education, maybe on Monday. We will get these details, so you can proceed.

MR MUGAMBE: I want them to know where the wastage is.  Early this year, we were given those statistics by the ministry. But we can even get more; it is available in the Ministry of Education. We should have 2.14 million pupils in primary 7 but instead we have less than 600. So, we are paying UPE to either people who are repeating or to non-existent pupils. 

I will tell you that now there are 7.4 million pupils. If you have got 1.5 pupils who should not be there and you are paying 8,100 per pupil per year, that means you are paying billions. You are wasting almost Shs 12 billion on the UPE grant! You are going to have teachers, classrooms, textbooks, and employ more inspectors for this 1.4 million pupils. So, the wastage in that area alone can save a loan. This is what I want to point out.  

Accountability should go beyond - it should address the inputs, the process, the outputs and the outcome. The outcome of the UPE programme should be a literate society, but here we are seeing accountability stopping at - On page 3, the Committee tells us “there has been upgrading of skills of unqualified teachers through the TDMS.” Is that the expected output? “This has been complemented by improved distribution and utilisation of textbooks across the country.” Is that the outcome we expect from UPE?  

So, my plea would be - we should maybe look at accountability in more details. I request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to look into these areas of wastage. There is too much wastage and we shall keep on borrowing beyond the means of our children and grandchildren. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is based on two issues; the Minister of Finance is requesting this august House to allow Government to borrow 50 million US dollars so that we can invest that money in Poverty Eradication Action Programmes (PEAP).  Mr Speaker, my greatest concern here is how Government is using the loans that we borrow. 

Sincerely speaking, I know that we shall respect the request and do the needful, but accountability has not been there. Because, if we put US$ 50 million towards Poverty Eradication Action Programme, we feel that at the end of some - maybe five, ten - years, the impact will be felt by even the grassroots. But to our dismay, this may not happen.  

After borrowing US$ 50 million, we may even start seeing expensive vehicles, which are being bought on that money.  Before even the project can take off, expensive vehicles are moving around.  

One example is the Rabbit Multiplier Project. I have seen that project name on expensive vehicles but I have never seen those rabbits multiplying so that Ugandans can benefit.  But very expensive vehicles are being used and those vehicles are part of the loans we are approving. 

Mr Speaker, I will request the honourable Minister and the government - because these loans are going to be paid back in 40 years. Some of us will not be here, but our grandsons and granddaughters will bear the burden. So let us try as much as possible to ensure that we reduce the burdens of our grandsons and granddaughters, and put these loans to more useful ventures. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say bravo to the committee, but I have one observation - or maybe a clarification, because this loan is good and it is very necessary, but it is only necessary when people and Government respond to economic incentives, which also need to seek the results by the Government, which is doing this.  

When you look at page 3, where there is “National Drug Policy and a strategic plan on pharmaceuticals”; I would like to be clarified by the minister because recently, they had privatisation of medical stores. I do think it was good that the Government was importing these drugs to put them in those medical stores. If you say that you are privatising, and then you increase the money and our culture has been that we are getting drugs at a cheaper cost, I see it as a problem here. That if you are privatising medical stores where you import and keep those drugs, we could get those drugs at a cheaper cost.  But what is the logic now? Is it necessary that we should add more money in this sector? If it is for the private sector, then it is well and good.

Two, I think bullet 1 of the recommendations is good, because, I would like to inform the minister that, the moment you put this regulatory and fair system on this money without giving accountability, you will fail to make an analysis on what your performance is. So I would like to know whether the minister could at least elaborate more, to give this 25 million when we have not got the first accountability. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The purpose for which this $50 million is being sought is very noble. A look at modernisation, primary education, primary healthcare, rural feeder roads, water and sanitation - they sound very, very convincing.

However, I would have loved to find in this report an indication of the current outstanding indebtedness of Uganda as far as foreign debts are concerned, for us to be able to say that we should continue to borrow more and more of this. 

MS KIRASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform my colleague that the Budget Act, Section 13 provides that: “The President shall, either at the time of presentation of the Budget or any time before the fifteenth day of June in each financial year, cause to be presented to Parliament, information relating to the total indebtedness of the state in that financial year, showing, inter alia, the total principal and sources of the loans and debts, the accumulated interest on each loan and debt, provision made for servicing or repaying of each loan and debt, the balance on payment, and most important, the utilisation and performance of each loan or debt, including the extent of the achievements of the objective targets of each loan”. And the same goes for grants and Government guarantees.  Thank you.

MR OMACH: I thank you, Madam Beatrice Kiraso, for that information. That is exactly what I am seeking, because now if we are to approve this, we should be in the knowledge of what she has just said.  

The second thing that I want to comment about is contained in the conclusion of the committee’s report.  The committee says that it will now start to monitor the performance of this and other loans approved by Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I think this is quite a serious statement.  We as Parliament are expected to oversee what affects the people who have elected us. I would like to know how the committee is going to monitor the performance of these borrowings that we are to approve today.  

Number 3, Mr Speaker, is contained on page 2, where the committee is saying that there are other conditionalities for the release of the first instalment.  It is important that we as a county, and in particular when we are borrowing at an interest, regardless of how small it is, are able to say “yes” or “no”. I would like to know how much of these conditionalities have been de-packaged by this country, how much of this was looked into by the committee to ensure that anything which is not appropriate for the people of Uganda has been de-packaged, so that we will not take a pill, which we cannot swallow.

Number 4, Mr Speaker, relating to these conditionalities, I would like to know from the minister responsible for finance, when this country will have a country rating so that we can walk also with our heads held high, knowing that as a country we have got a country rating.   

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would have loved to know the likely effect of the interest rate of 0.75 per cent on a loan of 50 million in forty years.  I understand the average American man in his lifetime eats about three to four kilogrammes of lipstick, and yet they take little at a time.  So, what is the importance of calculating how much of this 0.75 per cent in terms of interest would cost the people of Uganda over these forty years? I would have appreciated if this was calculated. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee.  I would like to touch on the issue of agricultural modernization, rural feeder roads, water and sanitation in respect to this loan.  

The loan we are seeking to approve touches on the issue of saying that Government will improve on agricultural modernization. The agricultural practices in our country are generally in the peasant sector, where the majority of the people are employed.  

I would like to be clarified by the minister. If this loan is approved, given the nature of our agricultural practices in the rural areas, and the Government policy of late whereby Government only remains at policy level, and leaves the matter of actual practice of agriculture into the hands of the peasants, how is this money going to be channeled to the extent of improving production, especially in the peasant area?  

Secondly, in matters of rural feeder roads, I know, Mr Speaker, that Government hopes and anticipates that in the event of improvement in the rural feeder roads, communication and transport will have improved to the extent that marketing of the crops and provision of services to the rural sector will improve.  

It is a very clear and good analysis of a situation.  But the other problem I see with the rural feeder roads in our country is that the supervision of works on rural feeder roads, especially those which are away from Kampala, is generally becoming inadequate.  I can cite an example of the road between Atirir and Ocere in Kaberamaido district, whose allocation from the budget this year has been Shs 351 million. It has not been worked on adequately.  Where it has been worked on, it has been poorly done.  How are we going to ensure that when we get the $50 million, the contractors will fulfill their terms of contract adequately in order to make a great value out of this loan?  

Mr Speaker, when we get this money and it is put in the Government treasury, it is a good idea, but can I be clarified whether this money will be distributed fairly throughout the country?  We have in this country areas of insurgency; we have in this country areas where people cannot sit and adequately produce, even if this money is available, and yet at the time when they have to pay this money back, they will all be asked to pay this money en masse.  What preparations or arrangements are in place to ensure that development arising out of this loan will not be only in those areas which are regarded generally peaceful?  I thank you.

CAPT CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my friend in thanking the committee who handled and produced a good report.  I want to comment on the justice, law and order section.  The people in this sector have complaints of their own.  The committee has noted the backlog of cases, congestion in prisons and alleged tensions.  

When we were interacting with the Law Reform Commission, they were saying that the problem has been with Government.  For example, the Law Reform Commission made an amendment on the Defilement Act and the jurisdiction of courts five years ago, but Government has never brought these amendments before this Parliament. It is now five years since they made the amendments and we continue to cry about the congestion in prison.  

We interacted with the Judicial Service Commission- maybe the Ministry of Finance should note here- they are making departments which are going to handle research, complaints, education and investigations. They are recruiting staff and the Ministry of Finance has provided funds for their salary, but it has not provided operational funds for them, and yet we want to fight corruption in this sector.  We want to see that the money that is put in this sector is going to handle the real work that would improve justice, law and order.  So, the honourable minister of Finance should comment on what improvements are going to be made.  

Yes, the loan is going to be given but what willingness do you have?  For example, we have the Leadership Code and we have got a certificate here that the funds are available.  The Inspector General of Government (IGG) was not availed funds to do most of the work. The certificate says the funds are available, but in the release from the Ministry of Finance, it indicates he did not get the funds, and he could not do the work he was supposed to do.  What is the willingness of the Ministry of Finance to ensure that this sector is handled properly, so that we improve in some of these areas which the donors want us to improve on?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman representative Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for having made this report, and to support the loan request, because I know that the $25 billion has already been indicated in the indicative budget framework as resources available for the financial year 2003/2004, and the other 25 in the medium term expenditure framework is also anticipated to be part of the Budget of 2004/2005. 

I welcome, very much, the departure from project financing to budget support. Because budget support addresses some of the issues like the one hon. sebaggala was talking about, of money going for a specific project and then ending up in consultancies and vehicles. So, I think budget support approach cures some of these things.  

I am also happy that this report points out, not only the terms of the credit or the loan, but also gives us an indication of the conditionalities that the donors are putting on Government.  It is very important because some issues have come up as conditionalities and you see Government trying to push them without telling us the truth that there are conditionalities, we halt them and then money is not released. Finally, Parliament is blamed for sabotaging Government programmes when actually we have not been told the truth.  So, I am happy that these conditionalities are coming out. 

On the improvement of financial management and accountability and anti corruption measures, I would like to add my voice to my colleagues who have already talked about lack of accountability and corruption in some sections of Government expenditure.  

I want the minister in his response to our concerns to throw some more light on the fate of the $150 million, which was approved but which the World Bank was still withholding because of non-accountability in the Defence expenditure, and Government going over and above money that had been agreed as a percentage of GDP to go to Defence. Because, some of these things we just sit here and approve and they do not take off! 

If these conditions which are here are not fulfilled, for us we will pride ourselves to have passed the loan of $25 million for this year's budget support. This money has not yet come because one or two things are not in place. So, I think we would like to be told how far that issue has gone.  

I know that there was a very big budget deficit. Of course, when there is a big budget deficit, some of the programmes are not financed. We stand here and continue asking about the roads, schools, and hospitals, and yet the money that has been put in the budget expected from the donors has not come.  We did present a report to show the half-year budget performance report, and we reported to this House that donor disbursement in the first six months performed at 16 percent. 

I am happy that Parliament, through the various Committees, is participating in ensuring that there is a fair distribution of Government programmes in the various areas.  I think that is one advantage the Budget Act gave us.  So, it is up to us to look at the budget framework and see whether the resources are evenly distributed.  I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I wish to support the loan request.

THE SPEAKER: I should pass on this information because it may also influence your discussion. The President has already nominated people to serve on the National Planning Commission.  It is now Parliament to approve the names and then the commission will be in place.

MR OGWEL LOOTE(Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to join my colleagues to appreciate the work of the Committee for putting a lot of highlights.  However, I would like to seek clarification from the minister, and maybe from the members of the Committee on the areas of this loan.

I am satisfied with primary education because at least if you went to the grassroots, you would see tangible accountability in terms of infrastructure, teaching and everything.  But when you come to rural feeder roads, it is more of a disaster, especially the security roads in Karamoja.  We have sung about the security roads but they have always said there are no funds, and yet we see a loan being sought for and it has to be approved and tomorrow they tell you there are no funds. 

When they release some money to work on these roads, sometimes they give it to people who are not accountable to the local government, or they are only accountable to the authority that gave them the tender. This is what sometimes makes the UPDF fail to curb these cattle rustlers.  They have the vehicles but they cannot move through all these bushes when there are no well-graded security roads.  So, I think we need seriously to address this issue.  

My second concern, Mr Speaker, is on the area of water and sanitation, especially in the rural towns.  In the report, you have seen that we have this rural water coverage, but up to date, you will find that some of these rural towns are not covered, and yet you will find it is well covered in the loan which is requested for.  So, I would like the minister to really explain. 

The worst of all in Karamoja is water for production and water for animals, especially on the areas of dams.  Previously, the dam used to cost about 300 million, but we were told the quotation is about 400 million.  But when you go to these dams, really it is a disaster! In the recent rains, those that had been constructed should have now given way.  

Secondly, you find that these dams are run on emergency programmes.  There is no plan to provide water for animals in Karamoja permanently.  These programs are run inadequately; they are all on emergency.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I thought the member from Karamoja really would have appreciated that Government has gone a long way to provide water for Karamoja.  Right now as we speak, I know that 13 large reservoirs are complete. The only problem probably the honourable member can talk about is that the rains of the last season were not adequate, and therefore, the dams may not be full.  But the structures have been put in place and arrangements are underway to complete three other structures. 

And as we plan for the new budget, high-yielding boreholes are also going to be put in place with reservoir tanks, which are also going to provide water. This is permanent provision of water.  We should know where we are coming from, where we have reached and how our projections are, and appreciate what Government has put down while we plan for more.  

MR LOOTE:  Well, of course, Mr Speaker, that is what I could expect from the minister who defends the work of his consultants and the work of the staff.  But I would like to tell him and this House that the contractors that you employ are even threatening to sue us for complaining in this Parliament.  

There is a company called Zzimwe; when you complain they say, “why are you complaining, you must keep quiet", because they are State House controlled.  You take the money to Karamoja and bring it back to Kampala and tell us here that people of Karamoja have received water. If we have got adequate water, why are the Karimojong going to Acholi and Lira to look for water?   Yes, you have gone there but you have only cleared the soil and you say you have given us water!

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, as a neighbour to Karamoja, I can testify that a lot of terrible things are taking place in that area.  That is why you hear all these problems of Karimojong going across to our areas outside Karamoja.  People are dying because of famine; there is a lot of internal security, and because of these terrible things, some people in Uganda now look at Karamoja as that part of the country which is suffering.  

But I want to appeal to my colleagues from Karamoja that one of the reasons why Karamoja is being ignored and highly marginalized is that they wait for these small comments - like now my brother from Moroto is talking but he will be ignored.  I ask you my brother from Karamoja to get organised and tell this Parliament and the country the terrible things that are happening in Karamoja.  

People don’t know those terrible things that are happening in Karamoja because Ugandans are so provincial in mind that they only look at their villages and their districts and tribes, and forget about others, provided there is enough water in their home areas, the tarmac road is there, they are eating meat and there is enough food. Most of them do not care.  

So, I am urging my brothers from Karamoja that get organised and come to this Parliament and ask for a day to debate on Karamoja. A person like me who is your neighbour who knows the terrible things and the lies that are being told in this Parliament by ministers and others will support you on this matter.  Thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA SENTAMU:  Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Omara Atubo, a veteran Member of Parliament, to use unparliamentary language to say that ministers tell lies?

THE SPEAKER:  It is not parliamentary language, unless you are going to substantiate.

MR ATUBO: Well, Mr Speaker, the word “lies” is a well-known word in our vocabulary, possibly the word “untruth” would be much better. (Laughter). Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So you withdraw the statement.

MR ATUBO: I substitute it with the word untruth -(Laughter).

MR MAFABI:  Mr Speaker, I want to give some information to my colleague. It is true you could be complaining as a member from Moroto; unless you put your issues in an organised manner, nobody will know the problems in Moroto.  

Frankly speaking, I also border them; the true story is that these people look as if they are marginalized, but the problem of the people in Karamoja, if anybody goes there, is insecurity.  The Karimojong are shooting people on the way, so people who could have gone there to assess the situation fear.  So, I do request again my colleagues from that area to tell his people to behave.  In fact -(Interruption)

MR LOLEM: Mr Speaker, what Nathan is trying to explain is really false because, if you go to Karamoja now, you get people working there; agricultural officers are not Karimojongs; veterinary officers are not Karimajong.  In Nakapiripirit, the District Engineer comes from Acholi; the Water Officer comes from Teso. In Kotido the Water Officer comes from Lira.  Now why are they alive if the Karimojong shoot them?  

So really, what this brother of mine is saying is really false, because he has not stepped in this sub-county bordering Teso. What he heard from people is what is really in his mind. So, Nathan should withdraw that statement that the Karimojong are wild people. The people administering us are not from Karamoja, they are from other districts and we don’t kill them!  They are comfortable. Even if you tell them now to go, they will not accept to come to Sironko or Mbale district. Thank you very much.

MR MAFABI:  Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for that information. I want to give you some information.  Recently, there were people from the Ministry of Education who went to survey the land for putting up a polytechnic in Kotido, but one of them was shot; and the one who is supposed to go to Nakapiripirit and some other places fears to go there.  

The money was passed long ago. When we asked the Minister of Education when we would have this money on the ground - anyway, you are lucky you have a full minister, you can air out these views. If Zzimwe is cheating you, you are right to complain, but put it in an organised manner, we shall help you.  Thank you.

MR LOOTE: Thank you, hon. Mafabi.  I would like to inform you that the shooting you are talking about on the roads is a security concern for the entire people of Karamoja.  They are wondering; the disarmament exercise was excellently done; they also trained the LDUs and deployed them, but immediately the issue of the northern war came, all the forces were withdrawn! They said "Karamoja is not a priority, you can wait; there are other problems." So there was insecurity in the area and when the technicians from the Ministry of Education travelled there, they were advised in the evening to stay because the roads were not safe at that time. But they insisted and travelled. 

 Also, the recent 7 people who were butchered by these thugs on the Nakapiripirit-Moroto road, they were advised not to travel because of cattle rustling, and they were even given escorts. Despite that, and hearing that the first vehicle was shot at, they did not listen.

Thirdly, when they went and got reinforcements to help the soldiers who were in Loringidwani fight the raiders who were overwhelming - I am told they were over 2,000. They combined the Pokot, the people from Matheniko and Turkana. When they went to bring soldiers for reinforcement to fight these cattle rustlers, those people sighted them. So, I am told that they went and took a stretch ambush of six miles in order to wait for that particular vehicle. An eyewitness who was in the vehicle of the butchered people, said they told them “yes, we purposely waited for you because you went and brought the soldiers to attack us.” So, that is the issue of security and that is the responsibility of the Ministry of Defence.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are moving away from the debate on the loan, because we are localising – some of these matters will be debated at an appropriate time. We should concentrate on the loan, and I believe we have said enough about it. We should ask the Minister, after the Member for Moroto has concluded, to wind up. Do you not think so? Honourable member, please wind up.

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. So we have the concern of water and I hope that when this fund comes, the issue of water will be addressed. 

Another point I want to raise is on the strengthening of justice and law. We are aware that some structures have been put in place, but do the people carry out justice? The Police only operate within the towns; they cannot go and arrest culprits from the rural areas. They are not even strengthened. When there is a situation requiring them to run and rescue, they have no transport. I think the minister needs to look at this. 

Even in case of an emergency, the Police cannot address a situation. I think we need also to tackle that in order to maintain law and order in some of the areas.

Finally, on page 4, I am looking at recommendation number 1. In future, when this performance is reported to this Parliament, I think it should be specific. What percentage of ownership of this, what were the constraints, and what brought about these constraints? In future we would like to know how we are to achieve this, or how we are going ahead, like in these areas of the Ministry of Education. The Ministry of Education gives us very good reports and everybody reads them and appreciates that the ministry is run smoothly. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think that we have heard enough of this.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We depend a lot on the Committee on National Economy in deciding whether to allow or disallow a loan; and borrowing sums of money is a very serious matter. Our children and their children will probably meet the impact and the burden of meeting these loans when we are all long gone. Therefore, it is important that each time we look at a loan, we really do thorough analysis of what we are going to get for this loan. 

When you look at the first page, the Committee tells us that the objective of the loan is to provide additional funding for government programmes already identified in PEAP, specifically agricultural modernisation, primary education, primary health care, rural feeder roads, and water and sanitation. The Committee goes on to tell us that this money will be disbursed in two sets. The first one will be of US $25 million; another will be of US $25, with all the various conditionalities, but the Committee has not helped this Parliament. 

When they talk about agricultural modernisation, what is going to be spent on agricultural modernisation; how much money is going to be spent on it and in what respect of -(Interruption)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much for giving way. If you read this report very well, this money is going to the basket. Once it is there, it will be spent according to Government’s priorities. The moment it reaches the country’s basket, that is the Consolidated Fund, we as Parliament will not go in there to say, “This loan of US $5 million should go towards agriculture”. We raised the same question in the committee and that is exactly the information that was given. It is budget support. It is not going to a particular programme or project. Thank you.

MR MAFABI: It is true, when this money goes to the basket it loses colour, but for the whole funding of the Government’s budget, donors contribute 53 percent and we contribute the balance. This is part of the contribution from the donors. The most important thing is that it is supposed to be used in priority areas. The reason why they have moved it to budget support is to remove additional costs of making project offices. 

The project offices and the consultants are paid highly. We will lose staff from Public Service, who go to the projects because they pay better than Public Service. There will be no additional cost if the money goes here because the entire staff will not move from Public Service. They will use the existing structures, equipment and whatever. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: I would like to thank the vice- chairperson and the chairperson for the answers, but they do not meet the point I was trying to raise. Even when that money goes to the basket, why do you single out these particular items as if that basket is only financing these items? This basket is financing a range of other items. 

The chairperson is saying that actually this money will go to priority areas. Why do you not report to this Parliament that the particular priority areas that this money will be spent on with regard to modernisation of agriculture will be a, b, c and d?

Why do you not say that in terms of primary education, the priority areas that are going to be addressed by this loan would be such and such? Then we would be in position to appreciate precisely what we are borrowing for. This is important, but this particular report –(Interruption) 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you my honourable colleague. The information I want to give you is that what you are explaining is actually a budget process. You as the vice-chairperson would not want the Committee on National Economy to take away from your committee what you should be doing. 

When loans are tabled before us, we analyze the rationale of the loan, the justification and draw the conclusion whether the Government should borrow or not. The rest, which has to do with the budgets, goes through the processes that are very well known to you. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Well, the Committee on National Economy is determined to defend every single bit of this report. Mr Speaker, last week we had grave concerns about the loan we approved here for APEX III – very serious reservations. It is a pity that things went as they did. But we had serious reservations because the Committee did not get the necessary details this House needed. 

The details were being brought out in this Bill, now the Committee is saying that the role of budgeting for this money is going to be the role of the Budget Committee! In fact this committee should be advising us so that by the time we go to the Budget Committee, we have, at the back of our minds, that this money that has been borrowed – the US $50 million - is intended for a particular purpose. They should not make a report and say that the objectives of the loan will be a, b, c, in such general terms. That is not satisfactory to me, and I think we are committing this country to these loans. 

Already the Committee has observed that one of the problems of many of these loans is corruption, especially in the area of procurement. The Committee is suggesting that they are going to start to monitor, but they do not say much about it. I do not know how they are going to do it - to monitor these loans - particularly in view of the information given by their colleague that the role of distributing this money is the role of the Budget Committee. So, how are they going to monitor these monies that we are borrowing in general terms? Mr Speaker, I have very strong reservations.

THE SPEAKER: It seems there is a lot of interest in this debate and we may have to continue with it next week. If this is the case, we shall have to continue with this debate on Monday. And perhaps from what hon. James Mwandha has said, there may be need for the Ministry of Finance to give further details about this. But you heard what hon. Kiraso told you about the Budget Act. 

Actually, according to the Budget Act, when you are reporting on these loans you should show the details, the achievements and the shortfalls. So, there is that opportunity for you to say you received a loan, and show what you did with it. According to the format of the report in the Budget Act, these details are supposed to be given. You are also free to solicit the details from the ministry. But since I have realized that you want to make further contributions on the matter, and as a matter of principle to guide us on future loans, the best I can do is ask the minister to –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I really seek your indulgence on this matter. I have listened to the debate and issues raised by members, but unfortunately on Monday I will not be around. I seek your indulgence that we continue with this debate, I respond to it and we conclude this matter. It will be very difficult for somebody who has not been here to respond to issues, which members have raised. 

I am supposed to travel to attend a conference abroad, and somebody who has not been here may find a big problem responding to this. I beg to seek your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: We could also set aside time to check the policy and methodology used by the Committees processing these motions for loan request approval. We should get time to generally debate the way the committee does that, since members are concerned about these loans. We shall set aside a session to discuss this matter in detail also, so that the committee is guided so that in future we do not have this problem again. 

But as you heard already, this was part of the budget that we approved. Perhaps we could okay this one but we set aside time –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I should be clarified on the conditionalities. The conditions for the release of the first installment were the ones outlined. We do not know the conditionalities for the release of the second installment. When do we deal with those for the release of the second installment? It is only fair that the honourable minister should be capable of briefing whoever will be here on Monday in detail, so that he could respond to all the questions. 

It is not a matter of him going today and putting his newspapers on his desk and then on Sunday he jumps onto the aircraft and goes away. If he is going away, he must make sure that he has prepared a very detailed brief for the person who is coming here on Monday. We cannot be hush-hushed because he is going to attend a conference, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: In the circumstances, I think we shall continue with this debate next week. The Minister should brief whoever is going to take over from him on Monday, about the concerns raised here. The technical staff should help to get us these details so that the minister could come and brief us on this. 

We have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Monday at 2.00 p.m., when we shall continue with the debate on this particular motion.

(The House rose at 1.06 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 28 April 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)






