Wednesday, 24 April 2002

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just want to thank you for the time you gave in yesterday.  We sat here up to almost 8.00p.m. A lot was accomplished. I also thank you for the contents of what we did yesterday.  Thank you very much!  I propose that we adjust the Order Paper so that we deal with the Leadership Code Bill, then we come to the questions.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LEADERSHIP CODE BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to withdraw the motion to re-commit clauses 9 and 12 of the bill.  

THE SPEAKER: So, the motion is withdrawn; can we proceed. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Leadership Code, Bill 2002” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the bill entitled, “The Leadership Code, Bill 2002” be read the third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE LEADERSHIP CODE ACT 2002

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable members! 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative,Northern Region): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You are aware that this question is long overdue, and a lot of developments have taken place, including swearing in of LCVs.  So it is not so easy for me to go by the wording to say “recently concluded election”. 

Following the swearing in of LCVs and formation of the Executive Committees without the representatives of Special Interest Groups. 

Could the honourable Minister inform the House:
(1) Why Section 119 of the Local Governments Act, which provides for elections of Special Interest Groups is not effected? 

(2) The causes of the delay of effecting this important provision and indicate to the House when this provision is going to be effected? 

Mr Speaker, we are waiting for a categorical answer.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, the answer to this question has been expected twice in this House, and on both occasions it was not given.  This was not due to deliberate dodging but the first time I was supposed to answer this question, I learnt from my colleague, hon. Okot Ogong, that I was on the Order Paper at 2.00p.m. after Cabinet, and yet after Cabinet, I had fixed a meeting to consult on the Political Organisations Bill. 

The second occasion I was put on the Order Paper, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Speaker and my colleague, the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs, were aware that I was away in Swaziland for a COMESA meeting. I did explain this to hon. Kidega. But all the same, I am sorry for the inconveniences my absence from the House may have caused. 

The Electoral Commission is mandated to organise, conduct and supervise elections and Referenda in accordance with Article 61 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Types  of elections:

Mr Speaker, during the financial year 2001/2002 the Electoral Commission was charged with conducting the following elections: -

1. The Local Government Council elections as below:
(a) Village elections;
(b)  Parish elections;
(c) Sub-county, Town, Municipal Division 
      elections;
(d) Municipal elections;
(e)  District/City elections. 

2. Women Council/ Committee elections.

3. Youth Council and Committee elections.

4. People with Disabilities and Councillors to the 
     Local Government Council elections.  

The Electoral Commission budget before the amendment of the Local Governments Act, 1997 amounted to Shs 34 billion.  After the amendment of the law, the Commission submitted a new budget proposal amounting to Shs 43 billion, which took into account the financial implications resulting from the amendment of the law. 

Parliament approved Shs 24.3 billion for financing elections during the financial year 2001/2002, leaving a shortfall of Shs 19 billions. In the course of implementing the budget, Cabinet made a further re-allocation from the Commission’s budget to the tune of Shs 2 billion. During the financial year 2001/2002, the Commission was also required to continue implementing the Photographic Voters Registration Identification System (PVRIS) project activities out of the same funds voted for elections.  

To-date Shs 8 billion has been spent on its implementation out of the funds voted for the elections for the same financial year. This effectively left Shs 14 billion for the Local Government Council elections. 

Because of these shortfalls, the Electoral Commission has been holding meetings with the Minister of Finance, and the Vice-President’s office in order to find a way of fulfilling the constitutional requirements within the restricted financial resources. 

For example, on 17 January 2002, the Electoral Commission presented a revised proposal to a meeting chaired by Her Excellency the Vice-President, attended by both the Ministries of Finance and Justice, in which they requested for Shs 19,737,097,2000 only, given the critical election activities which were not paid for in the first quota; that of December, January and February.

The meeting requested the Electoral Commission officials and officials of the Ministry of Finance to revisit those proposals with a view of further reducing the figures.  

On 18 January 2002, the Electoral Commission presented a budget proposal which had been reduced to 13 billion shillings plus. This figure and all previous ones covered elections for people with disabilities, elections for the youth and elections for women councils and committees. That amount was also not acceptable to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, given the pressures on the Budget.  

On 21 January 2002, we held yet another meeting chaired by Her Excellency the Vice President.  Since the Ministry of Finance did not accept the figures from the Electoral Commission, the two ministries again presented their case to Her Excellency the Vice President as chairperson of Cabinet. 

The meeting was informed that as of that date, the balance on the Electoral Commission account stood at UShs3.4 billion.  

You remember I stated that Cabinet had earlier re-allocated two billion shillings from the Commission’s budget to other sectors of the economy. Therefore, effectively only 1.4 billion was left to cover the remaining activities of the financial year 2001/2002.  

The meeting agreed as follows: 

(a) The elections for special interest groups should be deferred to the next financial year; this was: 

- The elections of the youth councils, which required about 1.1 billion plus. 

- Elections of persons with disabilities, which required 878,558,000 million shillings. 

- Elections of women councils, which required 1.3 billion shillings. 

(b) Discussions on funding the completion of the Photographic Voter Registration Identification System should be deferred until local council elections at district and city levels were completed. 

(c)That the revised budget stood at UShs11,532,995,000 only. 

(d) That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was in a position to immediately release the 1.4 billion shillings of that quarter, and re-allocate within the entire Budget to raise the 10 billion shillings for the Electoral Commission to fund the remaining activities.  

The Electoral Commission received this amount, and as a result, all elections have been handled except where there were repeat elections, re-runs and elections for interest groups.  

The Electoral Commission is committed to holding elections for all groups at any time, as long as those activities are funded. The Electoral Commission is aware that these special groups need to participate in the formation of district executives. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has to release the funds within its limited resource envelope.  

Taking into account the implications of the decision to defer the interest groups’ elections to next financial year in relation to the formation of the local governments, Cabinet directed that the Ministries of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Justice and Constitutional Affairs meet and find ways and means of sourcing the required monies to have those elections soon.  

We are in the last and fourth quarter of the budget. So, the Ministry of Finance will have to effect other cuts on the entire Budget to raise those resources. 

Furthermore, it is gratifying to note that the youth had elected their leaders from the village up to the district level. What is required are funds to enable the youth to elect their councillors to the local governments. These are the resources we are looking for. For further elections to the national level, Government will have to wait for the law to be passed by Parliament.  

People with disabilities are now agreeable to using the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda (NUDIPU) structures as the electoral colleges for purposes of electing their leaders. You recall this has been a matter of contention before this House.  

In response to this, the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development is soon to present to this House the disability council with structures from the village up to the national level.  Government had deferred their elections until this law is passed.  

Now that NUDIPU structures are acceptable to people with disabilities, Government is looking for monies to facilitate people with disabilities’ elections to the district so that they can elect their councillors to the local governments as required.  

Women council elections will only be held this financial year in the district of Rukungiri where we have a petition. We need to prepare a register because that has been an issue of contention. For the rest of the women council elections, we shall have to wait for the law.  

We all appreciate the pressures on the resource envelope, but I promise to have all the interest groups’ elections as soon as the resources are availed to the Electoral Commission by Government.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.        

MR KIDEGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am more saddened than ever before to hear that the youth elections are now deferred to next financial year. I am sure next financial year practically becomes effective about September or so. That is when money gets really available. 

In light of that fact and the communication from the Minister of Local Government to all local councils not to go on with any activity and await the representation of these persons who are missing, I wonder how the local councils are going to operate.  

Secondly, I do not know what compensation programme is going to be put in place for the disability and youth movements to make sure that this whole delay is not going to weaken the entire system. What kind of compensation is going to be put in place?  Even if there is really a position reserved for –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, what I said is that between now and the end of this financial year, Government is looking for monies to facilitate the youth to arrange for the elections of councillors at the district and sub-county levels. We cannot move beyond that because this House has not cleared the amendments in the Youth statute. This is what I said.

MR KIDEGA:  I thank the hon. Minister so much. I do not, even one bit, question the commitment of the Minister towards youth empowerment because she has done it before. But the matter I am raising is the big loss the youth movement has suffered now.  

We are all aware that the process of appointment is not a one-day event. Even if there is a reserved position on the Executive, there is election of the speaker and the deputy speaker. All these are positions of responsibility that entail some resources accruing to the personality holding that office. Those are job opportunities for the youth! 

The question we are asking is, when will the appointing authority have the time to study the sample space? The youth are supposed to be appointed, and it defeats logic for you to appoint somebody you do not know, or reserve a position for somebody whose capacity you do not know! This is the kind of situation we are asking about. How are we going to move on from here? I thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.

MRS BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern Region): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to seek some clarifications from, and ask questions to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Before I ask my question, I would like to provide information to this House so that whatever we say, we talk from an informed point of view. 

First of all, in the Local Governments Act, NUDIPU is entitled to use its structures to elect councilors and Members of Parliament. It is there in the Act, and there is no way of doubting the existence of that structure.

Then secondly, NUDIPU tried its best to mobilize for funds to establish these structures in place, right from the village up to the district level.  These structures are there to be used for the election of the councilors and Members of Parliament. The Minister has labored to explain the financial implication of the elections. I would like to ask the Minister why of all people, people with disabilities and the youth, have to wait while the others are elected? (Applause). Are you not aware that we are already marginalized? Does this not show a sign of paramount marginalization, Mr. Speaker?  

Then, is the Minister aware that even if the Minister for Local Government tried his best to stop the elections of putting in place the executive committees of the local Government councils, there is already serious lobbying going on? There are meetings already and by the time they start the elections, they know whom they are electing! 

So, we are going to miss these elections well knowing that people with disabilities have been deputy speakers, have been chairpersons of finance committees, have been secretaries of various sections. Are we not going to lose this opportunity? How are you going to compensate all this loss to people with disabilities and the youth? Thank you very much.

MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Central Region): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I wish to thank the Minister for coming out in the open to clarify on this situation, which is of great concern to my constituency. 

The clarification is clear, but I am deeply worried and I wish I would get a very clear message to take to my constituency. The Movement has been talking of affirmative action in favor of the youth and people with disabilities, yet today we are going back to the colonial times where all animals were equal but some were more equal than others! 

First of all, this question has appeared on the Order Paper for four times. For all those times, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs could not come to answer that question. This is an indication that she had more important things to attend to. Next we are told that funds for election of people with disabilities and the youth were diverted. It means the funds were used for more important elections. That is like saying that our elections are not important! 

Judging by the principles of affirmative action, election of special interest groups would be coming first, but now they are coming last, and we do not know if they will ever actually take place. There is this saying that affirmative action delayed is affirmative action denied, this is actually affirmative action denied.  

I ask the Minister to reassure me on this one question. Is the Government still serious or committed to the cause of the youth and the people with disabilities? I need a clear message to take to my people, to assure them that either the Government is still interested in them or not.  

Can the Minister also be sympathetic to the people who have been wasting their time campaigning and soliciting for votes, and say exactly when we can have elections? Thank, Mr. Speaker.

MS JULIET SEKITOLEKO (Youth Representative, Woman): Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. It is really so sad and unfortunate for the youth who are already marginalized, to be further marginalized. When it is time to vote, the youth are at the forefront; time to fight, the youth are rounded up first; but time for elections, time to get the national cake, the youth are put last. It is really so unfortunate!  

In the Minister’s statement, she talked about the amendment of the law, and to my knowledge, she is targeting the national delegates. How about the National Youth Council Executive members, who are already overdue for election, what happened to those? And she has not mentioned them in her statement. I thank you.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I have three questions to the Minister. One, hon. Minister, if you say that the elections are due next financial year, do you mean we are not going to have the executives till then? You said they should stay until we have all the councilors. Have you changed your mind? And if so, why? Who will talk for the youth, who will talk for the disabled when they are passing these budgets in the local councils?

Two; you said that we are going to have elections for Women Councils in Rukungiri district, because there is a petition for that. Do you mean to say that you are already aware of what is going to happen next, so that you should now go and prepare the ground for the elections? (Laughter) 

Then lastly, Mr. Speaker, I have a proposal. Members of Parliament yesterday agreed to contribute to the Police so that we help them do their work, which is actually for our own benefit. We want to be safe. Since Parliament did it as a good example to the public, I suggest that the money for vehicles of Members of the Front Bench should run campaigns for the disabled and the youths - (Laughter)- since they have transport. If we pass it to the next financial year, they will still be moving and they will still be doing their work. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want also to register my concern for the youth and people with disabilities for not having been elected up to now. It is not only these people, because in my constituency, Buhweju, one sub-county called Burere has never elected its LC chairman and councillors. I was there recently; there is actually a leadership vacuum. The Electoral Commission has taken there incomplete materials twice, and they could not elect. 

Since the Minister pointed out that the limiting factor for the youth and the disabled is the budget, I imagine that the sub-county elections were budgeted for. Can I be informed when, since this one was budgeted for, they will be elected? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from the Minister why the elections for the youth and the people with disabilities were not held on the same day as the other councillors. 

I also want to know why in Kapchorwa district, LC III elections were not held for the whole of Kongasis county.  May I know when they will be held? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am disturbed by the Minister’s statement in the sense that the implications for what she has stated are very wide.  It means these district councils will have no executive.  

Secondly, the important committees such as district service committees, accounts committees, and tender committees cannot be in place. Does the Minister know the effect this will have on the management of districts? It means the districts will be at a halt! So, can the Minister explain to us how these districts are going to function?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Besides special groups, I want to know whether the Minister is aware that the same elections did not take place in some sub-counties in Kole. For instance, Aboke has no LC III chairman up to now, so is Alito and Atalo. I am worried about this because for along time, nobody has bothered to explain to us what has happened, and it is as if we are not part of Uganda. Can the Minister explain what is happening to our programme of elections?

MRS BERNADETTE BIGIRWA (Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. After listening carefully to the Minister’s statement, it means that she is actually not aware of when the elections are going to take place. That has got a lot of implications. However, I have two questions to put to her.  

One, initially when the Photographic Voter Register Scheme was being introduced, we thought it was going to cost a certain amount of money in dollars. But subsequently, we have been seeing it in the press going upward. Every time they revise the amount of money for the photographic voter register upwards. Can the Minister tell us how much this exercise is going to cost?  

Secondly, when will this exercise cover the whole country?  Because recently wherever there have been elections, that is where the Commission goes. How much is it going to cost and when is it going to cover the whole country?  

Thirdly, I would like to share my concerns with my colleagues. We are speculating because we have not been formally told. We only see it in the newspapers that a directive was given that district councils should not elect their executives and even actually not conduct elections for the speaker and deputy speaker. Can the hon. Minister tell us how district councils are going to function? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Kidega for asking this question, and I hope my colleagues appreciate the very important and far reaching effect of this question. However, it has come through a question. I wish it had come on the Floor as a motion so that we give a directive to the Government on what to do. I hope that towards the end we shall come out with a motion.  

In view of the provisions of the Constitution, that of the Local Governments Act, and the whole idea of decentralisation, devolution of powers and so on, the Minister of Local Government came out with an administrative pronouncement, that although elections have taken place, the chairmen and the district councillors can be sworn, but cannot form a Government, and should not elect a speaker. 

I am a man who believes in the rule of law. I want the Minister to tell me under what provision of the Constitution the Minister of Local Government made this far-reaching and fundamental administrative directive. 

Secondly - hon. Sabiiti and hon. Bernadette Bigirwa have said it - was the Government aware of the far-reaching consequences of elections of local governments being completed, chairmen being sworn, members of the district councils being sworn, and then you are told they don’t function? Are you aware of the very dangerous vacuum in the administration of the country which you have created?  And your answer does not tell us definitively when these elections of the youth, the women and disabled are going to be held, so that the local governments start to function as they are conceived under the Constitution and the Local Governments Act!  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In other words, you are saying, what is the legal basis of stopping the councils from setting up their Governments?  

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Having listened to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I really feel there is a lot of injustice here.  I would like the Minister really to tell this House, knowing that councils have a prescribed term of four years; I want you to tell the House when the councillors, the youth and the people with disabilities are going to be elected? Will they be allowed to run their full term, because for you to delay the election and they run half way, Madam Minister, is injustice?  

Secondly, the Minister explained that some of these elections couldn’t be done because of the pending amendments to the law.  Surely, Mr Speaker, I would want the Minister to tell us, who is responsible for proposing these amendments and where are they?  The collective responsibility of ministers, even if it might not be within your portfolio - the Minister responsible should explain to us why these amendments are not done, and how they can be used to delay the elections of councillors?  The rest have been explained, Madam Minister, the decentralisation policy can only function if there is a political will towards these councillors to function, and the function of Government right now is counter productive.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli Central, Bugiri): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mine is a clarification and as well as a point of concern.  It is definite that the originality of uncertainty in the system is definitely originating from the Ministry.  Therefore, right away from the elections of the LC II, elections have not been held countrywide. Now this one creates a gap in the system.  At the end of the day, a lot of things are hanging over in various sub-counties just because of the lack of uniformity and flow of holding elections.  

It is because of the concern of the people in Bukooli Central that I have to mention the particular LC I section that they have not elected. It is in the village of Kasongoire where they have not elected the councillors to the sub-counties, and it is creating a lot of pressure all over.  To add a voice to my colleagues’ presentations on the floor, I do not know whether Government will work if we have such problems originating from the head.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister to explain whether the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs has a calendar of elections?  And if yes, is it true to say that the dates for the youth elections and that of other interest groups are fixed by chance?  Can the Minister explain whether they have a calendar or the election dates by those interest groups are fixed by chance?  Thank you.

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I think Members have all raised concern about the loss in terms of numbers and the age of the youth and the people with disability.  While we know that the youth are more than 50 percent of our population, it is very unfair that small in number as they are in terms of national representation, the Government has deliberately refused to bring up elections in time when actually they have been campaigning all this time.  

My concern, Mr Speaker, is that we should save Ugandans the agony of voter fatigue and election violence.  We have been in elections since March for the presidential, we went to parliamentary, and we have gone to the local council elections.  Now the Minister is saying that we are likely to have the youth and the people with disabilities’ elections in September.  

When elections are in place, Ugandans do not go for any economic activities, they are all on the roads, they are just swinging, and campaigning and looking for whatever they are doing.  I think we should not pay lip service to our economy. How do you expect an economy to perform when you spend one and a half years electioneering?   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please, I have heard your reservations, but let us really ask supplementary questions because we have two other questions to ask.  

MR BAMWANGA: So, Mr Speaker, my concern here is that it is a national concern and Members of Parliament should be concerned because I want the Minister to assure this House when exactly these councillors are going to be elected; when the district councils are going to form executives, because when they were swearing in, they spoke to their chairmen and their councils and they said they will not form their governments until the youth and people with disabilities’ elections take place.  So we want to know exactly on which date these will be due.

MR ROGERS MAATE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the approval of district budgets.  We all know that at the end of the financial year, according to the financial and accounting regulations of local governments, district councils are supposed to present by the 15th of June, their councils’ draft estimates for the new financial year.  Now, in a situation where there are no executive committees for districts, and at the same time there are no council committees to discuss draft budgets of districts, how are the districts going to function after 30th of June?  Is it automatic that on the 15th of June the council will sit and approval probably 25 percent of the budget as is required so that they perform after the 30th of June?  I need clarification.  Thank you.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (BBALE County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, Article 181(5) states that: “Elections of all local government councils shall take place at least sixty days before the expiry of the next existing council, but shall not coincide with presidential or parliamentary elections.”  

Given the background of those councils that have not been elected now, I would like to get clarification from the Minister whether this is not a breach of law?  

Secondly, there are situations of the new districts where the executive was at times working as a procurement committee because they do not have the tender boards. What is happening in those districts where there is no procurement committee and there is no executive?  Thank you.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Finance and Planning received information from the Minister when the Minister was being asked about financing of the Electoral Commission, that in fact the voters register was originally estimated to cost Shs.7 billion, but that it had run to Shs.30 billion. Can the Minister inform this House whether this could not be one of the reasons why the money intended for carrying out elections for special interest groups was actually eaten up in mismanagement by the Commission?

Secondly, hon. Omara Atubo was asking the legal basis for stopping local governments from being formed. I want also to ask, what is the legal basis for not holding - particularly now that you have learnt, you have received a quotation from the Constitution - the elections of special interest groups in order to enable the local governments to be formed?  Is the Minister aware that actually the Minister of Local Government has made it very clear that not until the elections of special interest groups have been carried out, that it is constitutionally wrong to set up executive committees of councils?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, so far 18 supplementary questions have been asked on this one question.  Can we not allow the Minister to answer so that we proceed to the other questions? Because I see the questions are the same. One important one is the legal basis of stopping the formation of executive councils. We know the mandate of local councils is four years, and we know there are constitutional provisions here that do not allow elections of local councils to take place at the same time with presidential and parliamentary elections. It means, if we have to follow this Constitution, if it is not changed, the latest election for next local councils will take place mid 2005 and not 2006. 

So, if local governments are not formed, you will see that they will have only about 2 and half years to work. What are they going to report to their constituents?  So, I think it is important that we get to know the legal basis of stopping these councils from operating, from passing and considering their budgets, because they cannot sit if they do not have speakers, they do not have the chairpersons to preside. What is going to happen?  I think these are very important questions that we need an answer on.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I want to thank honourable colleagues for the substantive questions that would have been put to me and to enable me to answer properly, being brought under another question.  So, with the indulgence of the Speaker, I would defer some of those substantive questions, go and research and come back to the House.

Secondly, it is unfortunate that the Legal Counsel for Government is not here, but I would state that I know that no minister can give, be it an administrative or not, anything that has a legal implication without consulting the Attorney General.  I will leave it at that. So, I hope that the Minister of Local Government did consult the chambers of the Attorney General before he committed himself to what he stated. But the two have to link up and come to answer.  So, that is a substantive question to the Minister of Local Government. But normally in Government, any minister must first consult with the Attorney General on issues that border almost to law.

Thirdly, I want to assure the interest groups that Government is committed to affirmative action. But I want also to draw the attention of hon. Madada that the article he has quoted is only relevant to the structures that will facilitate the councilors to go to the local government. But the youth, people with disabilities and women councils are not local governments.  So, that article does not refer to them.

Now, let me go to the substantive question, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Kidega says – let me mention also that I think there was a mix-up, probably of oral answers, because either people do not have the text or I may have been fast.  What I have stated is that the responsibility of managing the youth, people with disability and women affairs is a mandate of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I am being quizzed here even about issues that are not in my mandate, just because I have to facilitate these interest groups for purposes of elections. So, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development will have to come here and explain why the laws are not in place - the amendment.  That one I cannot answer.  

I think laws are made to facilitate societies to get what they want and I would appeal to Members of Parliament to participate effectively in the Constitutional Review Commission. The Constitution that I am managing is a very rigid Constitution; it sets time frames. Even when we were forming the local governments, we tied our hands by providing for the 60 days, even when all of us know that we are managing a resource envelope that is tight. So, that is why I am appealing for understanding because all of us have been managing this budget.

As I have said, if the Ministry of Finance gives me the money tomorrow, the Electoral Commission is ready and the boxes they used in the past elections are still at the sub-counties. The problem is the finances. So I am in the middle. I am ready to do the job but I do not have the resources. I therefore beg for that understanding.

I will take this next question to the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, because it is a substantive question. It asks for the legal basis that the Ministry of Local Government has to stop the formation of governments. That is a substantive question so I have to take it back to the relevant ministry. And although I have no answer to it now, what I know is that the chairpersons of the local governments, both LCV and LC III, are running governments with the CAO. And the structures that they are –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, hon. Minister, they are asking, why this interim arrangement? What is the legal basis for using an interim arrangement when elections for local councils have been completed? Is there any provision in the law, in the Constitution, that prohibits Parliament from functioning simply because certain constituencies have not elected Members of Parliament? (Applause).

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker, Government works as a chain. My mandate is to provide local governments with elected members. The Minister of Local Government manages governments when they are formed. Interpretation of the law is the mandate of the Attorney General. And even if I would have wanted to do so, and we have very brilliant lawyers here, armed only with the Constitution and without the Local Governments Act, I find it very difficult to venture into that. So I leave that mandate of the Attorney General –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: According to the information I have, the Attorney General is on safari. He appointed two people to do his functions, namely the Minister of Education, Khiddu Makubuya, assisted by hon. Bitangaro. And hon. Bitangaro is here. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker, I have just been with the Attorney General, he is back. Yes, I was with him in the Cabinet meeting. Despite that, even the person he had delegated, hon. Bitangaro, I have just consulted with him. He cannot answer without the Local Governments Act. Let me give him a chance to speak - (Laughter).

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Mr. Speaker, I have listened carefully to what the Minister of Justice has been saying. I agree with her. I just got the Constitution and perused through it. I did not find any legal basis upon which these councils cannot operate.

Having said that, the Constitution established an enabling law, the Local Governments Act. It is what I would have to peruse through and advise Parliament accordingly tomorrow afternoon. So I seek that indulgence. Thank you very much.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker, you know I am very careful. Let us stick to our mandate. Since the Attorney General has promised that he will come back to the Parliament tomorrow, I will not add anything to that. That is his mandate.  

We are however aware, and I have repeatedly said this, we are committed to these people having their elections as soon as the resources are here.

Hon. Ndeezi was asking whether we are really serious. We are really committed to people with disabilities having their full rights, but it is the resource envelope that restricts us. So all of us should work towards having money.  

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there is a youth representative. My colleague asked what would happen to the youth executives that she thinks lapsed. What I know is that the Attorney General did advise the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to extend the executives of the councils. As Government, we were aware that we were going to have this problem. So, unless they did not do it, then the youth and women councils should have lapsed. But if they did, they are legally in place.  

Hon. members are aware that we are about to be prorogued and –(Interruption)

MR KAMUGISHA: Mr. Speaker, I want to clarify on the issue of the youth councils. Their term expired in November, last year, and after that we elected the lower councils. All councils up to the district level are now in place, and these are the ones that are going to elect the LC representatives.   

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of procedure. Mr. Speaker, with due respect to the Minister of Justice and Constitutions Affairs, I think we are in a very dangerous situation right now. Mark you, if a whole Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs cannot ably defend an act taken at Cabinet level, where are we going? (Laughter and Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedure there?  

MRS MUKWAYA: Order, Mr. Speaker - (Laughter). 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, there is no cause for alarm. What I want to inform the House is that under Article 119 of our Constitution, the Attorney General is our principal advisor. The Attorney General was supposed to be here, but as you know, from time to time he is required to be elsewhere as well. That is the only problem we have had, otherwise he would have answered the question. 

We cannot have the capacity to know all answers to all questions. If I were to ask you a number of questions in political science –(Laughter)- you would collapse!

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, according to our rules, we should not really spend more than an hour on these questions. From the way we are moving, it is as if we think there is a lot of time for us.  

I would rather ask the Minister to give a general answer. Of course this is dissatisfaction for not holding the elections for the youth and persons with disabilities; there is nothing more they can really answer. Definitely these elections have not been held and we want them to take place.  Please, just give us a general answer and then we see how to proceed. Otherwise, a lot of time is being wasted. 

That question on the legal basis is very key, because as you see, people are interested in knowing. But that is for the Attorney General as you said, or for the Minister of Local Government.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I intend to move a motion under Rule 39 without notice, and the motion reads as follows: “In view of the urgent need for district local governments to function fully and efficiently, this House resolves that the Ministers of Local Government, Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and that of Justice and Constitutional Affairs do take all necessary steps to ensure that elections of the youth, people with disabilities and women to district councils are held within 30 days from the date of this motion.”  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I quite see the point and the policy behind what you are saying, but holding of elections is undertaken by the Electoral Commission, and what you have heard from the Minister is that this situation is due to lack of finances.  

Maybe you are asking them to facilitate the Electoral Commission to hold the elections within a month rather than the ministries themselves, because they have no mandate to conduct elections for the youth.  Maybe we would like to address that issue.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I am grateful for your wise guidance and I do accept the amendment. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I cannot amend.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I want to be advised.  What will the import of this motion be? I cannot quote the relevant article in the Constitution, but the backbenchers cannot move anything that has a financial implication -(Interjections)- Yes, it has implications. You cannot force Government to elect within 30 days when we have explained. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, possibly the Minister will have plenty of time to use that argument to oppose the motion, but not to kill it at birth.  That will be infanticide.  

I do not really need to emphasize what my colleagues have already said. As I said, I wanted to thank hon. Kidega for bringing this important question. All that I would have said has been said.  What we want is for the local governments to be duly elected, duly sworn in and they should operate. The only way they can operate is by holding elections to fill the vacuum of the youth, the people with disabilities and the women representatives’ seats. 

The way the Minister has talked – “next financial year”, “as soon as possible”, “when we get the money” – all this does not convince us that the Government is going to hold these elections.  

MR MUSUMBA ISAAC: Mr Speaker, I have read the Constitution and I want to bring to your attention that it is illegal to proceed upon a motion because the Constitution says so. I will read the section.  Article 93 says: 

“Parliament shall not, unless the bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government –
 
(a) proceed upon a bill, including an amendment 
bill, that makes provision for any of the following-

(ii) the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund…

(iii) the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any moneys not charged on that fund or any increase in the amount of that payment, issue or withdrawal; or 

(iv)(b) proceed upon a motion, including an amendment to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this article.”

Sir, I am –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before you proceed, you have to know the text of the motion. What he is doing is making an appeal; he is not charging. He is making an appeal to the appropriate bodies to look into raising funds. I think it is an appeal that may or may not succeed. He is not compelling. Isn’t that an appeal?

MR OMARA ATUBO: I am simply making an appeal. (Laughter).

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, on the Floor we have a motion that was moved by hon. Omara Atubo -

MR OMARA ATUBO: - and the Speaker amended it.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I entirely agree with the Minister that you cannot move a motion that charges. But if this motion is making an appeal to people who have to raise the funds, I think that is not charging, because there is no charge. It is just an appeal so that funds are found and something is done. I think that is the spirit.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, can I also draw to the attention of the front bench, Article 79 of the Constitution, which is an earlier provision to Article 93. I do not want to use the word, “superior”, but it is earlier. It says: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.”  We are talking about good governance -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think what you can do is to clarify.  What is the text of your point; let us hear it because it is an issue that has been raised, and you have quoted a provision of the Constitution.  We have to know whether you are charging the consolidated fund or not. If you are, then we cannot really proceed.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I think we are trying to wrap up the question by making an appeal to the Government.  We want to show our concern for the remaining elections of the youth, the women and people with disability, and we are calling upon the Government to expedite this election so that the local governments which should be in the interest of the central Government should as well start functioning fully and efficiently.  We are not increasing the budget, we are not decreasing the budget, we are saying that the money which is there should be utilised for their expeditious elections; that is all. It a very humble appeal, please.  Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to get is in a form of a question.  I thought when we were coming up with the election of local government councillors we had a budget which included people with disability and the youth.  Now the problem according to the explanation of the Minister is because the money was overused.  So we are not really creating new money to be removed from the consolidated fund; we are asking for our money to be refunded. (Laughter).  I am sure Government can get from a supplementary budget. We have been passing the supplementary budgets year after year, why don’t we use this chance to get supplementary money from the Government?  

I would also like to inform the Minister that is it unfair if you have got children in your family and you have food and you say, “let these children eat while the other children sit and wait.”  Surely, the issue of funds should not be a problem because the Minister of Finance together with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should find all means to fund this election before the 15th of June.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now honourable Members, how do we proceed?  Let us first of all dispose of this issue, otherwise we will not proceed.  It is true you cannot bring a motion that charges on the consolidated fund because this is prohibited and you cannot bring a motion to raise a supplementary budget here; that can only be brought by the Minister.  But, I think hon. Omara Atubo is appealing to the proper authorities namely, the Ministry of Finance and the others, to look into this so that when funds are raised you can have elections. I think that is the only thing.

CAPT BABU: Mr Speaker, I do not think the appeal is bad at all.  I think we should support it but it has got a time limit now; he has given 30 days.  I think his appeal should come out very clearly and we should all appeal, including the front bench, which they think is not interested; we are interested in these elections.  We should appeal to the Minister of Finance so that within a reasonable time they can ask the Electoral Commission to carry out these elections.  We better ask the Electoral Commission because they are the ones in charge of this.  Thank you very much.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, you have guided this House on the way to proceed.  As we are proceeding now it is still irregular.  A formal and appropriately worded motion must be brought; it is currently not in place.  It must be brought; it must be seconded urging all parties concerned to make available opportunity for people to be elected.  I have no quarrel with that but as of now Sir – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think what we can do, hon. Omara Atubo, you have the idea and you have the backing; maybe tomorrow you can think of drafting something, so that we can proceed with other questions. Otherwise, we are wasting a lot of time on this. So I will give you time tomorrow.  We proceed with another questions.

MRS MUKWAYA: Sir, I would beg to put on record, because everybody here has a name to protect, I want to put on record of the Hansard that I am a very able Minister of Justice – (Laughter). Since this Parliament started, I have handled five bills already in this House; the Political Organisation’s Bill is coming here under my leadership, and the Local Governments Bill where we are eager to have the other interest groups in place. So with all due respect to hon. Lukyamuzi, I am a very effective Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

MR BITANGARO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to inform the hon. Members that the Women Council Amendment Bill was presented to Parliament for the First Reading, and it has been referred to the Social Services Committee and it will be coming when it is convenient.  Thank you.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members.  I wish to respond to the submission of the Minister of State in charge of Gender.  It is true we received the bill and we are waiting for space on the Order Paper so that we can present the report.

THE SPEAKER: Fine, we will do this tomorrow or the other day. 

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I beg to ask the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs the following questions. 

Article 32 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stresses that the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability, or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing the imbalances which exists against them”.  

This Article further provides that Parliament shall enact relevant laws, including laws for establishing of an Equal Opportunities Commission.  

Could the Minister explain why the Government has failed to table a bill to establish the Equal Opportunities Commission as enshrined in the Constitution and the steps being effected to actualise it?  Thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members of Parliament, as we are all aware, Parliament is mandated to enact a law establishing the Equal Opportunities Commission to give effect to the provisions of Article 32(1) of the Constitution. In fulfilment of this obligation, my Ministry some time back instructed the Uganda Law Reform Commission to undertake a study on the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission. The Uganda Law Reform Commission submitted a copy of their report on the above subject to various stakeholders for their comments. My Ministry is still waiting for the responses from the stakeholders.  

Nevertheless, a workshop on the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission was organised by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development between the 18th and 19th March, 2002 at which my Ministry and the Uganda Law Reform Commission were represented. At that workshop, a taskforce comprising my Ministry, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Federation of Uganda Employers, Uganda Human Rights Commission, Action for Development, NUDIPU, NOTU and the Movement Secretariat was set to follow up the matter of establishing the Equal Opportunities Commission. It will report to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to enable them organise another workshop to chart a way forward.  

From the activities I have detailed above, you can see that my ministry has actively assisted the line Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in the establishment of this very important constitutional body. I hope that with this explanation, the honourable Members will agree with me that the Ministry is actually assisting and facilitating the line Ministry in establishing the Equal Opportunities Commission. As soon as the line Ministry is ready, we shall assist it further in the production of the law establishing the Equal Opportunities Commission.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I am only partly satisfied because this government has been talking about affirmative action in favour of women and other marginalised groups. It is now seven years down the constitutional road but nothing has ever been done. Could the Minister say when the bill is actually coming. If the bill is not there, can some of us go and bring our own bill? Because we have the powers to bring the bill. When is it coming?

MS AMONGI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We realise that the Equal Opportunities Commission should have been a very technical Commission which should research, analyse disparities that exist in all sectors in relation to addressing gender imbalances and to design appropriate strategies and approaches to address the inherent causes of those imbalances. I would like the Minister to let me know, for the last seven years that this has been absent, what the implication of the absence of the Equal Opportunities Commission have been to gender analysis and planning in all sectors vis-à-vis redressing the gender imbalances.  

Two, in the absence of this vital Equal Opportunities Commission, has there been any institution in this country, which has been trying to research and analyse information in view of addressing gender imbalances in all sectors?  Thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am giving information regarding the Equal Opportunities Commission. We met the Ministry this morning and there was a complaint about the Ministry of Finance that a study had been put forward requesting for Shs65 million, and Ministry of Finance had not provided for that money. They told us that the gap was Shs32.8 billion. So, the question is not the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs but the Ministry of Finance. That is as far as the Equal Opportunities Commission is concerned. I thank you.

DR NABWISO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In view of the fact that people with disability are suffering from many problems - we have been reading of cases of corruption in organisations which are run on behalf of people with disabilities. May I know whether the Minister of Constitutional Affairs is interested in this matter, and if so, what step is she thinking of, to protect these marginalised people?

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I am a facilitator because the Law Reform Commission happens to be under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. But the mandate to establish the Equal Opportunities Commission is a mandate of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  So, when the question was put to me, I had to explain how I have played my facilitation role in the establishment of the Commission. But I think hon. Ndeezi should put a question to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to give you the details of how far they are in production of the Equal Opportunities Commission.  

But let me use my experience when I was Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development. I think what is holding up this Commission, and as the Member said, is that there must be a study. Countries that have an Equal Opportunities Commission, they do not have a disability council at the same time - (Interjections). Yes! They have the Equal Opportunities Commission to look into marginalisation, sexual harassment and other issues. 

In those countries where the Equal Opportunities Commission exists, there is no Human Rights Commission. So, when you take off what the Human Rights Commission and other institutions do; and in view of the fact that we are going to have a disability council which is also going to be a council for advocacy for people with disability, what remains of the Equal Opportunities Commission?  I think the demarcation of what remains - what will be the scope? 

The issue is, do we need an Equal Opportunities Commission that will bite? Will it have the powers of a court? For example, will it charge and prosecute? These are some of the issues, which I think the Ministry of Gender wants this study to bring out and then recommend to Government the appropriate body to be put in place. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think that ends the session for questions. We have spent a lot of time on this matter. I suggest that we deal with hon. Sebalu’s question tomorrow.

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: No, let us hear the Minister, maybe she has some information, then we shall proceed with you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mrs Florence Nayiga Sekabira): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I just have to respond to one question. Maybe I would have made some comments on the issue of the Equal Opportunities Commission, but since we anticipate a question on that, then I can leave it.

Now, the issue of corruption within one of the NGOs that are providing services to people with disabilities is a surprise to me.  So, I am willing to discuss it with the honourable member so that he gives me more information to enable us follow it up. We cannot allow the limited resources that come to serve this particular sector of our population to be mismanaged. And when the target group misses the utilization of such resources, it affects future support to such a sector. So, honourable member, I am willing to discuss with you, and please give me more information about this particular organization.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I framed this question, I did not know that the business community in Kampala, Kireka and Bweyogerere in my constituency would go on strike as they did yesterday. But all the same, I am glad to be able to ask this question now, because it concerns the economy, and might address some of these challenges.  

The question reads: The business community in Kampala and its environs continue to complain about the low purchasing power of citizens for goods and services. This means that the turnover accruing from these enterprises is low, and yet the traders have to pay the ever rising rent charged for the commercial buildings owned by Asians. This is despite the high economic growth rates said to be registered by our economy. 

Could the honourable Minister clarify on what has gone wrong with the economy?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING)(Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to assure this House that nothing has gone wrong with our economy, because the economic growth in this economy is projected, and as we go towards the last quarter of the financial year, it is evidenced that we have a 5.5 growth in the GDP in our economy. 

Now, this is a half percentage point higher than last financial year. So, in terms of GDP the economy has grown. Further evidence is that the annual headline inflation is currently standing at negative 2.4 per cent, while the underlying inflation is at 3.4 per cent, which is lower than the targeted or the average inflation target of 5 percent. So, the economy has grown and it is strong and sound!

What is worrying hon. Sitenda is that the prices of food crops have seen a decline, and those food crops which are sold on the local market have seen a decline because of good production of food crops across the country. So, because there has been a bumper harvest all year round, the amount of money that is being received by a farmer is low, hence the purchasing power in the economy is seemingly low.

But it is important to know that good food production is a mainstay of a robust economy. What is happening is that it is those consumers who have incomes that have decided to consume differently. For example, there has been a growth in the communication sector - in the people who are seeking communication services - of 34.6 per cent; mobile phones, Internet services et cetera. These have grown by a factor of 34.6 percent. But the growth in the wholesale and retail is only 2.8 per cent.  

Now if you compare these, people with money have chosen to spend on the Internet, on mobile phones and things like that, other than spending on goods that are stocked by wholesalers and retailers. That is what is appearing to give hon. Sitenda’s constituency the feeling of poverty.  I thank you.

MR SITENDA SSEBALU: Mr Speaker, the business community in Uganda feels marginalized, it is doing a wonderful job of providing a taxable base of goods and services where the Government collects and taxes revenue. The business community complains that none of the five Ministers of Finance has ever held vertical consultations to appreciate their challenges and plight. 

They continue to say that a lot of new taxes are being introduced to them without any awareness campaign. I would like to quote a tax called domestic VAT; it is a new tax, which is 15 per cent of the 17 per cent of the Value Added Tax.  This is a killer tax! It is always charged at the point of entry. What does this mean? This means that all your working capital is locked up in this killer tax! It locks the working capital and now businessmen have opted to take a cheaper and primitive way of trade, which we call vending and hawking, so that they can balance up the deficit hopping up the tax by not paying rent.  

Actually, vendors are businessmen who have fallen out of business. Mr Speaker, my question is, is the honourable Minister aware of this tax? And if so, why has the business community not been sensitized about this killer tax?  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Now let us get a few supplementary questions on this.

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to be clarified by the honourable Minister of Finance. Whereas they indicated in the last budget that they are holding domestic arrears of Shs 139 billion of these suppliers, I would like to know how much they have paid.  

Secondly, on domestic VAT, I would like to know whether it is legal or illegal to insert that when we very well know that the threshold of VAT enclosure is Shs 50 million in a year. What happened to it?  

Another question is, the tabulation of taxes is very accumulative, and even countries which use VAT do not have such a tabulation of taxes. Doesn’t it affect the cost of prices in our country?  

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Finance should be very honest with us. They have stifled the economy, and they are holding too much money for our peasants.  

There are many people, as my colleague has rightly said, whose money you have been holding for so long that the moment you pay them, they will be able to have the purchasing power. It is more or less a cycle, but you are only concentrating on investments that cannot realise the economic growth so fast.  

The most important thing is, pay off the people you owe money, then the economy will be released.  Otherwise, we shall continue stifling this economy and at the end of the day, we shall not realise the benefits.  Thank you.

MR MICHEAL MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank hon. Sitenda Sebalu for raising these very pertinent questions.  

It is true that indeed traders in Kampala and elsewhere are operating under very low purchasing power. But as if that is not enough, one other important or critical problem that traders face countrywide is the issue of smugglers.  

From my interaction with very many traders, they have told me that there is a very small clique of politically connected people who are engaged in smuggling. They do smuggle goods and bring them in on the market tax-free, and our ordinary business people cannot compete with these politically protected smugglers.  

I just wonder, Mr Minister, whether you are aware of this clique of politically connected smugglers trying to hurt business and running most of our traders out of business.  

The Special Revenue Protection Services was created to tackle this problem of smuggling.  But the information - and very liable information - we are receiving indicates that goods that are impounded by the Special Revenue Protection Services find their way back onto the markets.  Traders are wondering how this is so.

We would be interested to know whether you are aware of the whereabouts of the goods impounded by the Special Revenue Protection Services. And is it true that actually leaders of the Special Revenue Protection Services are letting goods impounded from smugglers back onto the markets for their individual selfish ends?  Thank you very much.

MR ROGERS MAATE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to disagree a bit with the hon. Minister when he said that there is no problem with our economy. 

He did state that inflation has been controlled and that our growth rate is increasing. He also said that farmers’ prices are going down. Now, what is our national objective; is it to make the amount of money that the farmers receive smaller or you are supposed to make them richer?  

I look at it in a different way. Look at the business people who are complaining that they are not receiving customers to buy their merchandise, yet we know that the merchandise is consumed in the rural areas where the farmers are. It means that if there is no money coming from the rural areas to buy the merchandise from the businessmen, it is partly because the money that the farmers are getting out of their increased produce has gone down, although they have increased production. There are fewer rewards for the greater effort they put into production. That is a problem.  It is one of the problems in the economy. 

Why is it that we are not finding avenues for offloading what the rural sector is producing so that they get more money to help them purchase more from the business community? It shows that -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us restrict our questions to one or two because there are many who want to ask. Please finish your question then we get another.

MR MAATE: Secondly, Mr Speaker, the Minister did say that the communication sector has grown much faster than the other sectors. This indicates that much of the money that is supposed to have gone to the rural sector is going to some middle class. This middle class consumes the products in the communication sector, which are not necessarily the demands of most of our population. So, why can’t we channel the resources to the people who are engaged in the production? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JOHN ARUMADRI Madi-Okollo, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The hon. Minister has told us that the economy is alive and doing well. Economists, and particularly W.W Rostow, have identified five stages of economic growth. These stages are: the primitive stage, the preconditions of take off, take off, the drive to maturity, and mass consumption. 

Where does the Minister put us along this ladder, and for what reasons? (Laughter). I thank you, Mr Speaker.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The Minister has told us that the prices of commodities from the rural population are low because there is some improvement in the production.  Production is high so the prices are low and these farmers of ours are getting low income. Is the Minister advising the people of Kamwenge to produce less maize so that we fetch enough income and also enjoy the fruits of the growing economy?

REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru South, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Sitenda Sebalu for raising this question.  In his question, there was this particular section which referred to businessmen being overcharged by the Asian community. I have not heard any answer on that one yet. We have traders who are paying - some of them - over a million monthly, and I think they are being overcharged.  I want to ask the hon. Minister if it is possible to protect our traders in the city. If a trader is being overcharged, will there be some tribunals where they can appeal, because some of them are even being charged in dollars?  So when the dollar changes, some of the poor traders are overcharged!  

Mr Speaker, I also want to know because there is a culture of scratching in this city were people are making money by scratching for air and getting richer and richer. Who is behind all these things in our city; who is behind all these hawkers in the city?  I think there are many questions to be asked in order to protect the trader in Kampala.  Thank you Sir.

MR JOHN ODIT (Erute South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  It is true that the low purchasing power is not only limited in the city of Kampala, it is a national concern and I am beginning to wonder where these Ministry of Finance officials get their present figures.  I do not know whether the Minister is aware that it is now getting to the second season of agricultural produce when the farmers have their products in their stores.  There is no market and they have removed the right organ which has been handling the marketing of agricultural commodities and placed it under the wrong Ministry, which is not interested at all in handling things related to agricultural produce.  

So, I would like the Minister to really impress on us that they have got sufficient market for maize and for other produce that can empower a local farmer to improve on his or her purchasing power, so that we are able to procure what is available in the city.  If that one is done, I definitely will have something to report to my constituency. Thank you very much.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, can the Minister show the indicators of economic growth on the ground if Government right now cannot find money to run local government elections? How can you tell us that you are well off economically?  

Mr Speaker two days ago, business in Kampala came to a standstill.  Many of us, especially the Members of Parliament who represent Kampala in Parliament, would like to know briefly what is happening.  Is the Minister aware that the activities of vendors selling goods in front of other people’s premises was engineered by the presidential campaign which was endeavouring to ensure that President Museveni wins the elections of 2001?  If so, is that not a shame? (Laughter) And, do those businessmen and women whose activities have been halted not deserve some tax holiday because those activities of vendors were engineered by this thing?  I am speaking in support of some action to be taken in defence of those traders. 

Finally, Mr Speaker is the Minister aware that rent related to buildings owned by Asians in Kampala in particular is abominable?  A number of Africans staying in Kampala are about to vacate Kampala because they can no longer afford those exorbitant rates. Is the Government doing something about that? If it is doing nothing, are we not encouraging people to call up Idi Amin to come back and assist them?  Thank you.

MR MAFABI NANDALA (Budadiri West, Sironko): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  My questions are very few.  Is the Minister aware that there are some importers who are importing finished goods and claiming that they are raw materials, to evade taxes with the help of officials, I understand, from the Ministry of Finance and State House?  Is the Minister aware that the tax collection has gone down? And what action has he taken to correct the downtrend of the collections?  Is the Minister aware that there is always what we call comprehensive tax audits to good taxpayers and leaving out those who are evading taxes not being audited?  Every now and then they are on the good taxpayers; what figures -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, as I said questions really are limited.  

MR NANDALA:  Lastly, Mr Speaker, what figures or variables do we use to compute the growth rates?  Thank you.

CAPT BABU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was interested in the rent, and I just want to take this opportunity to inform the hon. Members that from 1990, this House - the NRC - and the following Houses that came up were concerned about putting there rent control and rent tribunals.  Some of our economists advised us and rightly so, that when you have rent controls and tribunals, you curtail investments.  When you allow the rent to float, people invest and accommodation becomes small and the rent automatically is regulated.  At that time, I was a backbencher against this, because a lot of people in my area were suffering with rent.  

I found out later that actually the economists were right, that more people started investing, not only in residential properties but also started putting up office buildings in this town. And today we have indigenous people who have invested in commercial and office businesses and now charge in local Uganda Shillings instead of dollars. This has regulated the price.  

As I talk now, a lot of our people have also put up commercial buildings outside the central business district.  As you go outside Kampala, you will find high-rise buildings coming up built by indigenous people.  So the policy of the market control of rent to the economist was correct, because today, if you take the residential properties as an example for the higher-level income group, the rent has fallen tremendously, and you cannot even get rent which we used to want in the olden days of two to three dollars.  

Now, if you look in town carefully, a lot of high-rise buildings are coming up one after the other.  All the malls are being put up and these are actually bringing the rent down, and some of the people who were charging in dollars are beginning to change their mind. I am talking about scarcity here as compared to demand and supply.  I am talking about rent; I am not talking about the economy.  

I just wanted to tell you that we have been at it in this city with members of government, with members of the population we represent. We have even had seminars with officials of the Uganda Revenue Authority. These seminars can be brought to you, hon. Members. I can give them to you –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am surprised because the Minister holding the Floor right now is not the Minister supposed to answer the questions at Table. Is the hon. Minister of State in charge of Housing in order to give a prolonged speech as if he is not knowledgeable about the specifics of all questions as expected of us? He is meandering into scenarios, which are not explainable!

THE SPEAKER: The Minister was not answering any question.  As a Member of Kampala Central, he was giving information about the issue of rent, which he is entitled to.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling. That is why I have always asked hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to keep to his area and leave this one to me, because I am its Member of Parliament. He has a tendency to interfere –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I hope you have given your information about this.

CAPT. BABU: There has been a problem up to now. We have brought this problem up, if you check in the Hansard. I was trying to allay the fears of hon. Members who have got a very good point about rent control, which some of us would wish to have. But the experts, the technicians on the economy will advise us otherwise, that this is a better way to go. And, actually, they have proved their point. That is all I was trying to explain. Thank you very much Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can the Minister answer the questions?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and hon. Members.  First is the supplementary question of hon. Sitenda. He asked whether a new tax has been introduced under the table.  

Article 152 of the Constitution is very clear. It says: “No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament.”
We have not, as a government, imposed any new tax. That is the prerogative of this House. What has happened is that we have applied the law that was given to us by this House, that is, the VAT Statute of 1996, to cure a tax evasion loophole that taxpayers were using to evade tax. 

The VAT threshold, as Members know, is Shs50 million. There are big people with a turnover of over Shs50 million who decided to mutate. This taxpayer is big enough to register for VAT but he does not register. Instead of using Musumba Company Limited, he imports items under the name Isanga Musumba (Mr Kakooza rose_). I do not know what the clarification is about but I wanted to develop the point first. 

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to be clarified on that point. The hon. Minister said that the threshold is of Shs50 million. I would like him to tell me why somebody who imports once in a year should be netted by 2.5 per cent as a Domestic VAT when there is a principal VAT of 17 per cent on importation?

THE SPEAKER: Explain to him.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Sir. If I could be allowed to develop my point. We have a threshold of Shs50 million but an importer instead of importing under the name of Musumba Company Limited, he imports the same goods under the names Isanga Musumba ‘individual’. Isanga Musumba as an individual is not registered for VAT, but it is the same Isanga Musumba who owns Musumba Company Limited. As a result, the goods he has imported into the country fall below the monthly threshold. 

We have a monthly threshold of about Shs4.2 million based on Shs50 million divided by 12. The monthly threshold enables Uganda Revenue Authority to know that a person importing a container per month, whose goods are worth Shs4 million or in excess thereof deserves to be VAT registered. So people were mutating, trying to minimise their tax obligation by finding the loopholes within the law. 

Therefore, in exercise of the power given to the Commissioner General under Section 33, he identified a study of two and half years, of companies that have abandoned importing items under the company and are importing those that have a value in excess of Shs4 million on a regular basis. Realising that these people are doing that, he applied powers under Section 33 to assess these people on the basis of an assessment that would plug that loophole, and on that it was computed. 

The VAT we are talking about is that between the point of importation and the tax on the value added to the point of retail. Otherwise, on the point of importation, the VAT is known, and everyone pays. But instead of you taking this for home consumption at that point, you add value by selling it. It is that portion upon which a percentage has been applied. That percentage is also arrived at scientifically. It has been realised that that the difference between VAT imported and VAT at retail lies within a range of about 15 to 30 percent Value Added –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Are we really going to follow these calculations?

MR MUSUMBA: I do not know.

THE SPEAKER: Really this is a classroom sort of thing.

MR MUSUMBA: Sorry, Sir, but I thought that the Members of Parliament should have their fears allayed. They should know that the 2.25 percent is based on the 15 to 30 percent of the tax on the value added from the point of importation to the point of retail. That is what is being charged. It is not a new tax because that would be unconstitutional. It is a collection measure to defeat people who default on tax. I apologise for boring this House with these things but taxation is generally a very boring subject.  

Hon. Kakooza did ask, “what is Government doing about the Shs 139 billion domestic arrears?” Sir, Government is progressively reducing the arrears. Two years ago in this House, the arrears were over Shs 500 billion and Government, through its budgeting, has continued to reduce this. In comparison to Shs 500 billion two years ago, it is now a mere Shs 139 billion. This is still a lot of money and efforts are still being made towards the further reduction of these arrears.

It is estimated that by the closure of the next financial year we should have reduced this to less than Shs 50 billion. We are progressively solving a problem that accumulated over several years of indisciplined spending and indisciplined contracting of services. The comforting thing though is that no new domestic arrears are arising because of the commitment control system. So we are reducing the debt, that is for certain.  

Hon. Kakooza again talked of VAT, which I have tried to explain, and I think he followed because he deals in items that attract VAT.

Hon. Nathan Byanyima did ask about domestic arrears and he is asking, are we not stifling the economy? It is regrettable for Government to have domestic arrears. Domestic arrears have been accumulated over several years of mismanagement, and as I said, efforts are being made to reduce them.

Hon. Mabikke is saying that it is the politically powerful and connected people who are smuggling. Well, I do not know that, but I can say for a fact that efforts have been made across the board to curb smuggling. And smuggling is a crime like all other crimes and I can assure you that you have to continuously be vigilant in order to fight crime. There is no single day when everyone across the country will go to bed without experiencing an act of crime. We have to be vigilant, both the Government and MPs; everybody has to be vigilant. Once one colludes with the criminals, crime will be difficult to get rid of. Smuggling is a crime. It is the duty of all of us to fight crime.  

The Special Revenue Protection Services (SRPS), members are asking, “where are the goods that they impound?” Some goods get burnt, like they burnt cigarettes a few weeks ago. The other goods, depending on what the law provides, are actually handled accordingly. Some culprits are fined, or other measures are taken in accordance with the law. That is my knowledge.  

Hon. Maate asked about what we are doing to offload excess production in the villages, the markets for them. Hon. Members, you will recall that we had a whole session with the President and he was saying that top on his agenda as a leader of this country is markets. We continue to try to ensure that we have markets for the goods. It is a major commitment on the part of Government, as exemplified by our leader.  

Hon. Capt. Byaruhanga asked whether we are advising people to reduce production. No, we are advising people to increase production as we search for markets.  

Dr Kefa Sempangi said that the Asian community is overcharging on accommodation. The MP for Kampala Central has most ably handled it, where the Asians are scrambling. I think that everyone has now understood the rationale of leaving the freedom of forces of demand and supply to take their own course. Consequently you get a better price in the long run when that happens.  

Games of chance, the lottery, were also an issue raised. There was a major lottery exercise here run by Premier Lotteries, which is no longer there. I do not know of any other such people in town. I am not sure whether the “Scratch for Cash” game is still going on. I know it was going on alongside the Premier Lotteries game, and the 6th Parliament put its foot down and stopped it. I will find out if there are more people still scratching for cash in this town.  

Hon. Odit is asking us where we get our figures. Our figures are generated from the activities in the economy. We hold household surveys, national surveys, crop production surveys, and we get figures compiled by none other than the able people at the National Bureau of Statistics. So these are not imagined figures. They are produced, people crosscheck them, and people who are not even politicians sanction them. They are simply professional, and they are technical. Their interest is to provide figures as they are and I am only reading them.

An honourable member did raise the issue of market for crops – same story. We are looking for markets. We have been to Zimbabwe, to Zambia, to Malawi, everywhere. We are looking for markets.

Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is concerned about vendors on the streets of Kampala. This, first and foremost, is not a matter that has been engineered by the President for purposes of causing confusion in his own city. No, not even for the sake of votes, because those are no longer an issue. This is however a problem that we think is being ably handled by the city council of Kampala. This is a Kampala city problem and the city has its leaders to handle it.  

Rent, again that is an issue that has been answered already.

Hon. Mafabi Nandala, importers bringing in finished goods and calling them raw materials; this is an aspect of smuggling. We will investigate and if it is true, the arm of the law will catch up with those people. 

He says that tax collection has gone down. Yes, it is true that the targets have not been met. We have a shortage of about Shs 34 billion, but it is not because there are not enough efforts in the collection of revenue exercise. The reasons lie elsewhere. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. The other questions will be dealt with tomorrow or the other day.

REQUEST FOR LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO EXTEND THE PERIOD WITHIN WHICH THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ELECTION VIOLENCE AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS SHOULD COMPLETE ITS WORK AND REPORT TO PARLIAMENT

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ELECTION VIOLENCE AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS (Mr. Nshimye Sebutulo): I stand here on behalf of the Committee to request for leave of this House to extend the period within which the Select Committee may complete its work and report to this House.  

By its resolution of 20 February 2002, Parliament set up a select committee on election violence and other related matters in accordance with Article 79 and 90 of the Constitution, and in compliance with Rules 144 and 145 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

At the end of the inquiry, the Committee was required to produce a report and make recommendations on how to improve the election process to the House within two months from the date of its appointment. The Speaker with the approval of this House on 26 February 2002 appointed the Committee. This period expires tomorrow, Thursday 25 April 2002.

Whereas the workload accomplished so far is estimated at about 60 per cent, the following remain to be undertaken:

• To receive evidence from some witnesses, especially those who were substantially implicated while conducting public hearings like Members of Parliament, Ministers and other government officials in keeping with the principles of natural justice.

• Receipt, analysis and interpretation of some questionnaires, which are yet to be returned to the Committee by organisations like FIDA, Makerere University Law Faculty, Law Development Centre and a number of private law firms, which have confirmed their participation in the exercise.

• Completion of the study of various court judgements from the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and the High Court; and 

• Analysis and interpretation of information relating to all terms of reference given to the Committee and therefore, drawing conclusions from findings therefrom and making appropriate recommendations to Parliament.

In view of the above, the Committee inevitably needs more time, and therefore, requests Parliament to extend its mandate for a further period of four weeks from today, to enable it complete its work and submit a report to this august House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR AWORI: I am going to move a motion, Mr Speaker, because it is a request.

THE SPEAKER: He is begging to move that you extend their mandate by four weeks. I am asking whether that motion is seconded.

MR AWORI: It is seconded.

THE SPEAKER: If it is seconded, do we need a debate? Isn’t the explanation clear?

MR AWORI: It is clear. Mr Speaker, procedurally if we are to allow a debate, it could prejudice the proceedings of the Committee. So, I beg to move that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, the period is extended by four weeks.

MR AWORI: I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker. I do not want to pre-empt anything you might have to announce in this House. But looking at the rate at which we have been doing business, and some of us would like to plan, I wonder if there is a specific period within which we must finish this business. Is there some pending recess in the very near future, because some of our questions have not come?  Are we going home soon?

THE SPEAKER: Definitely, there will be a break. In fact, we should have prorogued Parliament at end of this month, that is, early next week. We may have to extend by a week or so to complete what we have started on. But Parliament has to be prorogued to give time for a break to prepare for the President’s State of the Nation Address so that we open a new session and we receive the Budget, which must be read latest 15 June. Definitely, we shall have a break shortly.  But you will be informed after I have consulted with His Excellency, the President as the Constitution prescribes.  

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, I am wondering. For all the time I have been in this House, we have never debated a report on the Human Rights Commission or on the Inspector General of Government. And at any given time when they find it suitable for them, they put the blame on us. May I know whether we will ever find time to look at these two reports? This is because those reports contain very important issues, which we should be looking at. I am kindly asking for your advice on this, because I would not like to see us break off before looking at those two reports.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I certainly appreciate your concern. We debate reports submitted to us so that the people who made them know that we have appreciated what they reported, and we can give advice here and there.

However, it is not true that we have never discussed any Human Rights since you have been here. I was with you here in the 6th Parliament and we discussed some of these reports, though not all, and this is what I told Mrs Margaret Sekajja. 

There was a time in the 6th Parliament when we discussed their report without telling them to be present. But there are a number of reports that have not been discussed, and I request the Committees concerned, namely, the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee to study these reports, give us a report which will be a basis for us to debate. 

But I appreciate your concern. Whether that will be possible before prorogation, I do not know. Because right now I have an announcement from the chairperson of the Budget Committee, that under the law we made last year, the Sessional committees are required to report to her Committee their views on the various budget estimates by tomorrow. She is waiting for your reports latest Friday so that she can comply with the statutory date of 15 May when she is supposed to submit the report to His Excellency, the President. But I hope the committee concerned has taken note of hon. Musumba’s observation and something will be done. I shall follow up to see what can be done to this matter.

The other announcement is that the Members of Parliamentary Football Team are required at Lugogo Rugby Playground today, 24 April for training in preparation for a match with another team. And this brings us to the end of our business. I thank you. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00p.m.

(The House  rose at 5.10p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 April 2002 at 2.00p.m.)


