Tuesday, 20 April 2010

Parliament met at 3.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. I apologise for starting the sitting late – I had some matters to solve in the office. That is why I delayed. Please, bear with me.

I have just received sad news of the demise of Mr James Kisubi who was at one time an important Government servant in London – I think he was a student advisor. He died yesterday and the details of the burial will be given to us in due course. I suggest we observe a moment of silence in his memory.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: I forgot to congratulate the people from the Kingdom of Toro upon the Omukama who is now –(Applause)- 18 years of age and has started giving directives. I was privileged to attend his installation in Fort Portal. Yes, hon. Byanyima.

3.05
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some weeks ago, this Parliament passed supplementary expenditure when it pronounced itself on Shs 30 billion to work on the construction of roads that were taken over by the central government. It is now almost two months to the end of the financial year - what is required is the Ministry of Works and Transport to write a letter to the PPDA because of the emergency of the situation that we have in the country regarding these bad roads and the weather so that they can have clearance for direct procurement at fair rates. This will enable them serve the whole country to have motorable roads.

I would like to request Parliament to ask the Minister of Works and Transport to give us a timeframe within which this letter will be written. I am saying this because the Executive Director of the PPDA told us that if a letter is written, they can do the way they did for CHOGM so that our roads can be worked on. Otherwise, if we go into the usual procurement procedures, we might have work done in October or December. So I would like to request this Parliament to urge the Minster of Works and Transport to wake up and ensure work is done immediately. Thank you.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for raising this matter. However, I would like to set the record right that we are not sleeping; we are awake.

Immediately after approving the supplementary budget of Shs 30 billion, my ministry in conjunction with district leaders convened a meeting. I would like to inform the House that we have already deployed all the district equipment together with those that we had using force account.

Last Friday, we had a meeting with all the contractors in Uganda, which was chaired by the Minister of Works and Transport and agreed on the modalities of how we are going to employ them to work on those roads using direct procurement by writing to PPDA to get a waiver.

As I talk now, the waiver request is on the way to PPDA – the meeting was held just last Friday – and the contractors are going to work on those roads that are not going to be worked upon using district and ministry of works equipment, which are available now. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Hon. Members, there is communication that I should have read to you earlier. This is to inform you that the Committee on Social Services has organized a blood donation drive through which Members and staff of Parliament of Uganda will donate blood to Nakasero Blood Bank. The drive is intended to boost the supply of blood to major public hospitals (and maybe private ones) in the country. The exercise will take place tomorrow Wednesday, 21st April in the Members’ Lounge starting at 10 a.m. You are invited to go and donate blood, please – well, somebody is saying I should lead others, but I have already donated ten liters of blood and I have a certificate. I may give the eleventh one, but I have already given ten.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Government of Uganda has negotiated a loan of up to US $100 million from the Export/Import Bank of China for financing the acquisition of assorted road, sanitary and fire fighting equipment. The project is to be implemented by the Ministry of Works and Transport and Ministry of Local Government. 

I beg to present papers on the proposal to borrow the said US $100 million from the Export/Import Bank of China for acquiring equipment for local governments and town councils. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the papers are committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to consider and report promptly because Parliament may be prorogued in the second week of May – put in more effort to complete the exercise before that date. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister – I understand the minister presented it last time – I was not here. So, is it the committee to now give us the report? What is it? The report was also presented? But was it debated?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the debate is now open. Yes, shadow Attorney-General.

3.12
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Erias Lukwago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a copy of the report with me; and there are three fundamental issues I would like to raise.

One, as a member of the committee, I do not remember any meeting that was convened for us to deliberate on the report and adopt it. Procedurally, if there was such a meeting, under the rules, the minutes should have been laid on the Table together with the report. That was not done, with due respect, Mr Speaker.

Secondly, I find the matters raised by the various stakeholders particularly the Opposition not incorporated in this report.

Mr Speaker, you remember that we had intended to move a motion seeking for leave of this House to permit the Opposition bring a Private Members’ Bill to amend the electoral laws, but your guidance was that we submit all the necessary amendments to the committee, to which we complied. However, I do not see any of the proposals or even a mention that we submitted our proposals; they looked at them, but that for one reason or another, they were rejected.

In this country, we have an organisation called the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD), which is a new formation incorporating different political parties, including the NRM. 

I have here with me IPOD amendments which were agreed upon by all the parties, including NRM and they were jointly presented to the committee by all the parties, including NRM, and there is no mention in the report of the views that were submitted to the committee by IPOD.

Are we being sincere to this country? Are we being sincere to ourselves? Surely, if views of this nature are submitted to the committee for the good of this country and we are all working around the clock to ensure that we work out necessary reforms so that we can have free and fair elections in this country and then all of a sudden all our efforts are brought to nought - it is unfortunate hon. Migereko is not here but I had an opportunity of travelling to Ghana with hon. Migereko and others, including hon. Saleh Kamba. We went to Ghana, where the idea of IPOD started from, we returned and formalised it; we signed a protocol; we started on the process of working on the amendments and the amendments were presented to the committee. But all of a sudden, by a stroke of a pen, they are thrown overboard. 

How sincere are we? In a nutshell, I would request that for the good of this country this House defers this debate. The matters should go back to the committee so that we can work out all these issues which are so fundamental to the holding of free and fair elections in this country. 

The amendments we are talking about, Mr Speaker, if you looked at page 3 of this report, paragraph 3, you can see the object of the Bill. There are only three aspects: 

1.	Where a candidate withdraws or is disqualified, the Electoral Commission should be empowered to declare the remaining one a winner. 
2.	The Electoral Commission should send a report of the electoral process within seven days.
3.	Prohibiting fundraising.

Those are the only three amendments that I see here and the objects clause is not amended. So, surely, these are cosmetic amendments. They are shallow in nature. They do not go to the root of the problem in this country. So, if we were to realign the electoral process in this country, we need to go further than this. And it has been a call from all democratic people in this country, from everybody who is concerned about peace, security, democracy in this country that let us amend the laws; and we carry out electoral reforms for the good of this country. 

The reforms are not for only the Opposition but for the entire country. So, Mr Speaker, I call upon my colleagues on the other side that let us honour our undertakings. We agreed under IPOD to certain amendments and they are not incorporated in the report; I beg that we go back to the committee and sort out this matter before any debate proceeds. I thank you.

3.18
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I thought I should clarify on one or two things that have been raised by the Shadow Attorney-General, hon. Erias Lukwago, concerning IPOD.

It is true there are amendments that were proposed by IPOD where all the political parties that are represented in Parliament sit. These proposals were submitted to the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. There were discussions of the proposals by the committee and as far as I am aware, some of the proposals do feature in the report of the committee. Not the entire package or proposals of IPOD were taken on board. This is normal. When you go to a committee and make presentations or submissions, the committee will listen to your submission; it will listen to your proposals and they will take on board some of the proposals that you will have made. They may, however, choose not to take on board some of the proposals that you will have come up with. 

It is up to the committee to explain why a certain proposal was not carried on board. But that does not mean that the entire package of proposals was not considered. But it is also true that hon. Lukwago had an opportunity to appear before this committee much as for quite some time, due to internal differences within the Democratic Party, he had abandoned the work of IPOD. I thank you.

3.21
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you. I would like to express my very serious concern especially after the response given by hon. Daudi Migereko.

This IPOD process is a process we all got into thinking that it would help us get out of the very structured nature of debate, which sometimes does not allow you room to agree to dialogue very freely and, Mr Speaker, you attended that meeting and the meeting that has been driven by the Secretary-Generals of the relevant political parties. 

In this process, we thought it would be easier to harmonise positions than to come here and begin afresh. I want to put on record, first of all, our disappointment that the very person, hon. Daudi Migereko, with whom we have been sitting together in this process, who has been committing the National Resistance Movement, is the very first one to come into this House and say on the Floor that unfortunately the proposals were thrown out. 

I have looked at what the committee is trying to address; again I find this very unfortunate. When this country began asking for electoral reforms, we were of the view that we should create a free, fair and a level playing ground. That was the understanding. 

For the committee to come here and say that the most crucial reform they have to bring is when one candidate withdraws from the presidential race. Really, it is a shame! It is political dishonesty. I think that the issues that the parties had put to the committee – issues of abuse of media, issues of security, issues of declaration of results, are very fundamental issues when it comes to presidential elections.

Unfortunately, we are now shying away from this and we are being asked to join the committee in a cosmetic process. This is very unfortunate! I am inclined to propose that we give the committee a few more days to review its position. I know that the First Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Kivejinja, is not about to agree with me but I know that he has been here longer to know that without free and fair elections, we risk the future of this country. So, it is my prayer that you give us an opportunity to find out why the committee decided to make a report which has ignored every proposal that has been made to them. 

We are of course aware that our colleagues, led by hon. Daudi Migereko in the National Resistance Movement, have already backtracked from this process. They do not have the courage to continue speaking to it. But for the good of this country, we want the record set straight that we believe in these proposals and that we would like them to see the light of the day. Mr Speaker, it is my prayer that we could go back to the committee. I thank you.

3.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I just want to make one or two clarifications on the matters raised by my colleague, hon. Lukwago.

I understand that he may be disappointed that some of the issues that were printed out in the report may not be in the committee’s report but it is also not true to say that everything that was presented was ignored. If you read through the IPOD proposals, which the committee looked at closely, a number of proposals were definitely considered and taken up. But the first matter, which is really very serious, is when hon. Lukwago says that he does not know whether any committee was – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I think what hon. Erias Lukwago was saying was that he submitted amendments, which he wanted to effect in the Bill but your report has not mentioned anything about his amendments or made any comment about why they did not accept the amendments. That is why he wants us to refer the matter back to the committee so that you consider it. What do you say about that?

MR TASHOBYA: I was just coming to that, Mr Speaker. First of all, the committee held meetings, for which I have minutes with me here and on the 31st March, a meeting was held and there are minutes of the meeting. On the 31st, we even had the attendance of the Leader of the Opposition. The minutes were written and they are available. If there is any matter – I am aware that some of the matters were brought up but if there is any matter that he thinks should be brought up, he is free to bring it up but it is an authentic report of what the committee considered in detail. With time and – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, the question is, were amendments as stated by hon. Lukwago presented to the committee? Did you receive them? 

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, they were.

THE SPEAKER: If so, did you consider it appropriate to make a comment, either by rejecting or accepting them?

MR TASHOBYA: The reasons for rejection are in the minutes of the committee, which are here.

3.28
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I recall that one of the issues that come up when we come to debating Bills is that for purposes of moving in harmony, we should be able to solve most of these things at committee level. And indeed we felt it necessary that when we have IPOD, all parties involved, including NRM, these issues could be dealt with at the committee. What would come to the House would be for us to go through the process, which should be the normal procedure. It is dishonesty for us to change goalposts without informing our colleagues. 

The chairman has said, “I have considered all the things.” You should have said, “I considered x, and this is the reason why we rejected it”, or this is the reason why we accepted it. It is not fair for you to come and say, if hon. Lukwago looked at it, he would see that we have taken most of it. Then what did you leave; why did you leave it? It is very important that you tell the public.

The reason why we have inter-party dialogue is for purposes of dialoguing with all our members. Yes, today there is NRM but supposing tomorrow it loses, what happens? Do not make a law with the assumption that you will live on indefinitely. And we have been telling you on all these issues – I cannot remember the date -(Interjection)- of course we read history, where there was this man, Ibingira, Magezi, Balak Kirya, they brought a law here and they said, “This law should have been passed yesterday.” A few days after passing it, it caught up with the same people who were dancing on the Floor. (Mr Kivejinja rose_) I do not need your history; I am very conversant. Your history could be distorted. 

MR KIVEJINJA: Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the honourable member to stand up and misrepresent facts that actually the law that put the five ministers under arrest was passed by them before they were arrested? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, if he has misstated the facts, I think what you do is to give him information so as to the correct facts.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much for the wise ruling, Mr Speaker -(Mr Kivejinja rose_) No, no, no, I do not want your information. 

MR KIVEJINJA: Be informed. I would like to inform – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, since hon. Nandala was holding the Floor and he does not want information, you should sit down.

MR KIVEJINJA: I have the information. 

THE SPEAKER: He doesn’t want the information.

MR KIVEJINJA: The information I have is that the Preventative Detention Act was passed in the first part of Independence and by the time the ministers were arrested under that, they were victims of the laws they had made earlier but not after. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am praying to God that I live until I also get grey hair and I can assure you that I will respect that grey hair. (Laughter) I was not saying that the law arrested them before but it was after they had passed it. 

The Constitution of Uganda talks of national unity and stability, that is, Objective No.3, which says, “All organs of State and people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability.” The laws we are trying to make are aimed at this. The moment we disagree from here and we go out disagreeing, then you have already promoted instability. The reason why we want to make these laws is so that they are fair to all of us. 

Our colleagues always look at these laws as if they are meant for only the Opposition but one day, they will be applied to you and that is when you will discover how bad a law is -(Interjections)- I am not being threatening. I do not threaten. I always talk and I am judged by what I say. Because hon. Aggrey Awori was this side; he only discovered that what we did in the 1960s was not working out and he crossed. 

I think it would be in the interest of all of us here to review what we had agreed to under IPOD and come up and say, “This is what was brought and this is how we dealt with it”. And that will make this process faster and easier. We want all of us to move as a group. The electoral laws we are making are for all us. You could be in the Opposition tomorrow and it will affect you. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I suggest that in view of what hon. Lukwago stated and in view of what the chairperson of the committee stated, I would be inclined to accept amendments being proposed which were tendered but which have not been commented on. The ones to be presented by hon. Lukwago, I will accept them when you have reached the stage of amending the Bill instead of saying that we go back to the committee. Let the House itself handle your amendments.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, in light of that ruling, I would move that you give us another day, probably tomorrow, to give me time to prepare the necessary amendments and then present them -(Interjections)- yes, it will be very unfortunate if I just moved right away now.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what we can do is maybe continue with the debate and then after sometime we adjourn to enable you prepare the amendments but we should not just stop here because we do not really have time.

Let the debate continue on other issues then you prepare your amendments and give copies to Members so that they internalise them. Maybe tomorrow we will go to the Committee Stage with those amendments because amendments will be more relevant at the Committee Stage. Let people now debate on other issues.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was not here last week; I do not know whether the committee reports were given out because we are speaking about the reports but we on this side do not have the report. 

THE SPEAKER: I was not here also but let me ask: what happened? Were the copies given out?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, the committee reports were issued, they were even read and we adjourned at the point of debate.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe they should get you a copy.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, my second point is that I think it would enrich the debate if we waited for hon. Lukwago’s amendments to come first because we cannot debate the committee’s report without the benefit of having the amendments. So, I would really suggest that we defer this debate until we receive the committee’s report and hon. Lukwago’s amendments so that we debate the two together. I thank you.

3.38
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I was listening to the chairperson of the committee, he made a lot of reference to the minutes of the committee and as a House we do not have access to the minutes of the committee, which he was often referring to. I want to seek clarification that when he is bringing the report as you are guiding the House, that probably all those other items which he is trying to refer the House to are in the minutes should be included in the report so that we have the access to them rather than just defending himself saying that those issues were discussed and they are in the committee. I would like direction on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, can you tender the minutes?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, in this file we have the minutes of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee together with the copies of the submissions from different stakeholders, including IPOD. Permit me to lay them on the Table.

3.40
MR MATHIUS B. NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I led my party when we were presenting the IPOD report to the chairman of the committee at Ranch on the Lake. This afternoon, I had a working lunch with diplomats from the European Union -(Interjections)- no, I am saying that one of the points we have discussed is the IPOD views, which we presented to the committee. Therefore, if this Parliament cannot consider these views which we presented, I can say that, on our side we shall not be comfortable when these laws are just passed like this. I, therefore, request that we do not debate this issue until our Attorney-General has gone through it and gets the amendments then we can accept the debate.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification or information from the hon. Member of Parliament just going off the Floor whether he is mindful that he is debating in the Uganda Parliament and not the European Parliament.

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Speaker, my proposal is that this afternoon we have found proposed amendments by IPOD in each of our pigeon holes and their amendments are clear. I do not see the problem of the process continuing because we have the amendments - you have allowed them to move them and they are written in a way that they are being moved for amendment. Let us consider them together with the amendments of the committee and proceed because each one of us has received a copy in the pigeon hole -(Interjections)- that is what they are talking about. Hon. Lukwago is talking about these amendments and we have them.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us continue with the debate, but we do not go to the Committee Stage because the amendments really come at the stage of the committee. Let Members go with the copies of these amendments, study them and then tomorrow we shall bring them up at the Committee Stage. I think that will be fair. So, please continue with the debate.

3.42
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, last week I was here when we suspended this item. We thought we would discuss it the following day for debate because of some technicalities of missing information. I am surprised hon. Kigyagi has said that he found in his pigeon hole, the amendments. I have just checked my pigeon hole and I do not have those amendments.

Two, the minutes to enrich our debate have just been laid on the Table now and we do not have copies. So, to enrich the debate from an informed position, we need to have read these. Otherwise, if we are just going to start debating, we run a risk of missing the point. A day is not too long for us to fail to debate from an informed position. I really request colleagues that if you want to debate from an informed position, you need to read all those documents that have been talked about unless you just want to talk from the blue. That is my proposal.

3.44
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Listening attentively to the discussions that have been going on, apparently some Members do not have the full information much as it is available for them and not all this information is really necessary for the debate to continue. 

I have been a Member of this House for over 14 years -(Interjections)- and normally when committees present their reports, we do use the reports for debate and that is why we operate a committee system in Parliament. We have not previously used the committee minutes for debate in this House. 

And we are mindful that we do not have a lot of time left to the prorogation of this Parliament and that you have been very generous; when the House asked for more time to study the documents and do more consultations, you did accept. 

I would like to request Members to continue with the debate. I know many of us know the kind of amendments we want to move and many of the amendments have been circulated to all of us. After all, you have already guided that we will not move to the Committee Stage today. So, I would like to request that we do -(Interjections)- continue with the debate -(Interjections)- and then all the other documents are availed before we go to the Committee Stage. I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I stand up on a point of order. The House is guided with your wise counsel. We have carried on a lot of business for the good of this country, and more often from both sides when issues are contentious and they need further time for consideration so that all of us as people’s representatives our issues are contained. You have guided this House rightly. Is the hon. Member in order to allude that, “it is them”? Who are “them” - who give more time other than you, Mr Speaker, who guides this House? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are wasting a lot of our time and we do not have it. Now, let me ask one question without prejudice to what is going on. What is the position of the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009? Is it ready? Ok. If it is ready, instead of just adjourning the House so that we waste time, can we receive that Bill for the second reading?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
 
3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009”, be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, before I proceed - now it means we shall handle the Presidential Bill tomorrow when the copies of the proposed amendment are given. So, you get the copies today and tomorrow we shall resume the debate on the Presidential Elections Bill.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009 is intended to make certain improvements in the Electoral Commission Act, Cap. 140, arising partly out of experience in operating the Act; partly out of the need to recognise certain judgements of the Constitutional Court; and also partly to take into account the reports on the performance of the Electoral Commission and partly also out of the need to achieve a free and fair electoral process.

Clause 1 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 5 of the Act to require that the Secretary of the Commission shall hold office for a term of five years renewable only once. The intention is to give a fixed term as tenure of office of the secretary. The object is to promote accountability and independence of the commission. 

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 25 of the Act to reduce the period for display of the voters’ roll so that it can be a rationalisation rather than reducing in the case of both a general election and a by-election but to allow a period of six days during which any objections or complaints in relation to the names recommended by the tribunal be included or deleted from the voters’ roll in relation to any necessary corrections that may arise. The purpose is to ensure that voters are given adequate opportunity to ensure that the voters’ roll is fair and accurate. 

Clause 2 also seeks to amend Section 25 by substituting for sub-section 5 a new sub-section requiring the returning officer to appoint a tribunal comprising of five members but not being public officers to determine objections received by him or her under sub-section 4, including two elders, one of whom is male and the other female, and the three members shall be representatives from political parties or organisations nominated by the National Consultative Forum. 

The object of the amendment in sub-section 5 is to give the political parties representation on the National Consultative Forum the opportunity to participate in the functions of the tribunal to handle objections in the updating of the electoral roll. 

The clause also seeks to take account of judgements of the Constitutional Court against relevant provisions of the Electoral Commission Act particularly against the engagement of the tribunal of persons employed by the state. The clause further defines “elder” as used in the law to mean a person aged 60 years or above. 

Clause 3 seeks to amend Section 27(3) to require the Electoral Commission not to issue a duplicate voter’s card to a voter on polling day or within 90 days before polling day. At present, Section 25 provides that no person shall issue a voter’s card to a person on polling day or within 7 days before polling day. It means a voter can ask for instance for a voter’s card within eight days before polling day, which is impracticable and self defeating because the Electoral Commission cannot plan properly and update its rolls. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman.

3.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009. 

The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 16 December 2009 and referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Of importance was rule 116(2) which states that, “The committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill as it considers fit, if the amendments, including new clauses and new schedules, are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill.” 

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders: 

1.	The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs/Attorney General
2. 	The Electoral Commission
3. 	Uganda Reform Commission
4. 	Uganda Law Society
5. 	Uganda Joint Christian Council
6. 	Citizens Coalition for Electoral Democracy in Uganda
7. 	Forum for Democratic Change
8. 	Peoples Development Party
9. 	Political Parties Platform
10. 	National Resistance Movement Organisation
11. 	Human Rights Network
12.	Hon. Erias Lukwago (Shadow Attorney-General)
13.  Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya 
14.  Hon. Moses Kabuusu

Objectives of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to amend the Electoral Commission Act, 2005 to provide for the tenure of office of the Secretary of the Commission; to reduce the period of display of the voters’ roll for a general election from 21 days to 15 days; and to provide for six days during which any objection or complaint to the inclusion or deletion of names as recommended by the tribunal or any necessary corrections that may be raised or filed; in case of a by-election, to require the Commission to display the voters’ register for ten days and in addition to allow a period of six days during which objections or complaints in relation to names deleted from or included in the voters’ roll or in relation to any necessary corrections shall be raised or filed; to require returning officers to appoint a tribunal comprising members not being public officers to determine objections received by them and to require duplicate voters’ cards to be issued at least 90 days before polling day. The provision as it is now is self defeating and makes the issue of duplicate cards impracticable. 

Observations

The committee observed that:
1.	The proposed amendment does not specify the level at which the tribunal will operate. The committee proposes that the tribunal should be constituted at the parish level.

2.	The current position of issuing of duplicate voters’ cards within seven days before polling day makes it impossible for the Electoral Commission to process them. 

	In addition, it is also not cost effective for the Electoral Commission to produce a few cards at a time. However, the proposed provision of 90 days is a long time. The committee proposes that the duplicate cards should be issued at least within 60 days before polling day.

3.	The reduction of the time for display will make it difficult for voters to check their names on the register. There is, therefore, need to increase the days for display considering that the voters’ roll is very important for free and fair elections.

4.	The proposed amendment does not provide for the chairperson and secretary to the tribunal. There is need to provide for the election of the chairperson and secretary to the tribunal. 

Recommendation

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. Attached is a list of names of Members who signed the report. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you chairman and the committee for the report. Hon. Members, the debate is open.

3.59
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chwa County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been talking about the electoral law reforms in the last four years. Looking at these reforms and the recommendations, I really do not know whether in the opinion of the committee the Bill amounts to reform. But in my own understanding as a lay man, when you reform something, you change it drastically. I think we are just trying to play about with words. There is no reform; we are just trying to deceive the world that we have done it and yet we are really playing with serious matters.

We are living in a country where fire is really very common now; houses are getting burnt down. I do not see the logic in denying me my right to vote because my voter’s card was burnt in my house. To reduce it to 60 days – you know if I have lost my card, it means I cannot, therefore, vote. I think this is being unfair to the citizens of this country. I think if we want to restrict, I would suggest 30 days but then even that is long because it is not your fault that it got burnt in the house. Why should you be denied your right to vote? I think the committee should really reduce this period to 30 days. 

About the display, Mr Speaker, I have complained about the display of the voters’ register to even the Chairman of the Electoral Commission that it is not being done according to the law. During the last elections, it was done for only two days in my constituency. I told the chairman but he said that I am wrong and yet I was there physically; they do not do it for 21 days. I think even the display is meaningless because the way elections are rigged here is through deleting names from the voters’ register. 

After the display, the registers are brought back here to the headquarters and many names are deleted. The register that is used is enclosed together with the ballot paper; the voters have no chance to inspect the one that is included in the ballot box. You go for the display and your name is in the register but the register that is used at the time of voting does not have your name. So this makes the display meaningless; I do not know why the register that comes with the ballot box should not be displayed? 

Apart from deleting, there is a trick whereby if I am voting in station A and I go to that polling station and my name is not there - some people find their names eight kilometres away, having changed the polling station; so displaying is meaningless. I think something should be done about this if we are to have free and fair elections. I think that Parliament should not be party to rigging elections; we should make laws that will be fair to all of us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.   

4.03
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Erias Lukwago): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have had the opportunity of looking at the report of the committee. But again the views made in respect to the Presidential Elections (Amendments) Bill are applicable here because, one, the objects clause seems not to have been amended to incorporate our amendments contrary to the directive you issued earlier on. This was an agreed on position here that we should not move a Private Members’ Bill entitled, “Electoral Commission (Amendments) Bill,” which was our original position. 

We agreed and said, let us take our proposals to the committee but surprisingly the object clause has not been changed to factor in our amendments. So the Bill remains the Attorney-General’s Bill and that is what the object’s clause is providing for here and that is what the committee states here on page 2.

The same thing applies to the proposal by IPOD, and one thing I should make very clear here is that the IPOD positions were negotiated and agreed upon amongst all the key political players and member parties. They were agreed upon and handled in line with the Durban OAU Declarations of 1982. I think I can lay on the Table a copy of the Durban Declaration, which states that for us to have free and fair elections we should carry out extensive amendments that is both legal and administrative amendments -(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I know it has been the same case with the report on the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Act that if a Bill is before a committee and a Member actually belongs to that committee and Members have signed the same report - I think it would be prudent and procedurally okay if we had a minority report instead of looking at - of course we cannot do away with the IPOD as these are the views that would persuade Members to support them or not; but it would be prudent for us to have a minority report such that we look at it; look at the main report and then Members debate it. Otherwise, with due respect, the views of IPOD don’t bind Members of Parliament but they can only be referred to for persuasion purposes. So, I would imagine that Members who did not sign here would bring us a minority report and we look at both of them instead of -

THE SPEAKER: It is true that hon. Lukwago is normally a Member of this committee but it appears that this time he did not participate in the proceedings of the committee. He was a stakeholder who appeared in the committee so he did not participate. This is my view because the report has mentioned him as having appeared to assist the committee. Isn’t that the position?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think that in this case, it is not fair for hon. Lukwago to come and say he didn’t come and therefore the report of the committee should be disowned. This is because IPOD has membership of political parties. Parliament is not part of IPOD and neither is IPOD part of Parliament. We looked at the views of IPOD as a committee and took on some while we left out others. I don’t think – there are a number -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tashobya, did hon. Lukwago participate as a Member of the committee when you were considering this Bill?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, hon. Lukwago chose to attend the committee, appeared before it and even when we were considering the reports, hon. Lukwago was invited but he chose not to come.

MR WACHA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I attended most of the meetings of the committee on this matter except for the period from 26 March to 2 April when I came back to the country. Hon. Lukwago’s position was tricky because he had views, which he wanted to represent and the committee knew that so there were times when we were treating him (a) as a Member of the committee and (b) as a witness; so he was appearing in both capacities.

But let me answer hon. Rosemary Namayanja’s point about the minority report. From the beginning of our sittings while discussing these Electoral Bills, there was a general consensus that we should try as much as possible to generate consensus and we tried to do that. Actually our position was made easier when this IPOD presented their views because we thought that this was a position, which was already agreed on by the various stakeholders and ours was just to try to make it better where we thought it was not and where we thought it was absolutely unnecessary to reject them.

In respect to the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, I think most of the views, which were brought forward by IPOD were incorporated in the report. This IPOD report has been circulated and anybody can look at it. So, I thought that we did a relatively good job there. I don’t want to comment on the others because we are not dealing with those yet but hon. Lukwago’s position was rather tricky. I would hesitate to say that he chose not to because he was both a witness and a Member of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: In order not to waste time, and since he appears to have been a witness in this committee, let him say what he wants to say. You may or may not accept it but it does no harm.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was saying that the issues that we raised went through processes. First, we started as stakeholders and then we moved to IPC and from there IPOD and subsequently submitted the proposed amendments to the committee. At all these stages, we had input from various stakeholders and experts. 

When we agreed at IPOD level, we thought these positions would be respected but I see here that there are two things. Most of those proposals are not there, if not all, because the object’s clause is not amended as I said. But even then, even if they were to be rejected, as I said earlier, there must be a reason you advance in the report and say, “We received such and such amendments and they were rejected”.

It is like you are handling a Bill from Government, because if, for example, some of the clauses incorporated in the Bill as tabled by the Attorney-General were to be rejected by the committee, why don’t you make observations about that? So we brought amendments in addition to those which were brought by the Attorney-General and in this particular case, you were duty bound as a committee to come up with valid reasons as to why they were rejected. Even if they made no sense, you don’t simply rubbish them. With due respect, the people we scrutinise were not given the due attention they deserved. .“

Finally, I was looking at the clauses of this declaration. I implore you Members as legislators, as policy makers, in this country; we know the future of this country is entrusted in our hands. We are here to make rules not for a game but for the lives of millions of Ugandans. Mr Speaker, we assented to the Durban Declaration of 08 July 2002 and it has benchmarks which we have to comply with. We undertook to do that. The benchmarks are detailed here -(Interjection)- I don’t have time – but I remember I even alluded to a number of international covenants and protocols. I beg to lay on the Table this declaration for the benefit of Members. 

If we are to have free and fair elections in this country, we must, as much as possible, strive to build consensus on all these legislations that we are making. The perception you have of these legislations is as if they are going to benefit the Opposition. They are made for a purpose and we want one thing, free and fair elections, so that we can have a stable country where people will not resort to subversive activities to access public offices. 

So, Mr Speaker, in that spirit, I request the chairman and the committee - my colleagues - to refocus on these amendments. Let us have a look at them again. As I said earlier, the reason we travelled to Ghana with hon. Migereko and others, and the reason we came up with the IPOD is to build consensus. So, do not dismantle what we have built so far by rejecting the first project that we are handling together of electoral reforms; otherwise, how can we trust one another on other ventures to be engaged in subsequently? So, the proposals are here. The amendments proposed by the IPOD and the IPC are quite extensive and I suggest [Mr Kubeketerya: “Clarification.”] I am winding up.

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking a simple clarification from hon. Lukwago. I have been going through the list of Members who signed and there are Members from the Opposition: hon. Balikuddembe, hon. Katuntu and others. Is he trying to tell us that by the time they wrote this report, his views were not bought by even Members from the Opposition? The hon. Member is actually taking us for granted. We are bending the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament and he thinks we can go in reverse gear. So, are you saying that you doubt the position by the Members of the Opposition when they appended their signatures, hon. Lukwago?

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I too would like to join my colleague to seek clarification on a similar issue. Actually with due respect to all colleagues in the House, I respect very much the distinguished counsel, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Abdu Katuntu, and hon. Joseph Balikuddembe. When you look at this report, they actually signed and given what hon. Ben Wacha said, I wonder whether hon. Lukwago disagrees with this report?

Secondly, I would like to find out whether hon. Lukwago is now speaking as the Leader of the Opposition so that we have a common position from that side, because I am also getting confused as far as the procedure is concerned. Thank you. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I do not think it is my duty here to explain the dynamics under which my colleagues in the Opposition could have signed. The duty I have as a Shadow Attorney-General is to raise issues that were agreed upon but do not feature in the report. Otherwise, if I am to follow that line of argument, I would ask my colleagues - hon. Kubeketerya and hon. Sauda Mugerwa - the same question as to why hon. Migereko, hon. Amama Mbabazi and others signed the IPOD document and then departed from what we agreed upon because those are positions which were negotiated and agreed upon. 

I can authoritatively speak on the positions that were presented jointly and this is our concern that these issues are not incorporated in the report in one way or the other. I think it is a valid reason. Even if you were to appear before any tribunal or any court or anybody investigating a matter, you are entitled to the reasons as to why your prayer was rejected but the reasons are not here. So, these are the issues I am raising and I am saying –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Lukwago, our Attorney-General for what he has said but I want to seek clarification. What would it cost the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, because I think this paper belongs to Parliament, to put it that “I received this and this is what we decided.” What would it cost him to put these issues, which hon. Lukwago is raising, on paper?  

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to wind up?

MR LUKWAGO: The point raised by my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, back-races the issue I was raising. Probably I could have been satisfied by the reason that would have been given but not to tell me that those issues were not considered at all. So, Mr Speaker, I pray for the indulgence of this House that we be accommodated to have these amendments presented. I thank you. 

4.22
MS BETI KAMYA (Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for their work. The Government side or the NRM Government has spent the last ten years defending themselves against accusations of vote rigging and flawed elections. We keep referring to two convictions of a flawed election. 

In my opinion this would be a golden opportunity for this country and particularly for the Government to go the extra mile to restore the confidence of the people of Uganda in the electoral process. Those of us who live in Uganda know that the confidence of the people of Uganda in the electoral process is seriously shaken. People take it as a given that elections will be rigged; people take it as a given that Ugandans have to be booked; people take it as a given that the Electoral Commission is biased. Why don’t we take this occasion to ensure that we give Ugandans a new lease on life? 

This House has passed Bills and resolutions and taken positions, which an ordinary person would think are reckless. But we have been told the justification is that democracy is expensive. Free and fair elections are the hallmark of democracy and no costs in terms of time and the effort to bend over backwards should be saved to make sure that we have free and fair elections. If we cannot generate consensus in this House and we leave it with two positions, one saying that elections can never be free and fair -(Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: I would love to hear the best alternative for transparency such that we prevent fraud in elections. Elections take place, people come and vote right there; they count them and you win. What transparency do you want? 

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, we are discussing the merits of this report. Hon. Lukwago took a position not to be a member of this committee because that would confine his interests. He went to the committee with his proposals. Hon. Lukwago is arguing and I agree with him that his proposals were not given due consideration. The justification for not doing that is not here. Even the Speaker has guided that those amendments be tabled.

I would like to join hon. Lukwago and others who believe in the suspicion that Uganda cannot have free and fair elections to get out of the way so that we discuss the development of this country. What does it cost for the chairman of the committee to let us know why the amendments proposed by hon. Lukwago were not included?

I beseech the House if this is the most expensive price we have to pay to have free and fair elections, let us understand why the committee did not include these amendments.

THE SPEAKER: When we go to the Committee Stage, I shall listen to hon. Lukwago’s amendments.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hilary Onek): I have been in this House for nine years, and I chaired the Committee on Natural Resources; we had a number of committee reports, which we presented in this House, and normally the committee’s report which comes to the Floor is the considered view of the committee Members and this is the report the chairman submits. If there is any dissenting voice like that of Lukwago, for example, they come up with a minority report which is attached to the main one. If Lukwago’s group is lazy and have failed to write a report, why do we waste time? That is the procedure in the House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we know Parliament always starts at 2.30 p.m. now a Member comes at the end the session when have debated. Is he in order to come and take us back to what you have already ruled on?

THE SPEAKER: I think since he did not know what he should do; the best thing is to give him information just like what you have done.

MR ONEK: It is true I have not been in the debate but I am talking about the reporting of the committee which I did a few times when I was the chairman of a committee in this House. The reporting of the committee reflects the majority view and if there is any dissenting opinion warranting submission in this House, it comes as a minority report. Therefore, there was no point lining what the committee has decided alongside other views as you were proposing.

4.32
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Amama Mbabazi): In my 20 plus years experience in this House, I would like to say that this is the first time the political groups in this country and in this Parliament have created a forum now called the Interparty Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD). IPOD was created for purposes of having a platform on which all the political forces in Uganda can interact with each other, exchange views and if possible evolve consensus. 

In this particular case, I am happy to say that IPOD has been looking at proposed amendments in the reform of our electoral process and the NRM has been very effectively represented in this forum. I am glad that they have produced many ideas that our party (NRM) embraced and adopted.

The arrangement of IPOD is not that IPOD replaces any political party, which is a member. As I said, ideas are generated and once they are generated there, then of course each party takes these ideas back to its organs, this how NRM works. This is because NRM is a democratic organisation; we go back and subject all these new ideas to debate, especially those which depart from established policy. When we change policy we adopt them, but where we do not -(Interjection)- of course, we do not do that.

In this specific case, our representation in IPOD presented to the organs of the party the proposals that had come up and some of these proposals were adopted and I think they were reflected in the course of the debate. There were others, which are against the policy positions of the party, and we will need to go to the national conference and so on to sort this out. So, we cannot possibly change policy through representation of the party in IPOD –(Interruption)

4.36
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you, hon. Mbabazi. I am just trying to follow up on what you are saying. I thought that we agreed in the IPOD that there should be a process of feedback to the entire group. When you rejected these proposals that were made under the IPOD, you did not give us feedback. So how else did you expect us as Members of the IPOD to know whether you are honest about the process, whether you are sticking with the proposal? Or whether you are just hood winking us to believe that you are interested in consultations for purposes of public relations when actually you did not mean an inch of it? 

Mr Speaker, I would pray that the members give me a hearing because I am a secretary-general and this process is a secretary-general driven process –(Laughter)- yes, I am responding to hon. Mbabazi, the Secretary-General of the NRM and this process is driven by the secretary-generals. We would have appreciated that after the organs of your party, change position or refuse to agree with us in the IPOD, you would have given us feedback and perhaps then, we could have gone to try and lobby the committee as parties on our own and then they would be able to disaggregate these proposals and say, “Fine, of the IPOD proposals, these ones were taken, these ones were not taken.” Is it the reason, therefore, that the chairperson now comes here with a report that does not explicitly tell us what was taken or not taken on board?

Secondly, what is the future of the IPOD now? The reason they said that the secretary generals should drive the process is that they wanted somebody at your level who will be able to under take on behalf of your party. Now if you commit your party and the next morning they run away from the process, should we sit on the same table again and pretend we will agree at any one point? Hon. Mbabazi, please help me know –(Interjection)- you keep quiet because you are not a secretary-general!  

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, we are debating the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009 and not about your party arrangements. We are now prolonging the debate on that issue which you should sort out later. Let us debate this Bill.

4.38
MR MATHIUS B. NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. IPOD is not a forum for all political parties. It is a forum for only political parties represented in Parliament. Before we presented our views to the legal committee, we had a meeting where NRM was represented and we agreed what to present to the committee – there are six political parties represented in this Parliament. It is very unfortunate for NRM to change sides when these views are already in the committee. Why did you not tell us? We had a meeting in Ntinda before we presented these views to the legal committee. We went to Ranch on the Lake and presented our views as IPOD. The purpose of bringing together the political parties in Parliament is to harmonise our views even when we come here.

MR GAGAWALA: Is the honourable shadow minister in order to derail the debate on the Floor and start referring to documents which different parties were discussing outside this House and start making those whispers and gossips, which they had outside this House and turn them into issues which are to be debated today on the Floor? Is he really in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I suggest to you that we have a round table meeting to sort out these differences that have arisen. I think it would be better. You know some of us are not Members –(Laughter)- please have a round table and you will be able to make an agreement rather than mixing this debate with that administrative matter. 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: As long as you are in this House, unless if you are independent, on a party ticket, you are bound by –(Interjections)- because when we signed the protocol you were there. You witnessed the signing of the protocol. Signing of the protocol binds us as political parties to that protocol. Therefore, if NRM is pulling out of the protocol and they are saying they cannot accept or go by what we put in the legal committee, let it be known otherwise my colleague, the secretary-general, should be the one to answer whether you are pulling out or going by the protocol of the IPOD.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is why I am really suggesting to you that maybe after we adjourn today, we go somewhere in one of the rooms here –(Laughter)- and you meet and sort out this matter. 

MR MBABAZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to say that I rose –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: I thank my friend hon. Mbabazi for giving way. I thought that I should give this information. The reason as to why we are bringing the issue of the IPOD report is because it adds us a lot of meat to the Bills that we were discussing. A lot of ideas were generated by this organisation. 

When these views were being presented before the Legal Committee, NRM/O was effectively represented. Me, as hon. Ben Wacha, I took time to ask the gentleman who was representing that party whether the views, which were expressed here, were acceptable to NRM as a political party. He said, “Yes. Except the issue of army personnel getting leave to go and vote at home.” He said they rejected that. Otherwise, everything here was acceptable to them. I am saying this because I find it difficult to appreciate the stand now being taken by hon. Amama Mbabazi who himself, was the one who introduced to us the concept of IPOD! (Laughter)

MR MBABAZI: I thank my colleagues for the intervention. But what I am really saying is not intended to depart at all from the principle of co-operation and dialogue between the various major political players in Uganda which IPOD represents – and I want to reiterate our support for it! 

The simple point I made was that as we support IPOD because it gives an opportunity to talk and generate consensus – even if we generated consensus in IPOD, that consensus must be taken back to the party and if the party adopts it, especially when the consensus departs from a well-established party policy position, then we will go ahead with it! 

I informed the committee that the NRM position was what I presented. But we are aware that discussions were going on in IPOD and should there be a change as a result of that interruption, we would come back to the committee and inform it.

It is true that our representatives, who were headed by the Government Chief Whip, happily - last year, they made a presentation for us about the positions IPOD had adopted. We went through them; we accepted some and did not accept others, especially those that called for a major degree of overhaul within the party. There were others, which obviously necessitated even amendment of the Constitution and we didn’t think it was the time for the appropriate method of handling all those. So, we indicated what we thought was alright. Those that we did not think we could handle, we also indicated at that time.

But as my brother and friend hon. Ben Wacha knows, even then, the committee is not bound by the proposals from IPOD because the committee would consider them and make its own proposals in its own wisdom. 

Obviously, I wouldn’t want to use very strong language in relation, especially to the secretary general of FDC because of what she is and the secretary general of DP. I just want to assure this House and the country that we are committed to IPOD and we are ready, at all times, to engage with them in this forum for the good of this nation. Thank you.

MS BETI KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The debate in this House has reminded me of the 1985 peace talks in Nairobi. During the 1985 peace talks, the NRA engaged the Ugandan Government in talks led by General Tito Okello, while they took occasion to re-group for the final assault.

The peace talks in Nairobi were obviously a cover up for other things that were being done. (Laughter) Those of you who were talking about IPOD have clearly forgotten that leopards do not change their spots -(Laughter)- but my fear - 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, where is this kind of debate leading us to? (Laughter) I have said if you have an amendment, you will table it at an appropriate time and we shall consider it. If you have nothing to say during the general debate, then let us - but this is a matter for a round table meeting.

MS KAMYA: It was about the amendment –

THE SPEAKER: It is for the round table meeting.

MS KAMYA: I was just giving a preamble to the amendment, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, if there are points to debate about the report and the Bill, do so. But leave this matter to the round table meeting. I have offered the venue. Stand if you want to debate and debate it.

4.50
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the parliamentary committee and a parliamentary committee is attended by all Members from the Opposition and Members from the Government side. Good enough, they signed the report and there is no minority report.

This report gives us the methodology and all the people who presented views to the committee, and the suggestion of our colleagues on that side that whatever view was given to this committee should be recorded and a reason given as to why it was accepted or rejected -(Interjections)- well, I recall during the constitutional amendment period, we had reports where people gave views and the reasons were recorded as to why they were rejected –

THE SPEAKER: But let me make this clear: although we have the committee’s report, we are not bound to accept it. We can criticise the committee’s report and we are free to say what we think should have been the conclusion. So, don’t think we are tied by the report. So, what is happening here is to criticise the way the report is presented; but you can suggest what you think the report should have included.

MR MUGAMBE: Mr Speaker, thank you for the advice. What I wanted to suggest was that since the chairman of the committee was there during all the deliberations, he can give us a synopsis of some of the proposals and why they were rejected so that we can continue with the debate – a few of them if he is in position to do so, instead of wasting time here –  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have already said that those amendments, which you submitted to the committee and were not commented on in the report, will be tabled.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought it would be for our benefit to debate –

THE SPEAKER: But he did not include them, how do you expect him to come and highlight them? He didn’t. The committee considered it not necessary. Let us see how to handle it.

MR AHABWE: Mr Speaker, here before us, we have rule 193 of our Rules of Procedure: “Minutes of Proceedings to be brought up with report of Committees”, and this rule states as follows: “The minutes of the proceedings of a committee shall be brought up and laid on the Table of the House, together with the report of the committee, by the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or any Member of the committee nominated by the committee, when reporting to the House.”

Mr Speaker, we have used this procedure very many times. We have brought a report with attendant proceedings –(Interjection)- the minutes once presented here will definitely incorporate the very many ideas that we have presented during the hearing. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think what is true is that you present the minutes, but use the report. I am advising committees that in cases of this nature, when proposals are brought to the committee and the committee eventually rejects these proposals, there should be a mention of proposals made but not accepted and maybe with reasons. That is how it should be presented, but you should not just keep silent about it as if nothing happened. In future, I am appealing to the committee to do that. (Applause)

4.55
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the benefit of the House, I would like to make a general comment on the proposals that were presented to the committee. I would like to begin with the proposal that we in the Opposition have made that the constituency becomes the basic electoral unit. 

It is our view that for purposes of management, efficiency and timely declaration of results, it would be good that a returning officer or at least a responsible person be placed at a constituency level so that as soon as the results come from the parishes or polling stations, we have a declaration. 

We do not find it fitting that you vote from this village for a given constituency and then you have to carry these results and wait until you reach district level before the declaration of the winner in that particular poll is made. So we hope that this House will find it appropriate that when we go into committee stage, they entertain this amendment to the present position requiring that results be declared at district level so that we can declare the winners at the constituency level.

Secondly, we have looked at the proposal that the Electoral Commission accredits observers to elections, which is okay. But we think that political parties that are registered in this country should automatically qualify to observe elections; there is no reason why we should wait for accreditation by the Electoral Commission. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that in the previous by-elections, we have had to go to observe elections, to reinforce our teams on the ground and sometimes the Police would ask you why you are there as if they do not know that this is a multiparty dispensation and that they do not know that every party that is registered and has interest in a particular election should ordinarily be present in that constituency watching over polling stations, mobilising and conserving support and ensuring that they get what is due to them as a party that has contested. 

I want to comment on the management of elections, especially the voters’ register. As we talk now, there are lots of challenges to do with the voters’ register. We understand that there is registration going on –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague the Secretary-General of FDC for giving way for this information. I have carefully internalised the report of the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and they have ably captured your views on accreditation of political parties and organisations. I thought this was the right time to point out in good faith that this is one of your IPOD proposals that have been captured in the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee because it has been captured. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I thank the Attorney-General. It was really important that I give him the opportunity – we would have loved to know from the committee whether he was brought on board or not; you would have saved us all this. 

I was talking about the voters’ register update. As we talk now, the whole process seems to be in a mess; we were told that there was supposed to be continuous registration. And when you go to most of our districts, this exercise is not going on now. We again propose that in line with all these exercises - issues of display, issues of gazetting polling stations - we needed a six months’ period before the polling day. I notice that the committee seems to have proposed a shorter period – I think 30 days or something like that, which is not good enough! 

First of all, we do not know where the new polling stations are going to be. If you give a political party, especially those of us who are not in power and do not have the bulk of resources that the incumbent parties have available at their disposal to run around and do certain things that are not very orthodox, a short period we would find it very difficult to trace the location of this polling station, and assign party agents to them. 

So, I still believe that the proposal of six months is a worthy proposal and I hope that this House will uphold it when we come to committee stage.

Finally, we want to propose that the final voters’ register be availed to political parties at the cost of the government. First of all, it should be availed much earlier maybe in six months’ time to the next poll after it has been updated. But also we know that a photographic voter register is a very extensive thing, most political parties in this country cannot afford it except those who probably have methods of accepting other sources of money. 

So, without naming them, I hope that this is in the interest of free and fair play that as a political party, I get to know who is exactly on the voters’ register; who has been deleted and who has shifted where. I do not have to go to a polling station and say, “I find that half of the names in polling station X have been shifted: some are in Y, some are in Z”, last minute and then half of the population who should have voted in X find themselves unable to vote. 

If the political parties are given a voters’ register in time and they are able to peruse through it and they make the necessary adjustments and inform the Electoral Commission in time – those are some of the proposals that we have made to the committee and we are hoping that we will find this useful in refocusing on the fairness of our elections. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.04
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe we are generating consensus because what we are dealing with right now - there are two documents that we have. The Bill and the committee report and we are yet to receive the third, the proposals that were not put in the report. Therefore, I believe that we should not waste more time because I can see we are generating consensus and what is not here now will be brought in at the Committee Stage.
 
What hon. Alaso is talking about may not necessarily be here in the law but the Electoral Commission needs to be more organised because some of these mistakes are administrative. I believe those concerned should see to it that the Electoral Commission is more organised otherwise there are a lot of mistakes. You find someone is supposed to vote in place X, but he is 20 miles away. These are administrative.

My proposal is that maybe we give these people of the party time, they go and meet, have their ideas together then we proceed because I believe we are generating a consensus and I believe everything is done in good faith. There is no need to have suspicion because whatever you are proposing will be brought in. There is no cause for alarm.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the motion is that the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, just write those amendments and give Members copies so that tomorrow we conclude the other one we postponed. The amendment was there and tomorrow we can deal with the Committee Stage of the two. I think that is fair.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We undertake to get the IPOD proposals to all Members.

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow, maybe we shall start with winding up debate on the presidential Bill so that we have two committee stages for the two Bills.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Mr Speaker, it has been expressed here that some of the reports have not been available to some Members. I would pray that the reports are made available, particularly the Presidential Elections report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is okay, it is a fair request.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in view of what you have said, we may not proceed with the Committee Stage because of certain amendments that need to be circulated to Members. The Committee Stage will take place tomorrow in respect of this Bill.

Now another matter which has come up is about handling the budget process. You know with the budget process, we have to send our views to the President by 15th May but it seems proceedings of sessional committees have been interrupted by other meetings. So, I appeal to you that we do not hold other meetings other than the sessional committees so that each sessional committee can consider matters concerning its sectors until we finalise the report. That is clear.

I think then that with this we have come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned to commence tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. prompt and I appeal to the ministers who hold Cabinet meetings on Wednesday to be on time.

(The House rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 April 2010 at 2.30 p.m.)
