


Wednesday 21st April, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).


QUESTION FOR ORAL REPLY

MR. BWANIKA BBALE:  Mr. Chairman, it is question (4). 1993.  

MR. ATEKER EJALU:  Mr. Chairman, the question No. 4 is put, would imply that government has unduly delayed bringing this Bill to this House.  Yes, I would like to inform the House that the Child Law Review Committee was appointed on 21st June, 1990.  With a brief to examine the existing laws concerning Child Welfare, and in the context of international developments.  And then afterwards prepare appropriate legislation.  In order to understand the scope of the work that the committee was faced with, I would like to enumerate the law that the committee had to examine.  They are 10(ten) laws altogether.  First of all, there was the approved school Act, the Reformatory Schools Act Affiliation Act, Divorce Act, the Penal Code, the Probation Act, the Magistrate Court Act, the Adoption Act, Succession Act, and Resistance Committee Judicial Power Statute.  

On top of that, the Committee has also to look at International Conventions, in particular the United Nations Conventions on the rights of the child.  The O.A.U African Chatter on the rights of Welfare of the Child, and then the world declaration on the survival/Protection and development of the child.  As you can see, it was a hectic piece of work.  Some of these laws are very archaic and were brought to this country during the colonial days.  It is definitely a positive thing that it is the NRM, which is now overhauling it.  The committee completed its work and reported in March 1992.  Since then the Ministry has digested the report and made firm recommendations to government to consider before we bring it to this House.  The government is conscious of the need to have this matter completed expeditiously.  But it must be considered in depth at every stage.  Right now, the government is in a very advanced stage of consultation of this law to be brought to this House.  It is because government in its own wisdom saw that the laws needed overhauling, that it appointed a Child Law Review Committee.  Therefore, to imply that government has lost steam in this matter it is not right.  However in the meantime, the existing laws are under force and the children are not in danger.  And, will imply them with due regard.  

Lastly, government has also participated in the development of Uganda National Plan of Action for Children.  And very soon another Bill will be brought to this House to establish the National Council for Children.  Thank you very much.

SECTION 2 SUB-SECTION 2

MR. BWANIKA BBALE:  Mr. Chairman, question No. 3/1993.

MR. ATEKER EJALU:  Mr. Chairman, here again, the National Council for Voluntary Services has been in existence since 1953, 40 years behind us.  The Colonial Government and the Government following it never saw it fit to give it a Statutory home.  It is, therefore, with appreciation that, I say that it is the NRM, which has proposed for legislation.  Cabinet has cleared the proposal for legislation. This was to come here last year in August.  The Attorney General’s Chambers has informed me that this law is now being printed by the Government Printer.  It should be this House well presented.  Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE BANK OF UGANDA BILL, 1993

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the Bill, I think it is a little bit overdue it should have been here a long time about since NRM came in, it should have found it necessary to have brought this Bill.  Mr. Chairman, this Bill is intended among other things to stabilise the currency of this country.  We have seen that since 82 when we had two, first of all, devalued currency and then tale off the two zeros, a dollar was at 60/=, and it jumped up to 1,200/=.  Actually, that jump could not enable traders both important and exporters plan their business.  Of late, the bank has managed to control the exchange rate for about 1,200.  Now the importers and exporters can quote and can budget, you can predict that within the next six months a shilling will be so much to a dollar.  That is an achievement that I think the bank should be proud of, now we can plan.  But formally it was impossible.

Now, the other issue the Bank has the responsibility of controlling financial institutions. I am appealing to the Minister that this role should not remain in books, Ugandans have lost money because the bank has snot controlled these financial institutions.  To a layman, to a layman, a Ugandan once the bank gives a license to a person to run a bank, Uganda thinks that the bank, the government is actually checking on behalf of that customer to see that the bank does not run bankrupt with his little saving.  And I think it should be the responsibility of Bank of Uganda where it has license to a financial institution to run banking services and it runs bankrupt to re-imburse the poor savers.  Because most Ugandans are more than willing to save with banks.  We are more than willing to keep our money with financial institutions.  We had the case -(Interjection)

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that many countries, the solution to worry that the bank might go bankrupt is the formation of deposit insurance corporations, which the Central Banks may not form, but maybe formed from other sources.  And these hon. Member might have heard, very common in America and a similar corporation is helping in England after the demise of the DCCI.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Thank you very much.  I think hon. Mayengo will assist this country to start one since he is more experienced in that field -(Interruption)- and maybe his neighbour hon. Wanendeya those are experts. (Laughter)  On a very serious note, we had these financial houses like that one of the late Amagara-Gariho, Ugandans saved money.  We had the other one premium that he had gone, I understand is now operating in Mbuya.  Now Ugandans fail to differentiate between private companies and the Commercial Banks.  Now, I would appeal that once this Bank of Uganda takes over the role of controlling and issuing the licences for operating banking facilities, the moment Ugandans -(Interjection)

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, that part is coming in the Financial Institutions Bill, which is coming tomorrow.  

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, the question is not the law, but we understand we have these laws.  The Bank of Uganda has the obligation it does the supervision department, but we hear that they come in when it is a bit too late.  We heard of the unfortunate incident of about one month back, we do not know what is happening, they said, after 30 days the Minister would come out with the statement and the clients have been so patient waiting for a statement from the Minister.  Nothing has come out.  And now, it is very impossible to encourage farmers to save with such banks.  It is very difficult to ask Members -(Interjection)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, the inspection of banks by the banks provision Bank of Uganda is on routine bases and on a surprise kind of arrangement.  Therefore, the hon. Member holding the Floor should avoid misleading the House that they only come to the bank to inspect when there are problems.  They have a timetable a programme to inspect banks.  And this is a routine and they have always have got to carry it out.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Well, I am very grateful for the Deputy Minister that he has never been in the National Bank; he has been in Commercial Banks.  And maybe, he was visited -(Interjection)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member and addressing the House that what the Deputy Minister has said is satisfactorily true. (Laughter)

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, we are looking at an ideal situation what they are supposed to do. But then we have living cases, the examples when they have come in, its too late, a case in point, is the Teefe Bank.  You can shake the head but the farmers -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  I do not need it. (Laughter)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the issue of Teefe was not at all new to the bank supervision department, and in fact, even when the Minister made a statement, and when Bank of Uganda made a statement over this matter, they were clearly indicating that they had been following the performance of Teefe Bank until such a time as when they found that Teefe Bank was not meeting its obligation.  So the hon. Member I think should avoid continuing to mis-inform the House particularly when we consider that the matter we are debating is so crucial and important.  Otherwise, if we allow him to go on, what is likely to happen is going to stop our peasantry community that has been learning to bank to stop banking. (Applause)

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA:  Mr. Chairman, while I appreciate his view, but what I am appealing is that they should never come in when it’s too late.  Because we have the same of UgaDev, I do not know whether they were not aware, and maybe he can also tell us that they were aware and waited.  Why wait, why not save the poor savers of this nation?  Mr. Chairman, I leave that.

The other issue has been the role of the Bank of Uganda in clearance of these cheques as a clearing house. (Applause)  You will appreciate that formerly the bank was efficient that it would take a minimum of a day to clear a cheque.  Now, if you deposit a government cheque, you have to wait for seven days.

MR. KABUGO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member who is holding the Floor that, the volume of cheques that are cleared daily, has even tripled from the past.  And in this case, the computers are working and the people who are handling this are also competent.  But if it is an up-country cheque, we need to wait for the signatures; they have to make sure that the cheques that are being paid are not presented on forged signatures.  And I think as a Chairman of PAC, he would appreciate the delay and why there is such a thing.

MRS. MUGARURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to add to the hon. Members information that seven days is quite ideal for floods. Some floods have been traced from  bank to bank and back to Bank of Uganda.  One of the ways these floods can be detected and massive floods, is to give a cheque enough time for investigation.  

MRS. MASABA:  Point of information.  I wish to inform this House through you that we have a Bank of Uganda in Mbale District maybe to improve on efficiency that Bank of Uganda can handle some of the work handled at the headquarters.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May Inform the Member on the Floor that even these seven days are not even practical like for us in Soroti.  You get a government cheque you cannot be paid until three weeks or two.  So you can see even a government cheque cannot be honoured.  What else to come now?

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  No, I think we have received enough information. Mr. Chairman, I would request that those people can wait and debate it formerly instead of giving what.  The information I have received from hon. Kabugo that they need ample time because the volume has tripled, maybe he wants to inform this House that Bank of Uganda is not in position to show its responsibility. I remember even during bad times, a man could pick a cheque, could be word special clearance.  But as of today, even a bank draft you have to wait, there is no use of getting a bank draft.  Now that one discourages people to save, that is why people are holding on cash.  We should improve on the banking facilities so that people can deposit money and in position to get cash when they want.  Because actually it is because of this practice that even schools do not accept cheques from parents whereas they know that kids will not go away before the term is over.  People are lining up in U.C.B, they are lining everywhere.  If could improve on the banking facilities, schools should accept cheques because we have got a law in place that if you give a cheque and it bounces, we know how to get you, but now we have encouraged to have this cash economy.  We should save within the banking system.  Now I wish to turn to the Bill.  Under Section 3 of the Bill, sub-Section (iii) of Section 3 - the Minister has given out the characteristics of the bank and then under Section 6, he has repeated the same thing.  I think one should be deleted when we come to Committee Stage.  Section 3 sub-Section (iii) and the Section 6; one is the repetition of the other.  We look at who can be appointed a Director if he is a citizen of Uganda and if he has a recognised qualification in Economics, Financial, Business or Banking experience.  

Now, if I have business experience, regardless of whether I have any other qualification, I can be appointed a Director.  This is what it means.  I would think that the Minister looks at it very closely so that we have people who are qualified to do the job.  We look under Section 14 of this Bill.  He says, the Board may make by-laws to regulate conditions of service of its members and such by-laws shall be submitted to the Minister for approval, which approval shall be given in a period of not exceeding 30 days from date of submission of the proposed by-laws.  The question the hon. Minister has forgotten to tell this House is that what happens if the approval is not given?  Can he tell us that shall we follow Section 52 of this Bill?  That he would be convicted?  Because if he does not do it within 30 days, he will have contravened that Section and then he will have to answer under Section 52, sub-Section (a).  Is that so that we shall have a Minister being tried for having failed or is it possible that if he does not approve, the bank is free to implement without his approval?  I wish the Minister could advise this House.  Under Section 28, sub-Section (ii), sub-Section (iii), the Minister is saying that is the appointment of the Governor and Deputy Governor, that is the President so wishes, the Governor or Deputy Governor may be appointed from the Public Service.  I do not see why actually we need to legislate for that.  The President is free to appoint.  I do not see why he wanted it specifically under these laws that the President is free to appoint from Public Service.  Maybe, when he comes in, he will tell us why he thinks it is necessary to put it under this law.  Under Section 34, sub-Section (iii), the Minister told this House that the total advances made under sub-Section (i), should not at any time exceed 18 per cent.  In the same breathe, under Section 35, he says, ‘where in the opinion of the Bank, the limitation on the bank credited prescribed under sub-Section (iii) of Section 34 or holding securities is exceeded, the Bank shall make a report’.  

Now, I do not think that is the best we can have.  When you look under Section 50 of this law, sub-Section (i), the bank shall not later than three months after the end of each Financial Year present to the Minister a report and then a copy of the audited accounts.  You will recall that the Auditor General is independent, can do the work independently.  Once you legislate that a copy of audited accounts will be presented to the Minister within three months, you have to be aware that with auditing, you may not have audited accounts within those three months and the Auditor General should be left to be independent while auditing.  You cannot legislate, his powers are constitutional.  He cannot get a directive under this Section.  While as an Auditor, you cannot set a time limit for the Auditor General.  You can argue but if he has to audit, he has to be independent.  For those who have not audited can argue that you can, because when you are auditing, there are things you have to look for but you cannot be given a time limit.  Under the same copy, under sub-Section (ii), while we think that audited accounts will go to the Minister within three months, the Minister is proposing that he would be able to have tabled his report.  Now, we find that we will receive the report within three months and it will be within those three months when he has tabled his report.  I think there is a problem because a man may get the report -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that there is nothing wrong in putting a time limit in the legislation.  As a matter of fact, it does not have to be the Auditor General himself.  He can sub-construct the work to somebody and a few Government Organisations do it.  In any case, it does not mean that if the Legal requirement is for three months, it will make the Auditor General less independent.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, while I appreciate the information from an accountant like hon. Wanendeya, I wish to pose a question.  You have legislated that within three months, the Audited report should be here.  What happens if it is not here?  Are you going to arrest the Auditor General?  Are you going to sue him?  Then what is the purpose of legislating when you cannot implement what you are legislating?  Does it make sense?  Lastly, I have been looking at the Schedule under Section 4 of the Schedule, where it is proposed by the Minister that where there is a tie of the vote, the Chairman will have a casting vote.  We are looking at the Chairman of Bank of Uganda being the Governor involved in the day to day running of the business of the bank.  I think it is not prudent for him as a man in charge of the operations.  Now, being the Chairman of the Board, then having a casting vote where there has been a tie, I would advise that the motion is lost where the tie is because then you will find that the Governor being the man in charge of the operations would be biased because most of whatever will be presented will be his work and at the eleventh hour, he has a casting vote.  Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

MR. KASAJJA K.P (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to allow me to give you some ideas about this Bill.  Well, I do support the Bill because I believe that if there is anything to be rectified in our economy, I am supporting it and if this Bill is meant to improve the performances of Bank of Uganda, the I am supporting it strongly.  I would like to start by talking about the seven days cheques which my hon. Colleague talked about because I do not want to come in and interrupt this speech but what I have in mind is Bank of Uganda cheques are taking seven full working days and this is really a very big embarrassment to our economy.  I mean people cannot do business.  Seven days you put your cheque, you are told, and you wait for seven working days.  What is the use of waiting all these days?  We are not doing any production.

MR. ADAM HARUNA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that seven days is the normal routine work in clearing cheques.  For example, if you bank your cheque today, in your bank, that is one day.  The second day the bank combines all the cheques and sends to the bank where your money is to be paid.  Now, the third day is when the Central Bank clears these cheques.  Then the fourth day is when these cheques are returned to your Commercial Bank.  Then the fifth day is when these cheques are posted to your ledger accounts.  Then the sixth day is -(Interruption)- if any Member is complaining that these cheques delay, let him be specific because there are individual cases where you want your cheque to be cleared over a day and you have to incur expenses, you have to just travel within these banks, but the normal procedure is what I have said.  Thank you very much.

MR. KASAJJA:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for his views but what is actually done if we are to industrialise our country, we cannot rely on seven days.  That is an old method of doing things and we are now moving to the 21st Century, so I do not subscribe to that idea because what I am being reminded of is, I would like to ask the hon. Minister today that we should strengthen the - he should make sure that banks begin to computerise so that when they computerise these things will be done more easily, but as I talk now, Mr. Chairman, I am a Member on the Public Accounts regarding -(Interruption)

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform my hon. Member that in the old days when I was in Grindlays Bank, we used to clear and give freight within 48 hours.  So, if we could do t when we did not have computers, we did not have machines, we were using our heads, honestly, there is something wrong with the whole system that in the 20th or 21st century, we are increasing days instead of decreasing them.  I think it is gross inefficiency; it also encourages frauds because if you do not get freight within the shortest possible time, you are bound to get frauds.  Banks start paying against uncleared effects and the argument by the Directors of Bank of Uganda and so on and so forth does not really hold any water because you clear a cheque today, it is cleared through the banking system in Bank of Uganda in the afternoon, the next day it is in your bank, either you have funds or you do not have funds, the account is debited or the cheque is returned.  So we want Bank of Uganda to go back to the 48 hours clearing notice.  Thank you very much.

MR. KASAJJA:  I thank, Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member who has given me that information.  That is also solidifying my stand to inform the Minister that there has been something lacking regarding cheques.  I posed the same question when we met the management of Bank of Uganda.  I asked him why should cheques take seven days?  Then he could not give me satisfactory answer.  Now, of late, I happen to bank in Uganda Commercial Bank.  When I was paid after waiting for eight months, I took my cheque in a Uganda Commercial Bank Branch, I was told that you cannot get money until this cheque has stayed in the bank for seven full working days.  Then I got embarrassed.  I am a man who is supposed to go to my people and I mobilise them, I am supposed to do some production, I am not doing it because the cheque is being held up for seven days.  Surely, does this need someone to come and teach our people?  The Minister is there and things are going wrong and mind you, this recent measure by UCB has been introduced by the new Managing Director, the newly appointed Managing Director of Uganda Commercial Bank is the one who started this measure.  You can see how much Members get embarrassed.  A Member of Parliament to be embarrassed. (Laughter)  If this cheque was not of a Bank of Uganda, then at least, I would agree but a Bank of Uganda cheque -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Members that it is not Bank of Uganda that issues you as an hon. Member with a cheque.  Bank of Uganda is a Bank for Government, so the cheque is drawn on Bank of Uganda but the cheque is given to you by the Clerk of National Assembly, who draws this cheque from his vote.  So, when the cheque is issued to you by the Clerk and you present it to the Bank of Uganda, Bank of Uganda has to have this cheque audited back to Government system, whether it is a genuine payment from Government or from the Clerk to the National Assembly to you.  This auditing involved the Auditor General and so on to satisfy that the signatories are authorised signatories and so on.  We are dealing with public expenditure, whereas if you issue a personal cheque, in your personal Commercial Bank, within 12 hours, that cheque could be cleared because the procedures going through is of your private nature.  

So, the Bank of Uganda is the cheque - save Bank of Uganda because it is the Bank for Government, but really your drawing the funds from the vote of the Clerk of National Assembly and the auditing which takes place is to satisfy that the cheque is yours and that it was issued by the Clerk and, the Clerk when he issued it, he had money on his vote to honour that cheque.  Secondly, while the Bank of Uganda announces for public convenience the maximum period, it would take a clear normal cheque, is to avoid public being running up and down through the bank but it is not a law.  If a cheque is easily audited through, it could be credited on your account in two days but also if there is a problem with that cheque, it could take more than seven days if there are audit quarries.  

So, I beg that we should not debate as if there is a law about seven days when we come to a cheque whose headlines is Bank of Uganda.  Bank of Uganda is just a bank but the authorities, the owners of the accounts in the bank from whom the money is drawn are the Ministries, are the votes which we vote here and therefore there is need to audit, whether these payments are genuine, whether they are coming from the right votes but there is no law about seven days.  There is no specialty about seven days but for public convenience.  Bank of Uganda says, if we draw a government cheque and you are coming from Mubende or Hoima please be assured, if there is nothing wrong, seven days the money will be there.  You do not have to be in town every day waiting for it, but as we said, if the system operationally improves whereby auditing, pre-auditing takes place because of computers and so on and so forth and there is no over drawing of accounts, there are no manipulations, then as time goes on, it takes shorter.  But lastly, I must also advise, it is not true in Uganda, some of you have drawn cheques in even developed countries.  It is not true that you put a cheque on an Account today on the Branch in London and you walk across the road, in the afternoon and you draw the money on your account, even in London it is not correct.  So, I think let us not spend a lot of time on the seven days.

MR. KASAJJA:  Mr. Chairman, I am very happy with the Minister’s reply but I am not convinced because why I am not convinced I am one of the people who believe that there is too much inefficiency in the Government Ministries, in Parastatals.  So, you cannot convince me.  Seven days is too much and what I believe in at least 48 hours, and maybe I would also like to pause a question to the hon. Minister who has just replied, whether - what is the cause of these constant frauds if you say that you have placed in a lot of controls?  Why are there so many frauds going on and yet your controls are not working for seven days? (Laughter)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my Brother hon. Kabuubi that he could imagine, if we take a lot of care and still there are frauds, would he imagine what will happen if really we did not take any care? (Laughter)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  The Member holding the Floor said that the new Managing Director, Chairman, Uganda Commercial Bank, introduced a certain measure.  I am not very clear which this measure is.  If he clarifies it, I can help.

MR. KASAJJA:  Mr. Chairman, I was even shown a letter.  Even if you go to U.C.B. today, any U.C.B. Branch, Managers have been strictly instructed not to release any money any how and for example, now in this particular regard, for cheques, there is a letter which has come from the Chairman/Managing Director instructing all the Junior Officers, the Managers bellow, that they should not pay out money on cheques which are not seven days immature.  So that one is in writing, nobody should avoid it.  But in the past, although it was, but it was not being strictly observed as it is now.  Now, having talked about that point, let me go to another one.  This one I will talk about ‘Banking supervision’.  

There is a department in bank of Uganda called ‘banking supervision’.  This section has done a recommendable job.  But it has not done because -(laughter)- when you look at Teefe Bank problem has come about like that and we are not even informed.  Bank of Uganda at one time did not even - their accounts, they did not write accounts for five years, at one time and this is a Central Bank that is supposed to supervise other Commercial Banks.  How can you supervise others when your House is not in order?  So really I am to report that the new Governor - the present Management of Bank of Uganda, they have put in a lot of effort and their accounts are up-to-date.  

I would like also while I am contributing on this Bill, I like to thank the hon. Minister, the Mover of this Bill for during his term, at least, we have seen things.  The inflation has been controlled.  We can really see it.  This is reflected because the Bank interest has reduced.  So, at least, people can borrow and expect some little margin.  I am only disappointed that people are not paid, people who supply Government Ministries, since he is the Minister for Finance and he is the Mover of this Bill, I think it is in the interest of this nation that I bring this matter forward that people are not paid who supply Government.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. SEKITOLEKO SEBASTIANO (Bugangaizi County, Kibale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  May I also begin by thanking the Bank of Uganda for at least the improvement it has made in the economy of this country, especially from the beginning of this year.  After having said that, I wish to express the complaints mainly in the villages where UCB operated some branches but which have closed. Some branches belong to UCB have been closed and people are very, very much concerned because they had got used to these banks and many of them especially the businessmen find it now very difficult to operate their businesses because of those branches that were closed.

Another concern, is of course as expressed by some hon. Members, is that we should really take care about our people.  Today many citizens in this country are illiterate.  They are being a ride by some of these banking institutions, private institutions.  It is very important for the Bank of Uganda to identify immediately these institutions that are not working well, let them be Insurance or Banking Institutions.  Mr. Chairman, one Member was opposing that -(interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, through you, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that we will be discussing Financial Institutions and we do have a Bill with us and I would like to request the hon. Member not to labour so much on this that we stick to the Central Bank and then we can come back to the Financial Institution because it is the next thing on the Agenda.  Thank you.

MR. SEKITOLEKO:  Mr. Chairman, I do realise how much it pains the hon. Member to talk about the Insurance and the Banking Institutions which are running bankrupt probably as a shareholder.  But the thing we should really protect our citizens, we should protect our illiterate brothers -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Concentrate on the Bill.

MR. SEKITOLEKO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Having said that, may I also say that, there is a need with Bank of Uganda to see that they really assist some business people in this country about this supplier’s scheme and the suppliers credit.  A number of people in this country have negotiated with suppliers abroad for credits over two years or five years.  I think it is within our interest of this country that the Bank of Uganda considers in seriously his people who have managed to obtain credits abroad to pay over long periods of five years or ten to assist them to guarantee these undertakings so that probably our country could develop more especially in industries.  I know quite a number of businesses, entrepreneurs have put up certain proposals, have been given loans for industries for a period of five or ten years but their applications have been turned down by the Bank of Uganda.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now request Members to concentrate on the Clauses of the Bill.  If you are not going to talk about the Clauses of the Bill, then do not waste our time.

MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to make a few comments on the Bill and first that the Minister for bringing this Bill to the House as I think it is going to strengthen the role and the scope of work of the Central Bank.

I think the Bill is good because it gives some decree of independence to the Central Bank and that is what it should do. Although there is not a big relationship in Third World Countries about the independence of the Governors and the Management of the Bank as to the ability to perform but I think there are anomalies which were in the old act have been removed and I am very grateful to the Ministry and to the Institutions under his control for having done that.  However, I am only worried about Clause 49.  Clause 49 much as the Minister has tried to modify it, to give latitude to the Bank.  I am worried because when he does insist after the bank has refused his directives, when he insists to still go ahead, I do not know whether there will not be managerial conflict between the Governor then and the Minister, and then I do not know who will resolve those problems when they do happen.  Because I can imagine the situation where the Governor in his right professional advice, says, ‘do not print more money’.  Just for the sake of argument.  Say, the Minister goes to the Governor of the Central Bank and says, ‘Mr. Governor, I want more cash for crop-finance as it has been done in the past’ and the Governor turns round and says, ‘Mr. Minister, I cannot do it’.  Then the Minister goes ahead, because he has done the relative consultation, he says, ‘I still want this money’ and in 15 days, he brings the money and brings the thing to the Table as is provided for.  Then what ground will the Governor have in that institution when that area of conflict happens?  I would just like the Minister to enlighten us as to what will happen, how he thinks he will resolve the issue and whether the Governor will have the force to go back and still work with him because he will have conflicted with the appointing authority.  That is point number one.  

I have also a problem with Article ten (10).  One, we are now going open.  You can imagine the hon. Minister having shares in Teefe Bank, for example, and now that he is not - let us assume that something happens and he decides not to be in Government and he is retired and with his experience, I thought that would be the man who would go on the Board of Governors.  But provision in Article 10 sub-section (i), Section (b) states that, ‘a whole day in a financial institution supervised by the bank cannot be a Director of the Bank’.  I was saying where are we now going to get these people with knowledge in financial matters sit on the Board of that Bank?  You can imagine even the present Government of the Bank, we know by ownership, immediately we pass this one, he will have get out or sell his shares or something will happen because we know he is a co-owner of Nile Bank, and anomalies the hon. Kafumbe Mukasa, I think as a good citizen of this region might be having two shares in Teefe. (Laughter

I am bringing this because these are modified and I was going to provide an amendment but since I had not, I did not know the Bill was coming immediately.  I have not discussed it with the Minister, but I wanted to provide an amendment to allow - to remove this one and provide for disqualification when matters of Teefe Bank have been discussed and the hon. Minister is a Director because I think since we have limited numbers of people in this -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, in some parts of the world, if you are a Director of a Bank and you are appointed to a Central Federal Reserve Bank, then you resign your Directorship but, you take up that appointment rather than refusing it as provided in the Bill by the Minister.  Thank you. 

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, the information much as it is helpful, is not really what I am talking about. I am talking about share ownership not Directors.  But still I am grateful for the normal information from hon. Wanendeya. (Laughter)  The other issue I would like to address is the issue of Bank Supervision.  The bank is now taking on a wider scope.  I am hoping they are going to take all the financial institutions under their control including the famous building societies, and the credit Houses.  I do not know whether hon. Kiyonga is here, that have sprang up in Kasese.  This lending things that has been springing up - now I do not know, because even after restructuring, I have been to the Bank and I have talked to some of the officials.  I do not know the capability of the supervising wing of the Bank of Uganda whether is can actually supervise these financial institutions as the economy improves and as we grow.  These are going to be very many of them, and we are going to have a problem of the Bank itself not being able to carry scope - the role we are giving it under this Act.  

So, I would like some assurance from the Minister about the future role of the Bank and the scope and especially supervising department of the Central Bank in its ability to supervise these financial institutions that are springing up in this country.  This is the issue of protection and regulatory authorities within the Bank that I do not see spelt out.  The first one is, the one to protect depositors when the situation arises when the bank fails.  In normal cases there are institutions in place unless we are going to have another Act coming establishing an insurance scheme to protect the small savers of money say, one million shillings and less so that when there is a collapse of a financial institution, we know where to run to.  That one is not provided for.  I am requesting the Minister to look into that and go ahead and provide for that because if we are going to encourage savings and we are going to encourage small investors, savers of this nature, they need that guarantee, that should then anything happen and the bank supervisor discovers that a bank is going to fail, they have somewhere where to resort to for protection.

The other part - I am pleased that the Bank has agreed to go into full fledged part of development financing - I am very happy and I hope tire up when debate issues related to privatisation and sale of assets that we are going to sell, the parastatals that we are having.  But what I would want the bank against in this practice - allow me -I am talking about Article 36 on page 22.  What I would like to warn the bank about is to do what they did sometime ago of playing the role of Commercial Banking as when they went into crop-financing and look at it as a development role.  Please, Mr. Minister, warn the bank since you still have these powers to do so, warn the bank that development financing which is under Article 36 should not be used to go into Commercial Banking of the crop-financing type that we had before.  Because I can see a temptation of such a thing happening and I did consult you sometime ago when we had a crisis here, when we discovered that the Central Bank had loaned a Commercial person to do business.  I do not know how that arises if you, and I can be allowed to do that, then the role and scope of the Central Bank will have been diluted far too much.  
I am requesting the Minister to see that when such a thing happens, when this Bill is passed, at least, the Bank is warned against involving itself in the activities of that nature.

Let me come to regulations which are going to be made after consultation.  I am a bit worried about Clause 53.  While I accept the modification now given by the Minister, I am still worried because the Minister in most cases is the appointing authority of the Board.  He appoints the Board and I do not know what type of consultations he will be having.  I was thinking that - I do not know how one would formulate it, but I do not know whether the Board could be running in conflict with the Minister himself.  Would it?  I do not see that possibility.  The provision there I am not quite sure of and after these regulations have been done, what happens?  Are they going to be presented back to us or they are looked at as operation rules which do not need to be discussed at a future state.  

In conclusion, as I said, I support this Bill.  I think it will help the bank to play the role it should play.  It will give it the independence that it requires and there is empirical evidence to support that when the Central Bank is in charge of monetary policy, as we are trying to do, it definitely does control the inflation and it controls the Government to have the will to do what it should not do.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to thank the hon. Minister for Finance for presenting this Bill that I think is very well written and coordinated.  Also I want to thank the Minister for not having brought pieces of the 1966 Act to be amended, but has overhauled the whole system and brought it into focus to be able to centralise the Central Bank authority in order for the monetary policy to be effective. I wish to make some few observations.  One is that the Central Bank insists on ensuring that when you start a new bank, you tell them the three top executives, especially the Managing Director, the Credit Manager and the General Manager.  But after that, they do not follow up to ensure that in the subsequent changes of management they participate in that decision making, and I think it is crucial especially in the developing system that the Central Bank should participate in ensuring that the top executives of the Commercial Banks are also vetted by the Central Bank.  

Otherwise, we shall have situations where Commercial Banks when they have changed their leadership may create problems and these problems counterplot on the savings function of the society.  I wish also to request that the Central Bank now that it is going to be more strengthened to address the foreign exchange loss.  This is a crucial element, although it may not be as big when there is no inflation.  But when there are normally inflationary pressures, the foreign exchange losses create a problem.  Now that it is going to be the Chief Advisor on monetary policy, the Central Bank should advise on how exchange loss should be treated, especially when it comes to taxation.  Because if they do not, then it creates a crisis to the businesses that actually have exchange losses.  I see that the share capital is being moved to 30 billion.  But what were the scientific bases of 30 billion?  Why could it not have been a little bit bigger?  Since in Section 16 we are told that the paid up capital shall be 20 billion and then the Bank will keep paying slowly and yet keep strengthening its base.  Because the share capital base gives the strength of the institution.  I wish to echo other hon. Members on the question of usage of cheques.  Whereas we have heard of the seven days clearance problem, but I want to state that actually cheques are cleared the same day from the Commercial Banks.  I think the issue of Central Bank encouraging the usage of cheques in the system should be crystallised.  Although I know there is a law that if you bounce a cheque, you are arrested.  But they way we passed it here did not ensure that when you bounce a cheque, you are at the losing end.  Because you have some time to go to court and things can delay and the payee will lose.  

However, in one of the other countries have managed to ensure that cheques are used, if you bounce a cheque, you are immediately arrested until the cheque is made good.  Although that may not be in the rim of the Minister for Finance and it may be in the Attorney General’s rim, but I think the bank should advise that when you bounce a cheque and the reason is that if it is not clear or that actually you had no funds, then immediately steps should be taken to ensure that unless the cheque is paid, you actually answer for it immediately.  Because there is enough evidence that you are trying to steal.

MR BARIGYE:  Mr. Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that in these days of structural adjustment, not only for the country, but for every Ugandan and when everybody is tightening his belt or her belt, it is quite common for people to bounce cheques even if they are not of criminal intent.  To me, I think the law we passed was very punitive.  Furthermore, if the authorities did what the hon. Member is suggesting, namely that a person who bounces a cheque should be immediately put in prison until the money is paid back, it will be very difficult for the individuals concerned to find the money while they are in prison.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I hope that the hon. Member is not really covertly encouraging crossed cheques, because if he does, he is really undermining the economy.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, I thank hon. Barigye for that information, but you can see the problem.  Because if you pay me a cheque, I take it as good as money and if it bounces, you actually bounce my activities.  In other words, you are creating a question on my end when you have a problem.  If you do not have the money, do not write the cheque so that you make an instrument that is respected and acceptable.  Do not write the cheque after re-scheduling of your debt so that you write the cheque at a later date.  In fact, in the U.S. if you bounce a cheque, not only are you required to make it good, but even you who have bounced the cheque and a person who has had the cheque bounce pay an interest on the bounced amount and that makes it very serious.  The one who has bounced a cheque pays an interest besides paying the money and that makes him think twice before he can bounce a cheque.

In Section 4, we have the word ‘Secretary’.  Maybe the Minister for Finance will explain to us.  There was a recent re-organisation in the Central Bank and all the Heads of Departments including the Secretary are now called Directors.  So, how will this one conflict in the Executive Director/ Administration who handles secretarial services.  Maybe the word ‘Secretary’ will mean whoever does that work.  But I wish it could be streamlined in such a way that the new arrangement is also put into account.  Section 17(c) at the end of each financial year of the bank and after, making provision for bad and doubtful debts.  I am worried about the Central Bank making provision for bad and doubtful debts.  Who are these the Central Bank is lending who are not so good as to be bad and doubtful debtors?  If it is the Central Government, certainly, it cannot be a bad debtor.  Because somehow, somewhere, it will be paying.  But if we are going to allow bad and doubtful debts, it means you are giving it a way to lend to commercial operators and that can create a crisis in such a situation.  I hope we shall get explanation as to why we should have bad and doubtful debts. I have already given notice that I will move some Amendments and these Amendments are in Article 5(2) -(Interruption)

MR. SIBO:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that in fact among the possible institutions whose debts might be doubtful would be banks and financial institutions of whom the bank is a banker.  An institution like Teefe Bank may have had bad debts with the Central Bank in which case the Central Bank will have written or will have to provide for these bad debts.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  I thank the hon. Member for that information.  But institutions of that nature should borrow against secured loans such that when they fail to pay, they are able to liquidate in some way.  I will move an Amendment on Article 5, but I want to explain that in Article 5(2)(k), I thank the Minister for having realised that a Central Bank should participate in the economic development and growth of the country.  But I would want him to remove the words ‘where appropriate’.  It should be the duty of the Central Bank to ensure that there is growth and development and should participate in all these programmes without necessarily saying ‘where appropriate’.  If we come to Article 10, which hon. Kanyomozi touched on, I think it is a contradiction to say that you want directors who have qualifications in economic, financial business and banking experience and say that these people should never have a share in any banking institution.  They do not have to be directors, but to have shares should not stop somebody from being a Director, if he declares that he has got shares in bank X and that, therefore, the activities of that bank, when they come up as a Director, he will have shown his conflict of interest.

Finally, in Article 32 (2), while we appreciate that the President is the Head of State and he is the one concerned about the whole economy, nevertheless for the purposes of this banking and whole Act, he is referring to the Minister.  I think it will be a bit too much for the Governor when he comes to report in Section 32 (2) ‘the bank will advise the President whenever the target on reserves is likely to be violated for any reason and suggest remedial measures’.  Unless the bank is reporting on the Minister that the Minister is he one violating these reserve holdings, otherwise, the bank should report to the Minister and then the Minister will report to Cabinet and President and advise them accordingly.  Otherwise, I think this is a good Bill who should be supported and we hope that the Central Bank will do its rightful duty in the economic development on this country.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. N.J. ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also rise to support the Bill.  I would like to start straight from Schedule 5, the functions of the bank.  In the past, it has been very abnormal because even the Bank of Uganda did not keep their records up-to-date.  I remember being a member of the Public Accounts Committee, and the Bank of Uganda had problems with Ministries.  There were no bank reconciliation statements in time.  I hope by now those things have been put right.  This is a very serious affair.  A Central Bank must show good example of book-keeping and record keeping.  On Clause 6, about the powers of the Bank, this is a very serious matter.  In the past we were made to know that in case of crisis, for example, if the Government is overthrown, I was made to know that during Amin’s time he went away with dollars from the bank.  If it was true, what protection shall we have so that the power of the bank is not tampered by Government of the day?  Because even in Obote II, I was told that he went away with dollars.  If it is true, what protection can the Minister tell us that he has in place so that nobody will play with the Central Bank, which is our own bank?  This is a very serious matter, because even if you compare it with Section 39 where a Minister has powers, we wanted the Bank to have its independence, if it is going to be a bank that has its rights to control the funds.  Besides that one also, the audit of the bank has even been a problem.  I do not know whether by today the Bank of Uganda is being audited by our Auditor General.  If no, time has come for us to make sure that the audited accounts are properly done by even the indigenous auditors of Uganda.  If the bank is not audited and the accounts are not put in place, we cannot make sure so that the bank is operating properly.  Because with the audited accounts, there has been a big problem in all Commercial Banks.  That is why in some areas the Commercial Banks have not been making profits.  

So, I think a lot should be done to make sure that the audited accounts of the Central Bank are more up-to-date than even the Commercial Banks themselves.  Because it is one of the best examples we should have in accounting procedures. The head office of the bank, as mentioned in Clause 6(7), I am also surprised to hear that there is a branch in Mbale.  I never knew of this. (Laughter)  It is true.  I may say it is true, because in our area we have very hardly any bank facility at all apart from Soroti.  (Interjection)- Members should allow me to express my views.  We should all enjoy the facilities of the Central Bank.  For example, what relationship has the Central Bank with the ordinary farmer in the village, apart from being in the North?  So, Mr. Chairman, we need a bank of this nature to be closer.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, the Central Bank does not have to have branches of the nature the Member is talking about.  The current centres, which are distributed around, are to enable the Central Bank to play its role and it does not mean that when the branch or the currency centre is in that area that it brings it nearer to the peasants.  The peasants are closer to their Commercial Banks where they deposit their money and not with the Central Bank.

MR. ELYAU: Although I thank my brother hon. Kanyomozi, even the Commercial Banks are far away from some of us.  He should know this. (Laughter) We have been crying that at least, they should be brought near us.  Up to now, I want the Minister to make sure that we also have a bank in our place like Kaberamaido, there is no bank.  People have to walk 46 miles to look for a bank.  This is a very serious affair.  If the Uganda Commercial Bank is closing some branches is some areas, why not open in our areas?  This is a very serious matter.     

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the Minister for Finance in a liberalised economy cannot distribute banks.  What can only happen is that the people of the area must try to see whether they can have banks and I want to say that realising that problem, the people of Kabale and Rukungiri and so on started Kigezi Bank of Commerce specifically to meet that king of demand.  Because you cannot ask the Minister for Finance to distribute Commercial Banking.

MR. ELYAU:  Yes, but he has to make facilities available, Mr. Chairman.  Again, Mr. Chairman, in that Section 5, where it is said issue of notes and coins, I am wondering, can the Minister tell us, are these coins really useful?  Because I have not seen a coin now buying anything in Uganda.  Maybe I want to be educated.  These coins are really a problem, and even the five shilling note has no weight now, even ten shillings note.  I do not know whether we shall continue printing this kind of notes.  I do not know whether the community will pick to this realisation.  I do not know whether it is true.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House that, whatever the economy, developed, advanced, primitive or developing, there is always a case for a need for smaller changes, such as one shilling, five shillings or whatever it may be.  But because of the growth and flourishing of the economy, it impedes the utilisation of this currency and coins.

MR. ELYAU:  Mr. Chairman, let me go ahead.  Mine is again on the appropriate and participation of economy growth and development.  Some of us in our areas find it very difficult to get development as we talk it.  Say, for example, traders in those ravaged areas have no capacity to buy goods and without traders in an area, you cannot talk about development.  I do not know whether the Central Bank has any funds available so that places like ours can also be given an opportunity to assist those poor traders to do something for the area.  Because it is very difficult for these Commercial Banks to give these traders any chance.  I do not know whether there is any room anywhere in the Central Bank that such traders can be assisted to support their business so that in the end, they help the wanainchi.  I want the Minister to look into this matter. Otherwise this Central Bank will remain useful to the people who are well to do.  But otherwise, the poor elders and those traders, I fear it is terrible.

Lastly, let me hope that the use of the Bank Secretary, normally I used to find out that in a bank there is a Secretary for agricultural Business.  I do not know whether by removing away the fixing of the price, that branch has refused or stopped assisting the farmers.  Because that was a branch which would assist to formulate the cotton prices, coffee prices, etc. in the past.  Now that the price has remained adamant in this country, is that branch still working or is it now not useful so that farmers should be given to note.  With those few comments, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.

MR. WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this Bill.  Because the Bill is the basis of any country’s economy and without this Bill being put in place in proper manner, the economy of Uganda can never be in the right position. I would like to state that if we are going to develop the Bank of Uganda to be a bankers’ bank, we must have the right people to work in that bank.  Without having the right people to work in that bank, the economy of our country will never be put in the right footsteps. Before I go into detail, I would like to say that our shilling has been depreciating at a fast rate, and possibly because it is called a shilling, it may be high time to call it talkies. The reason why I say talkies is because most people in Uganda like to eat matooke and the word shilling may not have an indigenous meaning.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Turn to the Clause.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, I would have loved this Bill, as I have always been saying in the past, the time we are going to debate this Bill may not be enough because of the technicalities.  The reason why I say this is, in all society is that we should have session committees, with all due respect these would go into details of the Bill, if you want any Bill before this House to be what it is, I stand to support the Bill and I would like to say that, there must be an amendments which will come up at a later stage when we are going on with this Bill so that can put the right things in the right place.  What I am thinking of, is that sometime in 1987/88, you would open a Letter of Credit with a Commercial Bank, but that Letter of Credit when it goes to the bank, it used to be delayed by Equator Bank, and I remember a person like his Letter of Credit was delayed by more than six months, those are the sort of things which a banker’s Bank must try to avoid and indeed, if the Board is put in place, there must be the right people to be on the Board. Section 36 touches on Development Finance, the Central Bank or Bank of Uganda must desist at any rate to go into Development Finance of the type, which was used in 1988 to carry shillings and taking it to the country side.  As a result, Shs. 5 million has never been accounted up to now and I think this august House is titled to know what happened to this Shs. 5 billion.  I would now turn to the interest rates, if the Bank of Uganda wants our country to be developed then the interest rates must be fair, so that we can develop rather than being under pressure from the World Bank, from IMF because we have got to devalue.  We must try at any rate to desist those kind of orders, because they are counter development, in the sense that if the interest rates are very high, you find that it encourages the Dubai type of business rather than investing in capital forming goods.  These also for the devaluations, if we go under pressure to talk of devaluation without really good reasons, but just for the sake of it literally, I am afraid that this country will again turn into what I would call getting foreigners to enjoy better, because with dollar 1, dollar 5, you can live like a King in Uganda, whereas in some other countries, you cannot quite adequately use dollar 5 to get any reasonable services.  I will go to bureau de changes.  Bureau De Changes, Mr. Chairman -(Interjection)- no, they are not in the Section, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please wind up, wind up now.  If you are not going to follow the Section.

MR. WANENDEYA:  As I said before, Mr. Chairman, I will get details of Sections which should be amended and therefore, I will bring my amendments here, but since the Bank of Uganda is the Central Bank, you find that bureau  -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, proceed according to the Sections so that we do not waste time.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, well, I had the Sections for which I had written.  In Section 20, but what I am saying is that some of these things unless we discuss them if they had come in the Bill, it would have been covered.  The whole point is that, if we allow foreigners to be involved in foreign exchange, we will never, with all society, we will never get to go very far because this will be used for siphoning money out of this country.  Mr. Chairman, you will find that even when it comes to bank supervision -(Interruption)

MR. RUKIKAIRE:  Point of information.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, Clause 20 of the Bill, specifically talks of Bureau de changes.  It is buying and selling, and therefore, it is connected with exchange rates. But the point I am trying to make is that Bureau de Change have been of what I would call buying and selling of currency has attracted a number of foreigners with a result that instead of adding more to capital formation, we are, I am afraid that at the end of the day, it will not be the gain to the advantage of this country.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to join my Friends, Colleagues who have thanked the Minister for having brought this Bill and add that, I think this Bill, in fact, is over due.  I would like to subscribe to the practise of the Central Bank remaining practically as independent as possible and therefore, I would like to express that the Minister should not engage himself when we have passed this Bill into too much intervention.  When you look through this Bill -(Interjection)- I would like to be permitted to proceed, when you look at this Bill, you will find a couple of sections where the Minister has been consulted, has to give approval, has to be and so on, and these Sections you can look at Section 8, I have just picked a few, Section 8, 13, 14, 17, 19, 23, 28, 34, 40, 45, 49, 50, 51, 53; I think the Sections I have missed are much few than these ones I have read.  So, I would like, therefore, to suggest that the spirit of the Bill should be carefully carried through when we have passed this Bill, even in those areas where the Minister has been allowed to intervene.  

I would like to also appeal to the Minister to avoid using these Sections in order to find it in public interest all the time, to cause inflation by going to the Central Bank to borrow unnecessarily.  Hon. Wanendeya has just said Shs. 5 billion, I had the opportunity to indicate to the Central Bank and to the Minister concerned with an essential commodities, because cash was essential commodity 1988, to desist from using the Central Bank as a Commercial Bank.  The effect of using Central Bank as a Commercial Bank resulted clearly in the loss of Shs. 5 billion, I think the Minister should tell this House when he is replaying, what steps he has taken to ensure that the Bank has that money recovered.  I understand that quite a number of people helped themselves to this money.  I would also like to subscribe to the issue of depositors funds being somehow guaranteed by some kind of insurance coverage, because I was one in 1989, I had quite a number of people in Ruhama County losing lots of money by the time, I wrote to the Minister of Housing who was hon. Ssebaana Kizito and one of my people in my constituency lost Shs. 400,000/- which he had genuinely put in the bank, believing that he was going to be assisted with development funding, I brought this up t the attention and he suggested in return that we should go to the courts.  

So, I think the community in the rural areas believes that once a Government has guaranteed permission to an institution like a bank, in fact, they enhance development without the Central Bank?  The final authority in money matters being directly involved, I think the Central Bank and I think the Ministry of Finance should stop being responsive, they should go out and be pro-active, you get what I mean.  The Minister of Finance, the Central Bank must be pro-active rather than responsive, in other words, they must not sit in their chairs waiting, they must go shopping for development, so that this country can have development and enhanced with the statute of the Central Bank.  I will only now talk about the role probably or the secretary that has just been mentioned, I think that, there may be a need, I do not know why the secretary appears in one section and disappears completely.  Does the Board not have a Secretary?  Does the Board not need to have a Secretary because this is a statutory position.  I know that under Section 28, there is a provision for the appointment of all these other officers who have been mentioned in Section 4, but that one is silent there!  So, do we not have a role of a statutory rather than just an Executive Director?  I think, Mr. Minister, you will also help me on that one.  With those few remarks, I would like to support strongly this Bill.  I thank you.

MR. KARUSOKE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I support the Bill and in supporting it I would like first of all to thank the hon. Minister for doing the best he could to bring the inflation to what it is now.  This is very clearly manifested in a number of things, one of them is the reduction of fuel prices which was for the first time in the history of this country and apart from that, the reduction in inflation, is also continued manifested in the interest rate in the Commercial Bank and I wish the Minister continued in this way.  I however, would like to echo the voices of my Colleagues who have previously spoken, especially the voice of hon. Rwakakooko, that in our effort to control inflation, we must do one thing, either we make sure we do not get the services we require so that we do not spend or we make sure when we get services, we already have money to pay for them, but it is counter production, for Government to get services and later on fail to pay for them or deliberately refuse to pay for them in the effort to control inflation.  I remember at one time, His Excellency the President -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my Friend holding the Floor and my other Colleagues that it is not true that Government is not paying people so that it can have a record where inflation is controlled, that inflation is being created, it is not so.  The Government inherited an accumulated local debt of a period that we have explained that it was mainly due to poor management of budgets within Ministries.  That Ministries were consuming goods and services beyond the budget provisions of these Ministries, and as a result over time, a big local debt was accumulated problem and this Financial Year, Government has paid up to the tune of Shs. 21 billion on old debts. But as you will appreciate, Government can only do this now from its won cash therefore, as a result, it cannot pay all the accumulated debt in one financial Year, but in this same Financial Year, we have paid up to Shs. 21 billion towards local suppliers, but who have been accumulated over a period of many years.  But we can also only do this from only our cash collections.  So, the programme is in place in he next Financial Year to finish the accumulated local debt.  

So, it is not true to argue that we are achieving a successful fight against inflation by deliberately not paying for our services and goods, otherwise, there would be no record of growth at all.  I just want this to be made clear because it sounds as if we are making a trick to say inflation is coming down by deliberately refusing to pay and as all of you know, promissory notes have been issued to the tune of another about Shs. 15 billion on top of the cash.  But as Members from Economic Committee discovered in Public Accounts Committee, people in the Ministries we are living beyond budget approvals and I am glad that the Public Accounts Committee has recommended some disciplinary action to be taken on some Accounting Officers.  So, I think these two should be separated so that it is not a deliberate effort to say that to fight inflation, do not pay your debts, but I know there is a problem which Government has gone along way to solve.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House, what the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance has just stated to us, takes the House as the House does not consist of the economics and businessmen.  The accumulated effect of the inability and instability of the economy arose from the striking of the two notes of the outcome of this evil which you people have not corrected, yes, it is the fact, it is an economic fact you cannot run from it.  So, it is in this respect, if production - I hope the Minister, the Mover understands that if production had risen, yes, you would have redeemed your position.

MR. KARUSOKE:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Deputy Minister for the information.  I however, wonder whether or not in the effort by government to clear the outstanding debts, it is not accumulating more debts and therefore the thing is becoming recurrent.  I would be interested to know if government in the effort to clear the accumulated debts is keeping upto date with the current debts because that is the only way we could -(Interruption)
             
THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa):  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, this is driving a very important point which I think needs to be addressed to avoid the future problems.  We are trying to do exactly that and government has warned all government suppliers, please to secure a local Letter of Credit for goods supplied to Ministries which means that a Ministry which cannot establish for you a local Letter of Credit, that Ministry has no votes or has no money on the vote to support the goods they are demanding for you to supply.  And we are appealing to the public, please, let them not go into debt with government departments because a number of these departments have been operating outside the approved budget and the only way we are fighting them is to ensure that Bank of Uganda will issue a Local Letter of Credit for goods to be supplied to Ministries which cannot be done if that Ministry does not have money in the budget.  I appeal to you to tell the people you represent to help us in the fight not to incur more debts outside our means.  I thank you.

MR. KARUSOKE:  Mr. Chairman, I also thank the Deputy Minister for bringing up this Bill.  I think the purposes and objectives of this Bill are very clearly stated with preamble.  I hope after passing this Bill, the Bank will have a face lift but in our effort to face lift, the bank itself also must work hard to make sure it face lifts itself.  One Member has already mentioned something about the accounts of the bank lagging behind are not being roughed up to date and this is the Central Bank that is supposed to supervise all other banks.  One wonders how it does so when its own accounts are not kept up to date.  I hope when this Bank is given more autonomy and more independence, it is not going to abuse this independence by behaving on contrary to what is expected of it.  Secondly, I was reading in the newspapers last week and I was wondering where Bank of Uganda was not in position to know how much debt both internal and external this country owes other countries and other institutions and they had, the Bank of Uganda had to employ a foreign firm to be able to find out this.  I hope in future the bank is going to be a lot more serious than this.  I would not like to be a party to patronising the Bank of Uganda to misbehave at the expense of a taxpayer.  While I support the Bill and while I support the spirit in which the Bill is brought, namely that the bank must be autonomous, must operate freely without any external interference and undue interference, at the same time, I feel very strongly that the bank still has a lot of way to go to be worthy its name.

In the past regimes sin this country have tendered to misuse the bank by usurping its powers, by grabbing money left and right from the bank, mainly the hard currency and by giving unnecessary directives to the bank.  I remember at one time, there was a government that directed the bank to produce so much money within 24 hours, even if the money was not there, it had to produce the money.  This is the type of undue interference that we are trying to eliminate and I hope the authorities will make sure that this kind of thing does not come in again to protect the bank from this type of frustrations.  The Bill should have clearly spelt out the actions to be taken by the bank - in fact, situations.  In case the bank is pressurised unduly to do something against the principles for which it serves which stands.  What should the bank do?  There is no provision for that.  I hope the Minister will think about that.

Coming to the Bill Section -(Interruption)- you will realise that I got a lot of information and that was an interference.  Section 8(7) and (8) should be vice versa.  For example, where the offices of Governor and Deputy Governor fall vacant, it should be Government to designate one of the executive officers to perform the executive functions of the Deputy Governor instead of the Board and where the Governor and Deputy Governor are absent, then it should be the Minister in consultation with the Board to designate a Senior Officer, not an executive officer, to designate a Senior Officer to perform the duties of the Deputy Governor for the period there is absence.  I hope the Minister will look at this more closely.  

Section 11(a) says, ‘the bank shall be responsible for the general management of affairs of the bank’.  Experience has shown that whenever a Board engages in management affairs of any organisation, a number of negative developments do crop up.  There is always friction, there is always overloading of activities and performances and there is always unsettled disputes and wrangles because everybody wants power and everybody wants to do things.  It will be very difficult for the bank to clear and demarcate boundaries of operation between management on one side and the Board on the other.  The Board, Mr. chairman, should be responsible for the general policies but not general management affairs.

Section 15(5) is in conflict with Section 15(1) and (2), these two are in conflict because Section 15(5) says, the capital of the bank should be increased from time to time to ensure it is adequate in relation to the operations of the bank and yet sub-Sections (1) and (2) of the same Section, one says, the authorised capital of the bank shall be Shs. 30 billion which shall be subscribed by the government from time to time, Shs. 30 billion.  While the other one says, the capital of the bank shall be increased from time to time.  There is a point of conflict there.  And Section 15(2) says, the authorised capital may be increased by a resolution of the legislature.  That is very, very important.  If the bank wants to increase the authorised capital it has to seek the authority of this legislature from time to time to ensure the adequate - it is adequate in relation to the operation of the bank.  

I very much like Section 17(4) because it will create and maintain discipline by government now and in future.  Before we started operating a cash budget we used to reap where we never sowed, any excess of money we spent in this manner may not have been recovered up to now.  The bank may still be owed a lot money by Government, so it is very important that the bank deducts money from Consolidated Fund straight away and pays itself without having to consult anybody because we owe it this money and that is what Section 17 says, and I am in a total agreement with it.  I like it very much.  In the past, the government was always the main obstacle in the operations of the bank.  Governments in the past used to be the main obstacles in the operations of the bank and therefore, when we detach government from the normal operations of the bank, we are giving the bank more ability to perform better.  It is superfluous to a portrait of anybody on our money because there is no leader in Uganda who is permanent like in Britain where we have monarch all the time.  Since our leaders come and go and they are temporary, it is not necessary to have a portrait on our money and therefore, I support this Section.  It says, we shall never have any portrait of anybody, not even a symbol of anybody, we shall never have even any political symbol.  None owns this country and therefore, there should be no one to belong to more than others.

Section 23 to 25 cover notes and coins but I am interested to know whether these coins will not outlive their usefulness and therefore, they should get out of our vocabulary.  I am interested to know, Mr. Chairman.  

Finally, financial institutions which mismanage people’s deposit and savings must not be left free to sort out their problems with individual depositors where a financial institution mismanages the deposits of people, then it should be a matter between the Central bank and that particular institution, not the particular individual with that institution.  It should be the Central Bank to sort it out with the other bank or the other institution, so that the individual does not lose because the experience is that, whenever these institutions misbehave and mismanage, the individuals lose and they keep quiet and they have nothing to do and nowhere to go.  That is why I am seeking the indulgence of the Central Bank to save the common man from losing little saves he has made with any institution.  I support the Bill, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you very much.

MR. ODONGO:  Mr. Chairman this Bill seeks to strengthen the Bank of Uganda powers no monetary policy.  This is just a fulfillment of the statement which was made by the Minister of Finance when he was reading the Budget Speech in July last year.  I want to congratulate him for that.  This, therefore, means that the Bank of Uganda will be a monetary soil. That means the Bank of Uganda will formulate and implement monetary policy.  That is, it can effect positive interest rates.  It is to ensure stable currency in circulation.  The Bank of Uganda also should - now that it has been given the autonomy, be able to - if it was not doing it properly, supervise all Commercial Banks, financial institutions and credit institutions.  The Bank of Uganda at the moment, as was stated by many people should have constant flow of information with the Ministry of Finance to avoid some contradictions because what happened the other time, what the Minister of finance said that Bank of Uganda had never prepared its accounts for 20 years.  This was lack of information between Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda.  In fact, it was not true because the accounts were already laid down, it was a matter of the Ministry of Finance now to bring it for us for discussion.  So, I am asking the two parties to have a constant flow of information so that there is no contradiction or misunderstanding between the two.

I would like to congratulate Bank of Uganda for presenting its annual reports from 1986 to 1995 that is work for five years.  This is commendable work that I think the management should be reckon for.  And I want also to inform you that the statement of audit’s accounts and financial reports are up to date, they are with the Minister and they will be for discussion for you.  It is up to the Minister to bring it any time you want.

Now, talking about the use of cheques, I do not think this is the work of Bank of Uganda really to that people should not do - should use cheques instead of cash to encourage or to discourage cash economy.  It is the work of the Government to do that.  The Government should encourage accepting cheques, even government refuse cheques.  If you write a cheque to pay your tax, they refuse it.  Now who will accept it if the Government refuses it?  So, it is the Government, which should be encouraged to encourage others to use cheques if they accept them.

About interest rate, Members have expressed concern about the high rate but I would like to inform Members that now that the inflation has been fought and it is low, the interest rate it is positive is supposed to reflect the inflationary rate.  In other words, it is directed o be proportional.  Now that the inflation rate has gone down, the interest rate should also go down but some Commercial Banks are stubborn.  Up to now, in spite of the fact that Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda have told them they are saying they are being over charged by Bank of Uganda but I want to inform you that the Central Bank rate is not the same with the lending rate of Commercial Bank.  The Central Bank rate is supposed to be punitive in order to discourage Commercial Banks to borrow money from the Central Bank.  So, it is two percentage points over and above the lending rate.

Now coming to the Bill, Clause 49(i) if you see it - they say, the Minister for example may take action but I want to advise you that this will seriously undermine the independence of Bank of Uganda that this Bill actually seeks.  For example, the Minister may order printing of money if there is a crisis and this will actually bring inflation.  So, I think Article 49(i) to me should be deleted or improved upon.  And when you talk on to 49(2), when they say that the Minister may, with approval of Cabinet and after consultation with the governor issue such direction to the bank as it may consider being necessary in the public interest.  You know, when somebody has no better word to say, he will always use in the public interest because it is very difficult to establish what public interest is.  You can be dismissed all your mandate can be doubted here in the public interest.  So that is the thing, it is very difficult to establish -Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether the hon. Member was here yesterday, but if he was not, I would like to inform you that, that particular Section of the Clause I have already said, I wanted deleted and replaced by something else and I did not circulate that.

MR. ODONG:  Thank you very much for that, Mr. Minister.  Article 51, that the Board may with the approval of the Minister, may make by-laws not in consistence with the Statute regulating a, b, c, d, e, d and so on, but I want to say, it should say the Board may make by-laws.  A question of with the approval of the Minister that expression should be removed.  This completely undermines.  You see Article or Clause 11, look at Clause 11.  It is undermining even the internal independence of Bank of Uganda and the Board.  It is even contradicting Article 11, which defines the both function that should be a Board matter, Article 51.  So, to me, I say the Board may make by-laws not in consistence with the Statute regulating a, b, c, d, e, f, remove that expression with the approval of the Minister, that is where I want as Mr. Rwakakooko put it, everywhere Minister, Minister in all the Clauses.  What are you going to inform me, Mr. Chairman?

MR. ADAM IMAGA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that Section 51, in fact, favours the Board of Directors.  Because if they make a by-law and the Minister approves, I think there is a linkage between the Minister and the Board of Directors.  This is one of the information.  Secondly, to remove Minister’s power, we must be very, very careful.  Today we are experiencing a problem in Arua with Tobacco Union, we have removed all the Minister’s powers concerning the Union and Society.  Today the Unions and Societies are exploiting the farmers and nobody quarries that.  So, we must be very, very careful, when we are passing the Bill and we intend to remove the powers of Ministers, it means that we are removing our powers to quarry the activities  of this society -(Interjection)

MR. ODONG:  Mr. Chairman, thank you for saving me from irrelevancies.  Many of us are assuming that all the Ministers of Finance will be safe financially, as the present one, but suppose you do not get a save one financially, he will refuse everything which the Board has recommended or he will refuse a number of things to the Board and the Board will render useless.  So, apart from what I have said, Mr. chairman, I would like to say, thanks to the Minister for presenting this Bill and I hope that the autonomy that will be given to the Bank of Uganda, will not be only in this paper but will be practised by the Minister of finance.  Thank you.        

BRIG. KYALIGONZA (Army Representative):  I thank the Minister for having brought in this Bill which is liberating his office because all along we have been working under tension especially the Ministry of Finance, where all along the Bank of Uganda would make mistakes, accusations would be levelled to the Minister.  Now, I would like to point out some observation on clause 33, on sub-Section (3) where I am also pointing out to the Minister that it is important that Government should continue liberating themselves from the interferences of the bank functions.  Once this bank becomes autonomous and the Minister is supposed to be advised by the bank, then all the brains, all the failures, functions, should always be levelled to the Bank and not the Minister.  Whenever there are failures in the Bank of Uganda, it is always assumed that the Ministry, actually which directly involved and is at fault.  So, this Bill I think is very good and it is supposed to liberate our Minister from this chaos.  Another Section is 24, where I have an observation on sub-Section 2(a) this is also a very interesting issue where the Bank is at liberty, of course, to print some notes and bring them into circulation.  But at times there are some dubious characters who also produce some counterfeits and normally people the wanainchi are informed through Newspapers and the bank has never taken any action, in terms of information, the Bank has never taken action to inform the public.  When there are some counterfeits, it is always through some papers which are sometimes very active when they pick information from Commercial Banks, and when these counterfeits notes are, maybe brought under control, the bank has never taken any trouble to save the tensions of the regarding the circulation of these notes.  We always live by the information of the papers, and the bank that is supposed to do the supervisory work, has never made any effort to assist the wanainchi.  For instance, we have the thousand shilling note, up to today, deep in the village people are all doubting these notes, because people are not informed, they do not know what type, whether the counterfeit note is still the one, actually in circulation or the one now which is in circulation is the legal one.  So, the hank has never come up to verify on this issue or if they do, it is always the private newspapers, which normally do it.  

So, I was appealing to the Minister to do the role of the supervision to advise these banks, especially the Central Bank to take upon itself, especially when there are these counterfeits notes which are in circulation.  Then, regarding Section 8, Clause 7, where whenever any sufficient reason, the offices of the Governor and the deputy Governor are vacant, and at the same time the Minister shall in consultation with the Board, designate one executive director to perform the duties of the Deputy Governor and attending the meeting.  This is a very good thing and now there is a bit of relationship between the management and Government, the Bank and Government but again there is one issue which I think should caution Government and, maybe, the incumbent leaders of the bank.  It is very important that many of these appointments are assumed to be political, which have brought in a very bad precedence, because whenever there is a bad Governor performing, they assume so and so is this and that Government appointee?  

I would suggest that, such appointment should actually, become professional.  They should advertise, and a person is put in place because of his merits and capability. But if we continue appointing these Governors and Chairmen of Commercial Banks and so on, on political basis, we shall continue to remain in doubt, whenever he is weak, he becomes untouchable, he becomes very difficult to dismiss because he has been appointed by so and so.  But if he came in through an application and his performance is put in question, then he can be sacked.  So, I propose also Government should divest itself from the appointment of these Governors, so that it is actually advertised and a person comes in on his own merit.  With that, I support the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.00p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 22nd April, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

