Wednesday, 28th April, 1993

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as we do not form a quorum, we adjourn for 15 minutes while waiting for the Minister to come, please.  

(Debate continues).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 1993

MR. WASUGIRYA (Kibuku County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  While I stand up strongly to support this Bill, I wish to make the following observations. First and foremost, I wish to say that this Bill should have come much earlier than this.  Due to lack of protection on part of Government, these Financial Institutions have taken Many Ugandans for a ride.  Take for instance, the recent closure of Teefe Trust Bank. The clients to this bank have had their businesses stagnated.  If Government, through the Central Bank, had instituted measures geared towards protecting her people, such a thing would not have happened.

Secondly, the Government should do all it can to streamline the banking business in the country particularly to do with a Government on the commercial banks, like UCB. There is a lot to be desired as far as the operations of UCB are concerned, and much of the banking business conducted is along sectarian lines.  It is known worldwide that, without borrowing, little can be achieved; be it for a country or be it for an individual.  Countries with stable economies have survived because of borrowing.  

Now, what is the case here in Uganda? In Uganda today, the story is not palatable.  The genuine people who should get loans, end up not getting these loans.  Instead of people who should have not got these loans end up fluking and getting them, even when they fall short of some requirements. Because I know particularly upcountry, they usually demand a lot of things from potential applicants.  Things like land titles, valuation reports, income tax clearance, cash flows, balance sheets, and so on and so forth.  But these successful ones of late - not just of late but for all this time have been getting the loans without fulfilling such conditions.  At this point in time, permit me to refer you to the Uganda Confidential of 14th April, this year.  If it be true it is actually on page 4. It states, and I quote, “UCB 43 most important names.  The new team from World Bank which has come to run banks in Uganda will have plenty of work.  The most difficult will be to recover loans from bank thieves who lent themselves money, but cannot pay.  Below is the list of top UCB fellows who lent themselves money from mortgage scheme without even quadrilateral security. The list actually, ranges from 3.3 million to 247 million.’  Mr. Chairman, faced with that kind of situation -(Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order. A section of the pamphlet whose repetition is at stake -(Laughter)- and, which is associated with many half-truths.

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order.  Proceed, please.

MR. KASAIJJA: Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. Minister, the Mover of this Motion not to give a clear clarification regarding what is being said by the hon. Member holding the Floor?  Because this is a very serious issue, we want to be informed -(Laughter)- this country.  In fact, we want a degree of accountability and if we have to strengthen that degree of accountability.  Is it in order, for the hon. Minister to hear such statements and he does not reply and inform the whole nation? Is it in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He will get time to reply, proceed, please.

MR. WASUGIRYA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think what we are witnessing, that is a point exactly to what I am saying.  Because I said, if it be true that what is contained in this paper holds water and of course with your permission I went ahead reading.  So, I am saying I have been in this Uganda, you know; as long as my age reveals.  And I recall even from the days of Amin.  When actually, for one to get a loan, he had first of all to surrender a certain percentage before he could get that loan.  I believe or rather I am meant to believe that this kind of mentality still prevails in this country.  We have scattered UCB branches in the country, and people of course have all along had pregnant expectations about the services of these branches.  If you went around and analysed how much the rural areas benefit from these branches, you would not believe it.  It is hardly anything.  All the money disappears just here.  In fact, most times they tell us that there are no longer loans, there are no longer doing this and the other; when actually, the people here keep receiving the money.  And more particularly I am concerned because these rural areas are the productive areas.  If such money would be injected say in agricultural sector - if it could be injected in these areas of production, I think this country would begin to move in the positive direction.

Lastly, by way of recommendation, I am trying to emphasize that let these rural areas I am talking about be given a priority.  Because what is happening is that, as I said earlier I have been in this Uganda for quite sometime; in the past, the UCB Managers of these branches used to have some discretion in as far as these loans were concerned, they had a certain figure beyond which they could not of course sanction.  As I speak now, even if you wanted point five million shillings, in say Budaka Branch UCB, the Bank Manager will urge you to fill the forms and refer those forms to Kampala here.  What a crisis!  When a man here in Kampala can lend himself shs. 250 million.  And for you up country that way you are not accessible to a point five.  This is very serious.  As I said, I strongly support the Bill; but I would urge government to do all that is possible to ensure that certain things are streamlined.  Thank you very much.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira) Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also raise here to support the Bill.  But before I do so, Mr. Chairman, permit me to make a special appeal to the hon. Members of this House, who have been entrusted as Members of a Committee on discipline, with the responsibility among others as stipulated in Clause 71; that area which touches on their attendance.  I stand up here, with heavy  - to note that this is the second day when we are not realising quorum to be able to carry the business from day to day.  I am saying this because for those who are saying we have quorum, those are the people who were not here when we did not have quorum.  Sometimes we complain to the principle and fair cover.  But the fact that we are here on the taxpayers’ money, I think we should behave and humble ourselves here, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members. Thank you.

On the Bill, I would like to support the debate.  In my support, mainly on the clearness of the memorandum which things were meant and consolidate below regulating financial institutions.  My support is based much more heavily on the consolidation.  And for this reason, I will concentrate my contribution around Clauses that would, to me, require punitive measures if this particular Bill is to succeed. Such Clauses that I have sighted here, would be Clause 11, 18, 31 and thereafter, I have some complaints on the softness of Clause 32.  Clause 11, requires that a Central Bank may revoke a license of a financial institution. The hon. Member, Women Representative from Rakai had side observations here when she said that, this Bill should have also brought in the forex bureaus.  I do conquer with here that this that is left out is affecting a lot of money from the public, and very easily sending it out the way that was discovered with the Orient, and thereafter the Crane.

 So, I think I need to talk about the punitive measures to be taken when a license of a financial institution is revoked they should stop at that, there should be no negotiation.  Because, often times we either read or find that licences are reinstated for reasons best known either to some persons within the Central Bank and in financial institution in question.

I continue; I did say I would be very brief to Clause 18 on the prohibitions and restrictions.  Law to me as a lay person, I imagine is based on human history and human experience.  And if this is the case, I begin now to see that something might have gone wrong in the granting of these sort of money which this Bill now seeks to consolidate. To us the Langi of Uganda we say this Bill is like putting on the shoes after thorns have already pricked you.  Some people I believe are the beneficiaries already.  There were times here when we would make law and make them retrospective.  It is my humble pleading here that, it should not exonerate these other people, who maybe without any security as demanded or as it be requested for in this Bill in Sub-section 1(c), of Clause 18.  That there were people who without any security would be given some Financial Assistance.  Especially, the officers and staff of a Financial Institution.  I turn to believe that this was happening because there was a time a poor me also applied for a loan and then I was turned down that, at that material time UCB was still considering dishing out loans to its staff.  So, I think this one, now that it has come, it should protect all the intending financial institutions at least in one. 

On Clause 31, that is the easier of financial institutions, and points are enlisted here.  Whereas I do not have much quarrel or complain is this - my only complaint begins to come when the ceased Financial Institution is being exploited in Clause 32.  The Central Bank gets it, begins to manage and you will find that in subsection 4, is just going to close it.  What did you realise during this time when you were managing?  If you were managing it well and at the same time trying to educate maybe, the former owners of the Financial Institutions.  Why do you not other than close it, hand it back to them?  After that lesson I think they will be now be in a much better position to otherwise, stick to the Finance Institutions, regulations and rules as maybe shown to them.  So, to me, Mr. Chairman, my pleas, and I repeat, is that there should be no compromise in matters of Financial Institutions.  I support the Bill.	

BRIG. MOSES ALI (East Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I want to start by recalling what the hon. Minister said yesterday that the Bill is not foreign inspired.  It is true of course.  We cannot doubt our Ministers and it is also true that there is no way to say that for us here to know whether foreigners are not somehow involved in inspiring this Bill.  So, both the Minister and those of us who are doubtful, are right; because we are not a party to the consultation which is always done by virtue of responsibility given to the Government, they have to consult and as he said, again yesterday, they have consulted widely, very wide and officially.  

So, for us, it is our first time to know and to be requested to discuss something we do not know, how it originated, how it is formulated and so, we will take the Minister by his words and also he should take us by our doubting - his stand. It is not only this Bill that has a lot of far reaching implications and this Bill, if not amended somehow, is going to make the country cripple.  If we ask somebody who wants to form a bank - that much money, definitely, we cannot raise that much money and that means, those of us who are advantaged by having foreign contacts, by virtue of their office travels, up and down and having friends, possibly, they will be able to convince foreign friends to come and assist in forming banks; because that is Shs.500 million, it is half a million dollars which is a lot of money by our standards; so that will literally put this - supposing five, ten, banks were opened, then this country is totally going to be subservient to the foreign powers who have now brought in their money here; who are going to draw our foreign exchange - foreign currency by paying divided which is going to be very heavy.  I think this money is going to be very expensive to anybody in the country who is going to borrow because the overheads of people, who are going to be there, will be very high. This money or this request is going to widen the gap between the rich and the poor; because this poor man or poor lady, will not be able even to afford borrowing this money.  So, it will be only for those advantaged and the gap will widen, and the poor will not be happy because they are hungry and they will cause instability that will lead to insecurity.  

So, I call upon the Minister to think by revising the Shs.500 million to between 50 and 100 somewhere so that we can start from there to grow slowly as we begin to learn what is happening - how to handle money; is also within our capacity.  I think that way it will give chance to many people to participate.  

I want also to call on the Minister to consider this, being an agricultural country, and I think he is aware, if he is not a member of one of the Farmers’ Association with Uganda National Farmers Association. We are already talking very, very highly on forming farmers bank.  Now if you ask us to - for half a million dollars, where are we going to get it and yet we as farmers, are contributing heavily to bringing up of this economy of this country and we have no alternative but to think that way, because already, the money in the country is very expensive to a farmer and it is only the farmer in the world that this, the farmers in Uganda, are borrowing very expensive money to produce.  The interest is compounded; every third month your capital doubles.  So, it becomes very expensive, so we are in that way thinking; so if the money still remains to 500 -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that in countries which are highly developed economically like United States, one would put down $.50 dollars to establish a bank in some states.  Thank you.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  This information is taken and I want to add on so that the Minister in his reply should explain that in the Budget Speech it was mentioned that formers bank is going to be formed.  I hope he has taken that into account.  He can do that later, Mr. Chairman, sincerely, why can he not do - I am finishing.  (Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information. Hon. Moses Ali, who knows very much these matters of finance, having been a Minister for a long time in this department; I want to give him information which can help him, because I want to gain from his experience the current cost of a tractor is Shs.25 million; the current cost of a tractor with implements at Masey Ferguson.  Now, if people set up a bank with a working capital of Shs.50 million as hon. Wanendeya is informing people, the capacity of this bank from word one, will be only able to buy two tractors.  How will a national association help to help this?

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Mr. Chairman, I think the Minister is not going to run away from this idea of forming Farmers Association and I - Farmers Bank and is a fact, through out the world farmers are helped to help the country.  Right now, the negotiation between EEC and America is failing because of the disagreement and farmers, especially in France, are very, very powerful.  They will say no, to a proposal; government has to come on its knees otherwise, tomorrow is out.  So, we think that when we begin humbly to form Farmers Bank, we will put a deposit and definitely from their we shall pay the tractors’ company by installments; we will pay maybe, and what we are going to agree Shs.2 million, we take the tractor to the ground and it will begin working - will produce whatever we grow and we pay back as we produce. 

DR. MAGEZI: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that actually the Minister for Finance, if he is serious, they have got about 50 tractors rotting away in Namalere.  This could be used - I beg your pardon, it is actually 100 tractors in Namalere that can be used as the initial input by the Government into the assets of a Farmers Bank.  Secondly, if Government can listen, let it listen.  In Uganda here, we have so many tractors lying in the field, which have broken down for simple reasons because of small spares which can be supplicated in UGMA; but they can put up a programme which would not even cost $.2 million dollars to rehabilitate every old tractor wherever it is so that it can be used; because every farmer does not have to buy a tractor.  They should form resource pools of these agricultural machineries that can then be hired out to prospective formers. Thank you, very much, Mr. Chairman.  

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Mr. Chairman, we are not going to labour much the time will come for these things.  But I am calling on the Minister to leave room in his Bill for the farmers bank that is coming, by reducing the request of Shs.500 billion to my proposal of between 50 and 100, otherwise, I support the Bill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WANENDAYA (Budadiri County, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for the opportunity to contribute to this Bill.  I am supporting the Bill because the Deputy Minister for Finance who is my Friend. (Laughter)  I was saying that because they Deputy Minister for Finance who is my Friend knows that I know Finance, but for some reasons, he has never appointed me to any. (Laughter) I am not campaigning to be on the Board of a Finance Company but I support the Bill and before I go into details, we have got a problem in our country and that problem is connected with finance; because if finance is not in proper order, then other things may not be put in order.  What I have in mind is that the Uganda Revenue Authority under the Anti-smuggling Unit is really punishing our business community. For instance, a person would get goods at the border, at say; Malaba or Busia.  He would unload those goods at Busitema or in the corner of Busia and Tororo; as though those goods have not been checked at the border.  Then, one wonders as to what the border is. If it is not a connivance by the Anti Smuggling Unit to get - to trouble Ugandans so that, some of our business men are thinking of possibly doing business in Kenya, Tanzania and other parts of the world. The Government must seriously consider this, because even five kilos and of, let us say, sugar; they will ask for receipts, just five kilos and those goods - that sugar will be confiscated and when it is confiscated, a receipt is not given to the owner of those goods.  

As if that is not enough, when you get to Mukono, you find that you repeat the exercise of unloading those goods again. The Government must think about this problem very seriously. Otherwise, we are not going anywhere at all, in getting a good way of organising our trade.  We used to have the same problem with Licensing until EPADU came up with a system that is much far simplified and businessmen in Uganda are not complaining about that system.  My request is that the Government must do something.  The business people are willing, ever willing, to pay taxes, but the taxes, must be reasonable.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of order.  Mr.Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member, hon. Wanendeya to discuss taxation when we are on financial institutions? Would you guide us, Mr. Chairman, so that we stick to the Bill?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no, it is quite in order.  Proceed, please.

MR. WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman for guiding me, because without finance being in place and financial institutions, we will be really, deceiving ourselves to think of letting things go by when we are seeing with our own eyes and observing what is going on.  You find that when it comes even to Nakawa, it may take as long as two weeks, for goods that have been imported by license and, therefore, the Government, it is high time, must look into this problem. (Applause)  It will be just like EPADU when as I said before, traders were experiencing lot of problems with licensing and EPADU came up with dissolution as a result, the licensing is a very smooth thing and I think, hon. Members would agree with that.  So, I would propose that EPADU does look into this matter and rectify the situation.

Turning to the Bill, you find that the Bill does not state anything about mobilising resources for economic development and therefore, stock exchange which has been promised for so long, as talked about since 1986 and the sooner we can to mobilise the savings.  We will never get financial institutions to be running properly for economic development.  The Bill also does not mention anything about bureau de changes.  It is high time that the Deputy Minister for Finance things about putting bureau de change in the Bill, because it is part of the Financial Institutions.  I have made a proposal or an Amendment to be Bill so that Bureau de Changes are included in the Bill: because it is part of Financial Institutions.  

When it comes to capital as I said before, you find that unless capital is mobilised, we will never get anywhere. The amount of money in circulation is currently some shs.30 billion, if I am not mistaken, unless the Deputy Minister will give that in his summary, but out of that Shs.30 billion when you require half a billion shillings for the registration of a bank or a Financial Institution of Shs.300, 000,000/= we are not being serious because there must be a close collaboration of the money in circulation with the money that would be required to put up a Financial Institutions.  Without that, maybe then my knowledge of Finance is weak.  

When it comes to Section 12, sub-section (5), you find that the Minister agrees that the Financial Institutions to be established will be given three years.  Why is he doing that?  It is because he is trying to be realistic in assessing the amount of money in circulation with the ratio that would be available for setting up a bank or a Financial Institutions. You find that fees as prescribed under Section 25, sub-section (5); I think it is clearly stated that a fine of 0.5 or half a percentage will be paid as fees but you find that there must be a close collaborating of the amount of money to be paid as fees and therefore 0.1 of a per cent should be the amount of money that should be taken into consideration.  There is also Section 35, sub-section (4) which is not in the Bill incidentally but I would want it included in the sense that, I would like if the Bank of Uganda has refused somebody to establish a branch, he should be in position to get in touch with the Minister and convince him possibly to get a branch established wherever it should be established.  

When it comes to Section 37.  There should be some Section or sentences added.  The reason is that we have got to look at Financial Institutions. If someone earning some Shs.5, 000,000/- a year, he should be in a position, if he is borrowing money to put up a house of some hundred million shillings then the House itself will be acting as security.  So, something must be done about it rather than limiting the amount of money to his annual salary.  With those few words, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support the Bill.  Thank you very much. 

MR. KASAIJA K. (Bujenje County, Masindi): Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much indeed.  I would like to start by saying that I do support this Bill. However, I have some reservations that I would like to bring to the attention of the hon. Mover.  I would start with creation of more banks.  I would like to inform the House that the idea that was started by Mr. Mwine of having more banks in rural areas was hoping a lot and in fact it was encouraging our people to save money but ever since, our government has sort of diverted its policy from this trend.  People are now being discouraged to save.  As you are aware, if we are to improve the economy of this country, we must start with the rural.  We cannot start with the urban.  This economy of Uganda, 90 per cent of it is the rural population, who must get mobilised first, produce more and then after producing more, then this economy will grow; but once you leave out the rural population and you only thing to cater for the urban population then you have lost tract of how to handle the economy of this country.  

So, I am suggesting that the policy of increasing the capital of Shs.500, 000, 000 is really a deterring effect to the idea of creating more banks so that people can bring in more money to the banking institutions; because as you well know - if you look at our much money is banked in our banks, we have a very small ratio but if at all these banks were diversified in rural areas, then many people would be encouraged and they would bank and then they could increase the volume of the bankable funds.  

Therefore, the question of capitalization of Shs.500, 000,000 is really not good enough for us and I do support the hon. Member from Hoima who has moved an amendment to reduce this from Shs.500, 000,000 to at least to 300,000,000 so that at least our people can participate.  This country is for Ugandans, it is not for foreigners; because as you can see today, how many people have the money?  The money is in short supply, now if you increase the 500,000,000; it means you are now encouraging outsiders.  Because the people here do not have that money.  There is a shortage of money; money in circulation is squeezed.  Therefore, the capital of 500,000,000 should not stand the test. 

Regarding the control on Financial Institutions - as you are aware that these Financial Institutions are not controlled by government.  This is clearly manifested by the U.C.B. bosses getting so much billions without control.  This Mortgage Scheme was formed to help Ugandans put up their houses but then the scheme with all its good intentions was hijacked by a few individuals, senior officials in the Commercial Bank.  Really, 2 billion, 3 billion; this would have put up about say; Shs.15, 000,000.  How many houses would that be?  For middlemen? But now we are catering for only the top class.  

Therefore, I say the Ministry of Finance has not been monitoring what goes on in these banks and that is why these guys have taken in for themselves to dish out as much as they want because nobody looks after what they do and this trend is also prevalent in Bank of Uganda; because I remember on our Committee they told us that they had advanced themselves about 3 billion.  We have asked them to furnish with the details of this information.  As I talk now, that information has not been received by our Secretariat.  So, really also that adds -(Interruption) 

REV. K.J. YEKKO: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is making a very important point.  May I inform him that the Mortgage Scheme that he talked about died or operated without crossing River Kafu. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MR. K. KASAIJA: Thank you for that information. So, Mr. Chairman, if we are to build a fair society we should be fair to all.  We should be fair to small men, we should be fair to the middle men and we should also be fair to the top but not only to enrich the top hierarchy and then you leave the people in the middle and lower bottom suffering.  This is what causes descent; this is why people hate governments. You find people complaining.  Why?  Because the small men are suffering.  The top officers in parastatals, in Ministries working for nothing.  They do not even afford a cup of tea.  (Applause) So, this syndrome must stop if we are to develop this country.  

I would like also to talk about, just briefly, about the taxes.  The aspect that was touched by the hon. Colleague Mr. Wanendeya.  Really, the traders, the businessmen are in trouble.  You remember I pointed out this, that taxes are so high.  There is no proper system of taxation in this country. This is my second time I am calling upon the authorities to really revise this situation and rationalise these taxes because the traders complaints, ‘we have relatives, and we have got this and that.’ Our people are really perturbed, they call on us ‘you people you represent us but we cannot afford the taxes’, and when they go to pay the taxes, today they pay 20 per cent, tomorrow they are told it has been changed to 50 per cent. Why can you not rationalise things for the good of this country.

MR. KALULE SSENGO:  Point of information. Thank you Mr. Chairman, in connection with taxation, we have noted of late that the taxes on gunny bags which are so much used by exporters to export our produce have been changed now and again because about a month back the retail price for a gunny bag was about Shs.1, 200/=.  Two weeks later it went up to Shs.1, 400/=.  As I am talking now, it has already reached Shs.1, 600/- and all this, is caused by the Revenue Authority revising the taxes day and night which I think is actually a disadvantage to an exporter because if they overcharge you, then you will not be able to export.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information. Really Mr. Chairman, I would really be happy if hon. Members should do homework on what they come and say in the House.  The tax rates are set by us here under our Financial Act every year and there is nobody empowered to charge anybody higher rate than the rate approved by NRC in the Financial Bill which becomes the Financial Act.  Number two; my dear Brother hon. Ssengo must make a difference between the tax rate and the retail price.  The government does not control the retail price of any item apart from Petrol products.  So, we cannot be in charge of what a retail price for a gunny bag today, a gunny bag tomorrow -(Interjection) So, do not relate the retail price with the tax rate.  For example, if you applied a tax rate and your source of gunny bags is 1,000/= per gunny bag, and the rate is 10 per cent; you pay 10 per cent of the 1,000 which is 100/=. If you source your gunny bags from a source of 2,000/=, our rate is still 10 per cent, it will be 200/- on your gunny bags.  We do not control the sourcing of gunny bags, neither do we control the retail price of the gunny bags but Parliament controls the tax rate.  Gentlemen please do not excite the taxpayers.  Thank you very much.

MR. K. KASAIJA:  I thank the minister of his comments but I would like to inform him, if he can give me 24 hours, I will just give him exactly what has happened within six months.  The traders who go to Malaba, who go to Busia, what they paid the other time and after three months then they switched.  For example, they were  -(Interruption)

MR. J.NDEGE: Point of information.  Just to supplement to what the hon. Member is saying - a gunny bag today is charged 200/- at Malaba, whether it is a gunny bag or a polythene bag or anything and this has risen from 100/= about three months ago.  So, these are just simple facts.  If these Officers are leaving their own duties, I think it is the duty of the Minister of Finance to really go back and liaise with these Officers and put these matters right.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MR. KASUIJA K: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much and I thank the hon. Member for his supplement but really this is what shows that our people are in offices and they are not knowing what goes on in the field.  Some of us are participants in these things, active participants, we know. (Interruption)

CAPT. F. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, whilst I agree with him that there has been changes; the changes are much more on devaluation rather than the rates -(Applause) What apparently has been happening is that the Finance Bill is the same; however, the sourcing of our products has been increasing because of the recession outside this country and some of the things that we are buying, especially from Kenya, have been given an export promotion unit of about 18 per cent and that 18 per cent now has arrived at our customs and our customs are adding it on to stop the Kenyans damping their goods on our market and, therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would like us to differentiate between taxation and devaluation.  Thank you.

MR. K. KASAIJA: I thank you for your information but all the same as I am saying, the 18 per cent which you are saying export promotion is a tax.  I want you to tell me it is not a tax; if you know it better, then you can inform me but what I am saying 18 per cent, whatever you increase on that it is a tax and it is the consumer who pays. (Interruption)

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, what actually happened is that when the Revenue Authority was set up, it compiled lists of commodities being imported and gave values to these commodities irrespective of where they were coming from. For example, if you bring jeans into this country, each jean is valued at 28 dollars, regardless of whether you bought it 10,12,20 and that means that therefore, your basic price for taxation purposes is 28.  If you bring a dress, they assume you bought it 40 dollars regardless of what you tell them and that is what is creating a problem because they are using a base which is almost irrelevant to the actual cost.  (Applause) 

MR. K. KASAIJA:  Mr. Chairman, I am leaving the tax but I have given an assignment to the hon. Mover to understand that things are not all the best because when you do not collect taxes, then you are not even able to pay your people.  You cannot pay the Civil Servant, nor will you pay the National resistance Council Members. You will have a short fall in your collections.  So, it is good enough that you try to improve on the systems of tax collection.  

Lastly, I call upon the hon. Mover to understand as far as controlling of Financial Institutions - this point I had already talked about but really for example the banks, commercial banks - this compound interest, how do they come to it?  Commercial banks should be controlled.  You find a commercial bank is charging compound interest; you get so much money after so many months the amount has escalated so high and really there is no justification.  What I am saying is there value for money really? Why do you escalate?  We want to pay something for what it is worth but why do you go on expanding your interests so much within a short time?  So, I would call upon government to look into this as well so that you do not give these people super-normal profit that they are hopeless and they are not doing any work.  (Laughter) I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I support the Bill.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO E. (Ruhama County, Mbarara): Mr. Chairman, I would like to support the Bill and also add that better late than never because we know this Bill probably should have been here long time ago.  I would like to start by asking the Minister to let us know how he arrived at these figures of 1,000,000, 1 billion and 500,000,000 and then 300,000,000.  I am asking because I am not very sure whether the viability levels were established between foreign banks and local banks.  I believe the quantity of money should be related to the goods and services produced in the country.  Money is like any other commodity.  I know economically, that when there is a reasonable supply of money in the market, that money will compete for borrowers and naturally because of what competition, the rates of interests will go down. I think this a theoretical foundation of the laws of Supply and demand, which are economically acceptable. But when we are looking at the structure of our Financial Institutions, they are all urban based and in the urban areas is where really production is least.  The production is in the countryside and I think for this country to come up and improve its economic base, it must address the issue of facilitating production in the countryside. (Applause) 

I would, therefore, like to ask the Minister what steps he is going to put in place to ensure that the banks take the money in the countryside to facilitate production; because we are operating in a liberalised economy.  The foreign Institutions are foreign to the rural areas.  Whenever there is some little problem, you know these foreign institutions which reap maximum profits, jump out of the rural areas fastest and yet they are in fact now since we even attained this peace, I have not seen banks go to rural where they are required most.  So, you are going to have a situation where you are going to have banks here bring in money from outside to actually dwarf the local banks and wind them up literally.  Because they will have so much money and capital that the -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr. Chairman, I would like to correct the speaker holding the Floor that these foreigners if only they were bringing large sums of money to Uganda and they take a lot more than they bring.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Okay.  I think, Mr. Chairman, he has strengthened my argument.  What happens is this, if the foreign bank brings in capital that is higher than that of the local institution, it reduces the interest rate.  The customers go for foreign banks.  In the process, the profits are higher; at the end, they are repatriated.  It is true they take more money out of the country.  But what is also true is that they do not go into the countryside.  They just sweep everything that is in the urban areas. I have been saying, the Minister for Finance should address the issue of financial institutions substantially operating in the countryside so that people who are willing to produce are catered there, because that is where 90 per cent of our people live, and they have access to the banking facilities that facilitate this production.  Just a little while ago, hon. Atwai was talking about, even at his level, not being able to attract a loan for purposes of production.  Because in the town here there are so many parties involved in speculative trade and that is the most attractive area of putting in money by these banks.  Because the risk is that they bear a minimum; the cost of supervision is minimal. They have access to the borrowers every minute they want. (Interruption)

MR. ADAM:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the floor that although these banks operate in urban areas, but their services can be extended to rural areas.  What matters are the people; whether they have activities in the rural areas that need to be financed.  For example, the Rural Farmers Scheme I think was financed, but the whole thing collapsed.  So was it the fault of urban areas?  So urban areas are there to give incentives but the services can be extended to rural areas as long as they know how to utilise this bank.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Mr. Chairman, I wanted to hear one word form the last information.  If he had said that in fact, Mr. Chairman, the services have been extended - the operative word ‘have,’ not ‘can,’ that ‘can’ can stay for ever there. (Laughter) I have been saying that the Minister for Finance, when raising the capital, must address this issue of the production for improved economic performance that lies in the countryside, not in the towns.

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I have been listening to hon. Members deliberating over the issue of banks is the rural areas.  But since the majority of us in this House come from the rural areas and at the same time have a lot of activities in the urban areas, we know both ends.  I would be glad if the hon. Member holding the Floor can talk of production in the rural areas, compare it with the marketing system, compare it with the pricing and also give us the propensity to bank, of our people in the rural areas.  Because UCB is not closing branches for the sake of closing them.  There are branches that have been introduced.  I have been to some of these rural areas where the bankers tell you we spend most of our time in the sambas here where we have been posted, because there is nobody coming to bank.  If there is somebody who has brought money to bank, we are waiting for him to come and withdraw the same money.  

So, when we talk about services going to the rural areas, are they viable?  Have you assessed in your own rural area whether a bank can effectively operate or not?  So, the essence would be for most of us Members to go and educate our masses that if a bank is introduced in your area, please, bring the money from the baskets and posts and put it in the banks.  But UCB is also finding problems that they cannot operate their branches if no money is going these branches.  Thank you.

DR. KAHERU:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. the Deputy Minister.  He has said that we must educate the masses to do the banking.  I am saying, you must educate the masses in the rural areas by being there.  You must be there first.  Therefore, how do you expect somebody in Murama hill, which is 80 miles from Mbarara to keep coming to Mbarara to draw 3,000/=? As and when he has access to some cash, he will keep it in his mufaliso until the other need comes up.  I know it is a mattress.  (Laughter) So, I think what is important is to create a structure within the banking industry that will be accessible to the areas.  I think we should have the Ministry of Finance and now the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning should have statistics to show how much money can be tapped from where.  I will accept first left and then second right.  (Laughter) 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr. Chairman, I really do appreciate the information given by the Deputy Minister of Housing; but there is one basic problem.  It seems that the commercial banks in this country think they are doing us a favour for us to use them.  If it was not because banks depend on the interest that they charge.  But in rural areas when a man has banked his money and he wants only to borrow Shs.1, 000/= - I will give a person in Bukinda in Kabale 30 miles away from Kabale, his application for 1,000/= can only be approved if he goes to Mbarara, which is 130 miles away.  Now seriously, how can you expect somebody to give you money and a depositor is a lender to the bank, and when he wants to get back the money, the borrower says I give you my own terms.  That is a serious issue and we need rural banks, therefore, to be able to come near to the people, attract the people and be able to deal with them on their own terms.

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The hon. Rwakakooko has raised a point which I would like to stress and attract the Minister to look at very seriously.  First, there is an Amendment proposed by the Minister or a new section called Establishment of Refund and the Deposit Insurance Fund. This is to protect depositors anywhere in Uganda.  Once we have this fund - and I think we should support this idea - then we should create in these Financial Institutions Bill a rural bank criterion.  Banking should be categorised.  After all, why not?  We can categorise all other things.  Why can we not categorise banking? We can categorise banking and have a rural bank, and you to qualify to become a rural bank, you must operate in a rural area and certify certain people.  

Now, the fear was that if people deposit money in a rural bank and they come to get it, they will not get it.  Because that is what has been going on with these financial institutions in the past.  But once you create a depositor’s protection fund that has already been proposed, that will take care of that problem such that Ugandans and indigenous people can then have a low capital base to start banks in the rural areas.  Because if you do have a healthy financial institution in this country, there will never be any development.  Financial services must be closer to the people, even much more closer maybe, than the road.

DR. KAHERU: Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Members.  What has been said by all the people who have informed me in addition to what I have said, I think justifies the need for Government to address this issue very seriously, that is, taking the banking services, to the rural areas and taking the facilities to facilitate production - not to just collect deposit, but facilitate production deliberately, not just in ad hoc fashion.

I would also like to touch the funding of the industries.  The banks have funded trading operations for much too long to the detriment of our own capacity for self-sustaining.  The third point is the strong supervision that is required of the Central Bank on financial institutions.  In the past the Government has been the biggest breaker of its own rules.  What I am saying is this.  The Government without reference to the monetary issues has directed commercial banks, in particular its own inadequately funded Uganda Commercial Bank, to go out and issue money on credit for even things that are not viable.  I think I would like to appeal to the Minister to desist from this practice.  Once the banks are funded adequately, they should be left to do their own business.  They should be left to establish the yardstick for lending money and the Minister should only come in when the policy has been violated.  Otherwise, you are going to continue creating expansion in the credit that is not justified.

Finally, I would like to associate myself with the Members who have spoken in favour of the rural financial institutions being allowed to start from a lower capital base.  I think I would like to say that it is not possible for the rural base institutions to start at 300 million shillings.  I think that is too much.  I think a lower figure should be allowed and then supervision put in place to ensure that once they pick experience, they also continue to increase the capital base so that finally everybody benefits.

Lastly, I endorse the proposal made by other Colleagues that there should be an insurance cover for depositors’ funds.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Permit me to thank most heartedly, all Members who have contributed to this Bill and also all those who would have wished to contribute and those who supported it even if they have no opportunity to contribute.  Because none of those who spoke did not support the Bill and those who did not speak, I saw them nod in support of the Bill.  However, permit me to clarify on what we are providing for.  Because it seems my dear Friends have valid points, but not on what we are trying to provide for.  This Bill is trying to provide for institutions defined in this Bill.  The points that have been raised by hon. Members - this Bill basically intends to provide for commercial banking, not subsidised banks, and not state-sponsored banks.  Because if a need arises, as indeed there is a rise for cases like what hon. Moses Ali raised, to address the banking facilities for farmers and Government feels there is need to subsidise the farmers and bring banks specifically for farmers, the Government will bring a law before you to create a farmers’ bank that will be tailored with government subsidies.  If the Government researched and found that Government needs its own budget to put up a subsidised facility for Members to go to rural areas and take banks there and ask you as Parliament to contribute to their losses or their capitalization through the budget, the Government will bring such Statute before you.  But today the Government has brought before you a Statute to provide for people who want to go into commercial banking; whose motive is only to make money and profits and prosper out of accepting other people’s deposits and use them and invest them the way they want.  These are the people we are providing for.  And the answer is, what security do you give people who deposit their money with such private institutions and the owners do whatever they want with their money.   What do you put in place to safeguard them?  Therefore, this Statute is not providing - (Interjection) 

May I refer you kindly to the definition in this institution of banking?  In the context of this law, the bank means any company licensed to carry on banking business as its principle business and includes all branches and offices of that company in Uganda.  And what is the banking business?  Banking business, for the context of this law that is seeking protection for depositors, means the business carried on as a principle business of accepting deposits of money from the public repayable on demand or at the expiry of a fixed period or after notice.  (b) Employing such deposits wholly or partly by lending or any other means for the account and as a risk of the person accepting such deposits.  (c) Presenting to another bank for payment, cheques, drafts or orders received from customers in the capacity of a bank.  The law is asking you as legislators.  The people who give in their deposits to these people who make this their business want safeguards in terms of minimum capital, in terms of supervision, in terms of being audited should be put in place before you license them to be in this business.  The Bill is not addressing how we can provide as Government to finance rural development.  This Bill is not providing on how farmers who cannot go to commercial banks can have access to an actual bank that gives soft terms and gives subsidy to farmers.  These are not the terms of this Bill.  

I want also to inform hon. Members that the Government indeed has already made its successful study on how to establish an agricultural bank.  Hon. Members know that they have been borrowing from Uganda Development Bank as a Government Bank and the interest rates at which they borrow, the grace period given and recovery period are not on commercial terms, because the Government subsidises that bank.  Because it is a bank for development.  

Now, there is a feeling that that bank is more geared to industrial development.   There is an outcry for a bank geared to agricultural production.  Government has made a study and Government is finding out how to come up with such a bank and a law will be brought before hon. Members to create such a bank.  Then we shall debate how that bank can be as near to the people as possible and how it can finance them.  This law talking about commercial people who take as deposits our people’s money.  How can you help to ensure that that money is not lost?  This is the aim of this law.  And I want to announce as I have circulated and as you are circulating, as a request of Members, Government is proposing to add a complete section to this law as a deposit insurance guarantee for our people in case banks were to collapse. (Applause) Therefore, Members should believe in principle that stringent measures must be taken to safeguard the people.  So in this context, I want to reply to a few remarks. (Interruption)

MR. ADAM:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister regarding insurance.  These banks are commercial banks, not - if you impose them or on them insurance premium, I do not know who will pay that insurance premium?  Because, my fear is that, first they will charge the depositors certain percentage for covering the insurance; secondly, that insurance premium will be covered from the net profit that will reduce their payment to the Government.  So, here, I would like the Minister to clarify this Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  I have asked my Colleagues to circulate how the deposit insurance will operate, this will clarify the matter, because it is a little bit a number of pages, a few copies are going around that will clarify matters to you.  So, I want now to urge Members on the common argument that was there about the classification of foreign banks being demanded Shs.1. billion and local banks starting with Shs.500 million.  This minimum capital requirement is not too much for a commercial bank.  A commercial bank that is decent, well-managed, proficient and is respected, can collect deposits of Shs.500 million in a matter of a few months.  What safeguards these people who put their money in few months in a bank, when that banks minimum interest in their own business is less than half a billion shillings.  Now, someone was saying that UCB even if Government investment UCB capital as of now, Shs.200 million, UCB deposits are running in billions. What if it was not a government bank, what would happen if that bank had trouble as a private bank with billions of deposits and a shareholder having its investment of 200 million? In any case, Gentlemen, why do I not -(Interruption)

DR. MAGEZI: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, because really, it is a point that is very valid, I think the Minister to clarify on.  Is it not true that the World Bank has given a credit to UCB of Shs.32 billion in form of bonds, additional Shs.4.3 billion to cover partly the bad debts has occurred.  Now, if UCB had this money, the Minister is talking about, in form of deposit, why is the World Bank coming in to rescue UCB? 

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, hon. Magezi is an engineer; so I want to clarify to him, because these are financial matters.  UCB’s capitalization and its own worth does not include the depositors’ money because that is UCB’s reliability.  Therefore, if it is true that UCB had World Bank assistance, what if it was a bank that cannot get World Bank assistance, what will be the safeguard of the depositors?  This is what we are saying, that commercial banking is a profitable business.  If I deposit with you, my money, you give me 15 per cent as interest, you are free to lend my money I have given you at 30 per cent and the difference is your money.  But I have no control on how you managed and what you do with the money, all my interest is to see that through government, there is sufficient supervision and you have put in sufficient commitment to have my interest covered.  After all, nobody has said that commercial banking is going to be a compulsory business.  It is not true that because of these conditions, applications for banking licenses have decreased.  I have my Friends here who have been pressurising me why their banks are not up-graded to become commercial banks? Because it is a good business, provided it is done properly, and it is the investors like depositors we need to safeguard.  It is not the promoters of the business, because it is not compulsory to go in to the business, you as public leaders, it is the public which is weak, but which needs the services of a bank which we need to protect.  

So, I would beg, that we do not legislate as if we are on the size of a few businessmen that may opt to go into commercial banking. We are legislating to defend our ordinary people, the peasants you are talking about, who choose to save their money and put it in a bank, how can their deposits be save? And you as people whom the people have elected, this is your primary duty.  Also my Friends, like hon. Kanyeihamba have urged why do we not have a rural bank and also urban bank?

Banks by their very nature remain the same, regardless of their locations, whether they are located in Kabale or in Jinja and as long as they can also open branches, you cannot operationally say where a rural bank will stop and where urban bank will start; and also for me as a depositor, and where not banking has been liberalized, why should I be confined because I live in a rural area to rural bank when urban bank can give me better terms.  These are bankers they can open branches where they want, because they have liberalized.  What we need is strict supervision   because they hold public money, and also their strong commitment to this business.  

So, I urge that the business of this people, for example, like building societies really, if you want collect money from the public promising then that you will put a scheme to build them houses and that they will pay interest on the money they give you to build houses of a long period and you are a company to operate in the whole of Uganda, but you the shareholders you may be 50 you cannot rise Shs.300 million what type of houses are you going to build?  I do not agree with my representative from Butambala, that these Building Society are really meant to serve out ordinary people in Singo, Bulemezi or in Kitgum.  Those people build power people their houses in their ways, these people put up Building Societies because of our working class who get regular wages, why do we not want to safeguard them?  They have already been reaped, now you want to go in this business, we are going to supervise you strictly, also show as your commitment and ability and Shs.300 million these days really, even if it is law costing, a law costing two bed roomed house will not cost you less than Shs.10 million.  Now, this is your business, as a company shs.10 million per house, you think Shs.300 is too much to start, now what is your base? On which you become a recognised by government to be supervised and government encourage to receive people’s deposits.  So, -(Interruption)

MR. LUBEGA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The Minister is addressing this House, and with regard to Building Societies, Minister appears to be thinking that the beginning is an easy thing.  We people in the Building Societies, have come together humbly to start a venture and what really matters as far as protecting people’s monies the interest is the management, because you can manage a financial institution like a Building Society properly, even when you have started with a sum of Shs.100 million.  Building Societies that we know off, have started humbly and those which have been able to progress have done so because of management, it is really management which should matter.  The Bank of Uganda had hitherto not come up to supervise them, but now we when we enact a law, which empowers Bank of Uganda to supervise Building Societies, hon. Minister, I think we shall go on a long way even if we do not swell up the capital to 300, as if that was not enough, I want to draw your attention, hon. Minister to Clause 3, sub-Clause (3), which brings in the ambit of this Bill or Statute if it becomes one, all Cooperatives Savings and Credit Societies carefully reading of Clause 3, sub-clause (3) even brings all these savings and credit societies, when you have the impression that these are not brought in the ambit this is my way of understanding it, because of the word which are used.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: It is a wrong think, Sir.  The right think is reading as follows: “This statute shall not apply to a cooperative society registered under the cooperative society’s statute. Save a cooperative society established for the purpose of accepting deposits from the public,” for example, the Uganda Cooperative Bank, as long as Uganda Cooperative Bank wants to accept deposits from all of you, which it does, it will have to come through under this - what? If we form say, Saving Society, and so on which do not accept deposit from the public but only from their Members -(Interjection) Yes, because what is important there is that Cooperative Society establish for the purpose of accepting deposits from the public - yes, not withstanding that the acceptance of deposits may be limited to its members.  Now, for example Cooperative Bank is saying cooperators own it, alright; and all its branches all around, they say they bank for cooperators.  Are you going to live out cooperative bank, because it is saying, it is operating for member but accepting their deposits.  

Secondly, hon. Damiano Lubega, when you are developing in business, what makes it necessary for people to make big companies, has always been inadequacy of capital.  If you want in this country to start people pulling resources, which has been the biggest argument it is because the capital you need is not enough, that instead of doing it alone, you come to Kafumbe Mukasa and   see whether I can come with you.  If two of you cannot make it, you also go to hon. Wanendeya, if three of you cannot that is how company formation, you as my great lawyer, you know very well that is how the theory of companies started. For people to pull resources.  So, me as a supporter of Financial Institution, I will be happy to be approached by your Building Society, that some of you cannot now make it, you want some of us to join you.  This is an important thing.  So, we could not have a rural and urban bank, it is not possible for the time being.  With these two contentious matters now settled, I want to address to serious matters raised by few Members, individually hon. Mayengo wants the duration of the license be only want to know that there is a possibility of someone refusing to renew your license for another year, unless it is done in the context of other matters, that is why you see under section 27, (3) every year, a bank will be required to display its directors, every year.  

So, scrutinising, directors cannot stop, because a company has registered, scrutinising will continue, of directors because, after you have registered, you can become bad Directors, it is not enough to say, I agree with you that we bring you a good directors for the purpose of registration, after we register, you can as well go and have bad Director; annually, you must be you must be scrutinise.  Also Bank of Uganda must continuously supervise that Financial Institution.  

So, because of that fear, hon. Mayengo should not be substantial, now he wants stated relationship in the law between Financial Institution and Stock Exchange.  Now, it is very difficult, as lawyers will tell you, for me in this law to refer to something that does not exist legally.  We shall bring a law regulating Stock Exchange, then that law will refer to financial institutions, other than me now asking lawyers to say can this really refer to the Stock Exchange which is not legally put in place?  Much as groundwork has been done.  So, I promise you that when we bring the Stock Exchange Statute Bill, it will refer to a relationship between themselves and the financial institutions.  Hon. Mayengo also was very disturbed about rural areas, so was my other Colleagues, and I have addressed that one.  But my Friend hon. Kagonyera was very, very strong and hon. Kanyeihamba and all of them correctly, but I am saying the only way we can do it like what hon. Rwakakooko has said is Government to put incentives to encourage commercial banks to go to rural areas.  For example, if we encourage banks which open branches up-country, not to pay taxes, on the operations of those branches, for five years, that is an incentive that we take a bank to open a branch somewhere else.  

So, I think we should put this law as it is, but Government should put in place incentives that should attract commercial banks to go into taking branches into rural areas, and in the next budget, we shall propose such incentives using income tax, using taxation, using other provisions, and, now that, I do not want to upset hon. Lubega, I will carry out Amendments, so that those cooperatives which decide only to deal with Member so not have to adhere to this rule, because really they have not taken anybody’s deposits, they regulate themselves, they cannot blame government, and that will allow the people in the countryside to form their own consumer societies, their own saving societies and so on.  I will carry out that Amendment.  

So, hon. Rwakakooko, since you are in charge of economic matters on behalf of parliament, we shall discuss with you, which incentives can be given to commercial banks.  We shall discuss with you honestly and seriously - we shall discuss with you what incentives government can put in place to attract commercial banks to go and do banks in the rural areas; that is safer than relaxing on these banks.  The hon. Members will approve in the next Budget such incentives, because they all have.  I agree with them that we must develop rural areas.  

Hon. Mayengo wanted Forex Bureaus to be mentioned as Financial Institutions.  But really these bureaus are shops, you just go there, you buy an item for value agreed, only that Central Bank needs to examine them that cheating does not go on, and that record is properly kept for us to know our foreign exchange business.  But really, these are simple shops, only that they deal in items of pounds and dollars they could as well deal in sweets.  So, that one is not a problem. 

Hon. Sibo, I really have sympathy with you because, hon. Sibo, dwelt for along time on experiences he had gone through with his Rural Centenary Bank, and I want to congratulate you for having perseverance and that you have encouraged to go into rural banking and the Members who want to do rural banking have a chapter to pick from you.  But, hon. Sibo, at every time, Bank of Uganda did not do whatever you wanted at that time, Bank of Uganda gave you reasons, and once these reasons were satisfied, Bank of Uganda was satisfied and licensed to the bank; so this double standard accusation, I think was made against this background, but today I think we should be proud of our Central Bank.  It is trying to create an image we should be proud of as our Central Bank, and I regret, if there was an inconvenience to Ugandans trying to do banking but this law will now make things easier, because they will not tell you, we are fearing to Minister, and I agree with hon. Lubega that when an application is rejected, a man must be given reasons to the Minister if he does not know the reasons for rejection?  

Hon. Sibo also raised the issue that Bank of Uganda has obligated its responsibility as a clearing house to the Uganda Banks Association.  I will draw this attention to the governor of the Central Bank.  It is not that an association of banks can decide how formal business - who should transact business with them as long as you are licensed to do banking, you are entitled to do banking.  

So, this is an administrative anomaly, and if it is going on, I will draw the attention of the governor to rectify the situation.  Hon. Kisembo knew exactly the purpose of this Bill, and I want to thank him very much, because he had recommended that this capital proposed is still not strong enough.  But in light of the comments of Members, I beg hon. Kisembo to drop the proposal of Shs.1 billion, so that he supports the one of half billion, so that as a House we move together.  Hon. Lubega made a comment that it is not clear in Article 7 4(2) when he says; a sub-committee will report to the bank, we shall carry out an Amendment to say it will report to the full board, so that it is clear.  But as I replied your argument that Shs.300 million is too much for Building Societies, I have talked to my Fried hon. Damiano Lubega, we better pull resources, and be strong and then put housing I do not agree with hon. Lubega from Butambala that section 26 (4) be difficult to enforce, we are giving Bank of Uganda to direct an Auditor to give certain information, even if, the professional opinion that Auditor thought that information was not necessary.  We are asking the bank to have power to demand for that additional information so that they can make proper assessment.  He did not give any reason Mr. Wagwa Lubega why he opposed Article 27, he just said, it should be there.  We think it should be there.  

Hon. Zabasaija  - I want to inform you that, government deliberately put some Members of this NRC on Board of Directors because government wanted to differentiate between government guiding policy and government being participating in management.  
So, when I am challenged as Minister to commend on activities in a financial institution, or a company, I would like the directors who are in those organisations to supply information to Members because they know better than we as Ministers because, we do not interfere once we appoint the board.  We do not interfere in the management for example in UCB we do not interfere on how loans are given.  

When you charge me who was not given a loan and who was given, it is unfair when you fully know that amongst we have a colleague who sits on a Board and make these decisions.  So, hon. Zabasaija I did not really agree with him when he said that the only way you can give confident to the people in a village to bank is as if that bank can be originated around that village, it is not true because Uganda Commercial Bank originated in Kampala but it has tried to have branches and the director in that bank - but also if you were a commercial bank, there must be a return on your investment as a commercial bank, if a branch no longer meets its expenses whose deposit money are you going to sue to run that branch for the sake of running it; and I would have expected him to explain these policies because they are their policies because hon. Kagonyera was rightly bitter why UCB was closing branches.  I will explain to him because hon. Zabasaija did not help me.  It is basically because of viability at least, a branch should be able to meat its costs, if a branch failed then it means you must use depositor’s money to sustain a branch.  Then how will you refund the money when hon. Magezi comes to collect his deposits?  So that is one reason, and it is not true that that to solve security that - not high capital sufficient capital - sufficient capital is important much as supervision and management is important.  You cannot say you can only manage even if capital is insufficient.  

Also, hon. Kagonyera says, this capital is very high, will discourage our people from doing business.  He did not state what business.  All our people do not have to be in the bank business but our people will do their business with a secure bank.  They would like to use banks if they are sure the banks are secure, and that is what we want to achieve so that our people should stop moving around with cash on their bodies.  Hon. Kagonyera was saying, how we can go and participate in public resources.  I want to inform you that in government’s privatisation of Uganda Commercial Bank, a comprehensive programme to participate in its shareholding, for example, if a man banks in the Uganda Commercial Bank for a long time and he has fixed deposit account with UCB; why should he not be encouraged to use some of those deposit to acquire shares because in the bank there are two people.  There are those who have their money there, and there are those who go there to get other people’s money from there.  Maybe, those who have their money, their deposit can be encouraged to turn these deposits into shares, and this will be a good different process to get Ugandans participate in the banking while we also wait for the stock exchange but this can be done before that even.  Hon. Kanyeihamba’s only disappointment was that, he was a Member of Committee that made three recommendations and government adopted two.  I do not know why he should be disappointed, if you make three recommendations to government and two of them accepted by the government; why should he be upset?  So, he should be happy that he got about 75 per cent of the recommendations accepted. (Laughter) 66,normally you pass exams in our old days. So, hon. Kanyeihamba has argued that it is administratively difficult to have a rural bank and an urban bank, and there is no way the can police to say, please, do not cross here, this is a rural area, do not come here.  After all, we have liberalized, it will be difficult; but we shall encourage banks to go to rural areas deliberately.  

Hon. Kanyeihamba also, it is not true, holy truth, that our people have not been saving because there have been no banks in the villages; there are other economic reasons why people could not save.  Saving is not a function of banking facilities, that when is to have a bank facility you should save.  Otherwise, saving it will be a lot on Kampala Road because there are many banks there.  Saving is a function of many as the economic factors which government has correctly addressed, inflation, stable income, opportunity to invest and so on.  But to say it, is because, for example, in the 60s when people used to save what motivated them when there were least number of branches of banks, but still that one does not stop us from taking branches to our people in rural areas, those who save, they will have convenience to keep their savings and make earnings on their savings.  

Mrs. Ntabgobwa, I thank her very much for her good observation on building societies.  I think the only surviving big society is where she is as a shareholder.  But I want to assure her that building societies will not be allowed to engage in other banking activities because that will be spreading risks too much.

Now, those ones who spoke today, have just emphasized the same point which hon. Members emphasized yesterday and I said I thank them, some of them have just expressed their disappointments with the banks that my Friend hon. Kasaija is annoyed with UCB if it was a UCB Act or Bill would have done a lot about it, but I have told you.  You can talk to hon. Zabasaija he is a director of Uganda Commercial Bank and another hon. Member is here.  I will not disclose.  They will help to address this but for us as a ministry we have taken your observation very seriously, and we shall bring the attention of the board and the management to complain.  You have registered against Uganda Commercial Bank in particular, and also banks generally -(Interruption)

MR. KIGYAGI: Point of clarification.  I want this clarification, from the Mover in his provision for capital requirement under section 12 he is provided for Commercial Bank, for Credit Institutions and for Building Societies, Development Banks and Insurance Companies are not provided for. So I would like him to guide us on that because we might have a problem when we come to licensed development banks and insurance companies because there are also financial institutions, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I am circulating some amendments to include - because Uganda Commercial Bank is created by an Act of Parliament and Uganda Development Bank and the Co-operative Bank. So, we shall make an amendment to refer to them specifically, and when you remember the Bank of Uganda Act, we empowered Bank of Uganda Act to declare insurances to be financial institutions, and therefore, the Bank will regulate how would you become, how would you get a license for insurance because the insurance act is a separate law - but you see, an insurance does not parade there whose business is to go and take your deposits for them they say, you bring this money we insure this year, you will live and if you do not live this year, your survivors will compensated.  They are financial institutions but in business of handling deposits and as you see the definition there is a difference between financial by credit institutions and banks.  That is why I said people who say how do I get a bank?  You start the way hon. Sibo started with his colleagues, you start with a financial credit institution, that is why you see the demand for a credit institution are limited, but we start in a small way and then we grow big.  So, I want you to start like hon. Sibo, if you want now.  He is becoming big but he has been there for 20 years.

Now, the problems, hon. Wasugirya was also one of the directors.  I do not really - when I read the Uganda Confidential I may try to investigate some of the things they say, but I do not take it as official opposition, and the allegations made these institutions should be able to explain these allegations other than waiting for a Minister, really to explain.  

Rev. Atwai supported so I thank him very much. 

Hon. Moses Ali honestly, I do not accept that really.  This Bill intends to widen the gap between the rich and the poor. This Bill intended to safeguard the poor, so that, their savings are not consumed by the rich who set up these institutions, and of late, I have dealt with hon. Moses Ali on a number of things and I would have expected to support a higher capital because when you look at the financing capacity of our financial institutions, Mr. Chairman, there was a problem as you remember when we imported buses; Steyer.  There we were asked all questions,’ who told you to bring Steyer buses here’? ‘Why are they here in the yard?’  Today it is a problem to get a Steyer bus -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, a Steyer but cost 78 millions, if you were a financial institution and I come to you to ask for you to fund me to buy a bus and you cannot finance ten buses because, ten buses will be 78 millions; why should you be a national bank?  So, that is why I said hon. Kisembo do not worry, you had a good point but we should go as the majority want, half a million.  (Laughter)

Hon. Wanendeya blustered URA and said now licensing is easier than Uganda Revenue Authority collection, as hon. Wanendeya said, it is true.  Hon. Wanendeya is my dear Friend for a long time but also this is one of the reasons why I have found it difficult to - for him - to get him appointed to these boards because he is now pleading. (Laughter) He is now pleading for smugglers; there is no simple job. (Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Mover to say that, I pleaded for smugglers when in fact, I would like the system be improved, so that we can collect more revenue. You find that in a country like Rwanda the per capita consumption of soda is higher than in Uganda.  So, if the taxation was right, it would be in the best interests for our country.  Is it, therefore, in order for him to say that I am pleading for smugglers?

THE CHAIRMAN:  You have spoilt your point of order please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Hon Members, I want you to give full support to revenue authority.  I want leaders to give full support, your economy has got some sanity now, inflation below ten per cent, this last month it was 3 per cent. Why? Because young men have raised revenue collection from 9 billion, to last bit 23 billion.  That has brought sanity in your economy.  Now, hon. Okia yesterday did not give full information on what happened on the border.  On the board at 2.00 o’clock in the morning, three people, smugglers, not traders, three at net after midnight, two after midnight, three smugglers when asked by revenue authority anti-smuggling unit they challenged it, and challenged those people who were all armed. You know what challenge means, they challenged them. You see let me say, now if a trader at 2.00 o’clock no problem on the border, you are asked by the authorities all right?  Why do you not cooperate, no one would like any ugly incident in these cases.  

So, I would like us as leaders to appeal to our people to cooperate with tax authority.  Everybody will understand that in the past the government depended on printing money instead of collecting revenue.  So all of us have grown up in a custom, a culture where really one is telling you to pay tax is harassing you and so there is still resistance.

MR. OPIO:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, when I appealed to the government yesterday was to observe human rights, I did not say any situation when someone who is not armed in confronting someone who is armed and someone who is armed should shoot somebody for tax.  So what I was after, actually, I was to say that when the government wants tax, we are all law abiding people, but life is dearer than just some money someone should be apprehended, the law of the land should take place.  This is what I wanted the nation to hear not because we do not, as leaders, allow people to pay tax.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, I do not want to waste your time in the complications of smuggling.  Smugglers are armed people and government has not told you how many we have lost.  We lost two workers in the anti smuggling units.  These smugglers are totally armed and operate in the most dangerous situation.  So, please, let us have some law.  You are right why should a person be killed, you give an impression that a man is on the border in charge of tax, he sees you, you are carrying ten kilos of posho, he fires you, it is not true unless there is confrontation arm by arm.  These people have been armed to protect themselves against armed smugglers and we have lost a number of good officers in the process.  So, I appeal to you, hon. Members, let us encourage our people to pay taxes.  Let us carry out seminars, workshops to tell them that when you pay tax the money eventually comes to you.  We, as your leaders in Parliament we demand that we know how the money is used.  Let us carry out the entire programme so that it does not become a problem to pay tax.  Already you will hear that I am going to Kikuubo, there I am going to everywhere to talk to fellow Ugandans, please, all these inconveniences have been put in place because of lack of cooperation.  No tax collector would like to sleep on the road to collect tax.  They are also human beings but let us support them. They operate within the law that we created; and also let us educate our people that taxation is not a punishment because you demand accountability for the money we collect. (Interruption)

MRS. MASABA:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Mover holding the Floor, Mr. Chairman, that while he speaks of co-operation, our Revenue Authority people must also co-operate with the wanainch not that I support smuggling, but my husband lives in Busia, I stay in Kampala, when the child brings two pockets of flour they tear it. They pour it out.  When they count things at that Revenue Authority, they do not tell these people where to go to claim their things.  So, while the wanainchi cooperate, the authority also must direct people where to go and claim their things.  That is why the wanainchi are quarrelling.  Otherwise, we would like to have more revenue.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Okay, after all, this is not Revenue Authority Bill -(Interjection.)  Yes, because we can go on and on, there is no body on that border Busia who does not know whatever the age where you must go through lawfully.  They know; they have been born in Busia, they know.  For us to collect Shs.23 billion, these people bring - she says, ‘they bring two pockets.’  They bring two pockets until a lorry is filled on the Ugandan side. (Laughter) 

So, please, I beg you particularly my Brother hon. Okia on the border, you tell people on the border that if they are Ugandans, and they live in Uganda - the Kenyans live in Kenya.  The Ugandans should abide by the Ugandan law. As you said you have comparative advantage on being on the border.  You should not extend also to breaking the law.  After all, when you are on the border the wheat is cheaper because, you eat it without transport.  Those in Kabale pay higher because they pay transport.  This is the only comparative advantage which you have other than that nothing else.  We can work together and change things.

Hon. Wanendeya has told me that if the money in circulation is Shs.30 billion, how can you demand a bank to start with this?  A half billion, these are information which he gets - I do not know from where!  I told you in one month, we collected Shs.23 billion, in tax; if there is Shs.30 billion in circulation, how do you relate that? (Laughter) Mr. Chairman, hon. Kasaija also his complaints were very general.  Hon. Kasaija, you know very well that Government has liberalised the interest rates, so if you bank with a bank that compounds interests, and there is another bank that does not compound, you cannot blame the government for that.  Government does no longer set interest rates.  So, you cannot hold us responsible for banks which compound interests. (Interruption)

MR. MAYENGO (Kyamuswa county, Kalangala): Mr. Chairman, before this Bill came, I visited the Uganda Commercial Bank, I met one of its main officials, Mr. Jjagwe, that is the name, I talked about interest rates, he said the Minister of Finance has not been complaining about interest rates.  We apply the interest rates that the Bank of Uganda tells us.  Who is right now, the Ministry or the Uganda Commercial Bank? 

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  On this matter, I am the right one.  (Laughter) Mr. Chairman, I want to inform my hon. Colleague, if a Commercial Bank goes to borrow from a Central Bank, it will pay a very high rate of interest because, Bank of Uganda is not its business to lend.  So, it discourages.  So, if commercial banks overdraw their balances with the Bank of Uganda they are charged a very high interest rate.  So, that Manager who told you cannot come to say because Bank of Uganda charges at a high rate.  We also charge a high rate.  Government is urging them.  Can you relate your interest rate to the rate of inflation that is all?

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of order.  In view of the fact that, the Bank of Uganda Bill that we passed only a few days ago, had a provision that the Bank of Uganda will set interest rates.  Is the Minister in order to tell us that the interest rates have been full liberalised?  Is he in order Mr. Chairman?  

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  I want to conclude by reading that law again. The Bank of Uganda will set the maximum interesting rate  -(Interjection.) It varies, yes.  Now, Sir, I want to thank my hon. Friends for all the good points they have made, all the views they have made, and I trust that with a few Amendments to this Bill, we shall, if we pass it, put in place a strong base for a strong banking industry because a strong banking industry can only be supported by depositors and depositors can only support the supported industry which they feel secure and this Bill intends to give such security.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE CHAIRMAN: With that, we have come to the end of today’s Sitting.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Council rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on 29th Thursday April 1993).


