Tuesday 26th April, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair)

The Council was called to order.

MOTION FOR RESOLUTION

MR. KAHERU:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that the Council passed the following resolution.  The National Resistance Council sitting on the 26th of April, 1994 notes with appreciation the reports of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor General’s Report for 1986/87; 1987/88; 1988/89 and special Audits on the accounts of the Teaching Service Commission and on the DANIDA funds for the Uganda Constitutional Commission, notes reports of widespread and serious mismanagement and lack of control of Public Funds and assets.  Note the grossly inadequate measures taken by the government to prevent and eradicate financial mismanagement and corruption in the Pubic Service.  Now, therefore, be it resolved by the National Resistance Council:

    i. That Council directs the government to take action to eradicate embezzlement and mismanagement of funds and assets and corruption in the Public Service;

    ii. That Council directs the government to take action to implement the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee and in particular to take action whenever individuals are shown to have mismanaged funds;

    iii. That Council calls on the government to strengthen the Criminal Investigation Department of the Police, the Department of Public prosecution, the Judiciary, the Treasury and all the accounting services in the Ministries, offices of the auditor General and offices of the Inspector General of Government;

    iv. That council calls on the government to submit to it proposals to empower the Inspector General of Government to prosecute cases of embezzlement and mismanagement of funds;

    v. That Council directs the government to regularly present to it progress report on the implementation of recommendations by the Public Accounts Committee, Inspector General of Government, commissions or Inquiry etc.

    vi. That Council calls on government to establish at a high level an inter-Ministerial Agreements Committee to scrutinise and approve all proposed government agreements;

    vii. That Council calls on political leaders and public officials in the interest of transparency and accountability to give public explanations whenever serious allegations of embezzlement, mismanagement or corruption are made;

    viii. That Council directs the NRC Committee on Economy to regularly scrutinise all matters regarding government external and internal borrowing; and

    ix. That Council directs the Public Accounts Committee to particularly monitor the utilisation of loan funds and implementation of projects funded by the Government.

Last Thursday, the 21st of April, this Council adopted and approved a Motion by the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, the reports of the Public Accounts Committees or the Auditor General’s reports of 1986/87; 87/88; 88/89 and a special audit of the DANIDA funds for the Constitutional Commission and the Teaching Service Commission.  

Firstly, I propose that this Council formerly records its gratitude to the Auditor General, to the Public Accounts Committees, the three of them, who considered the various audit reports and the Committee’s initiatives where the Auditor General had not reported.  Secondly, this Council should consider necessary measures needed to take action on the various recommendations to eliminate embezzlement and corruption.

I do not have to go into the details; many recommendations have been made since the work of the Public Accounts Committee was revived but what we are waiting for is the action on these proposals.  There is widespread concern about corruption and embezzlement of public funds.  Look at the following extracts from the Report of the Uganda Constitutional Commission.  I quote; ‘people are of the view that a lot of public funds are being diverted to private us.  They point to unexplained wealth in the form of houses, cars, luxurious life styles and other evidence to back up their claims that some government officials especially those handling public funds are corrupt or have embezzled public funds.  There is overwhelming feeling that not enough is being done to control corruption and embezzlement of public funds.’ 

In paragraph 22, sub-paragraph 8 of the same Commission’s report they state; ‘there is equally great concern about funds.  This results in diversion of funds to purposes for which they are not intended.  Over-expenditure on some projects and under-funding of others among other things.  Though there are laws meant to regulate the management and control of public funds there ate too many cases of misuse and diversion.  The people feel concerned that these laws are being ignored with impunity.’  That is a quotation from the Constitutional Commission Report.

Now, the same Commission states also as follows:  ‘The people have noted short-comings in relation to the work of the Public Accounts Committee which they would like to see rectified.  These include: (a) apparent lack of action when individuals are shown to have mismanaged funds or to have engaged in corrupt practices.  These taxpayers are not informed of what action authorities take after the Public Accounts Committee has presented its findings.  (b) Ministers are not called upon to explain issues, which affect their Ministries.  (c) The Public Accounts Committee deals with history, the Auditor General’s report on which it based its investigation almost always comes a long time after the matter being reported on have occurred.  It is therefore of doubtful value in preventing mismanagement and funds and corruption.’  All that is an extract.  

Similar views have been expressed by the Public Service Review and Re-organisation Commission of 1989/90.  The press and many members of the public have been greatly concerned about action being taken on this matter.  We realise that the fight against corruption and embezzlement will be hard and protracted.  However, it is a war that must be fought and won.  Remedial action needs to be taken.  For example, (i) the first measure is that political and public leaders should sensitize the public against embezzlement and corruption.  Here it is the duty of us all to sensitize the public lest the public would think that corruption and embezzlement is a normal behaviour.  Political leaders should, therefore, respond with concern when cases of embezzlement or corruption in their areas of responsibilities have been raised in the Newspapers.  

Currently, whenever there is no response to allegations in public, the public would be excused to think that political leaders that either what has been stated is not correct or public leaders have no respect for the public otherwise, they would have explained because this is taxpayers money.

Number two, ministers should give top priority to the debates of the Public Accounts Committee Reports. (Applause)  In his speech on the occasion of the closing ceremony of the Induction Course for Ministers in Jinja in 1990, and His Excellency the President had this to say.  I quote, ‘Ministers are ultimately expected by the legislature to take great interest in the proper use of government funds budgeted for the Ministries.  Statutorily, Ministers acquire funds from Parliament for their Ministers.  They defend their Ministries budgets in Parliament.  After utilising these funds, Ministers are again answerable to Parliament through debates on reports of the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament for its expenditure.’  That is a quotation from the speech by His Excellency the President.

In the same speech, the President urged his Ministers again I quote, ‘to take adequate interest in the accountability of the funds Parliament votes for their Ministries, notwithstanding the accountability responsibility of the Permanent Secretaries.’  Mind you if the President were to preside over the debates of the Public Accounts Committee Reports, Ministers would attend. (Laughter)  Probably we should invite the President to attend the debates.  There is urgent need for the enforcement of the Leadership Code of Conduct, late as measures may be. (Applause)  

Furthermore, the Public Accounts Committee should be strengthened.  When I was Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, We had a problem on the staff, on even simple funds to have documents Photostatted and so on and so forth and this has continued.  So, these Committees who are doing a great job should be strengthened and be given a small but carefully selected secretariat to assist in the following up of the PAC decisions and in ensuring that the police and IGG deal promptly with issues raised by the Public Accounts Committee.

There have been proposals made for the government to initiate measures to appoint an anti-corruption tribunal because the normal courts are too busy and some of the rules are too technical and bureaucratic.  In the report of the Public Service Review and Re-organisation Commission, the following proposal was made in this connection.  Perhaps some countries have taken measures to curb corruption by passing specially stiff laws and by establishing special anti-corruption tribunals, which are not hampered by the ordinary procedural traditions and technicalities of the regular courts.  

To ensure quick but fair trials the National Resistance Council should be asked to establish a special anti-corruption tribunal the function of which would include the following; to expeditiously try all the corruption cases emanating from the police force, the CID, the Inspector General of Government or from the proceedings of the Public Accounts Committee and pass sentences; (b) to impose heavy penalties provided by the law which should be commensurate with seriousness of the crime.  

The above-mentioned Commission also recommended the amendment of the anti-corruption law of 1970 and the Penal Code.  For example, they stated that all embezzled monies should be returned to the state and misappropriated properties or goods should be forfeited.  

Now, I am making quotations from some of these reports because very many reports have been made but they keep on gathering dust and recommendations are not implemented.  For example, again, the Public Service Review and Re-organisation Commission recommended that the Auditor General’s Office be strengthened with qualified staff to permit timely inspection and audits. They also again made recommendations in many other areas, very good recommendations.  They even recommended financial incentive schemes in form of commission for people who give information and that is the whistle blowers.  There are other proposals that have been mentioned in the resolution.  So, what we would like to see, what I would like to propose, is that the Council decides that it demands action. (Applause)

Lastly, is the question of debts. Uganda has got a heavy burden of debts but there are some weaknesses in the machinery of negotiating and approving of loans and there are also loopholes in the problem of following up projects which have been financed by those from overseas and I would propose that the Council uses its own machinery to strengthen the investigations of a number of these areas.  

In other words, even on our part as National Resistance Council, we should ensure that loans that have been negotiated have actually been put to best use and I would like to invite this House to pass this resolution in order to assist the Government and to assist the public in at least making a start.  

I am not saying that once we pass this resolution that is the end of our obligations, no.  This is a beginning because when Government makes progress report these matters would be considered both by this House and the Committees but, in view of the concern of the public there seem to be conspiracy of silence on this area we nee to do something.  There has also forth been a statement like people feel concern before they have gone to public office once they go there, the matter loses its urgency and in practice no action is taken.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.  

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira):  Mr. Chairman, on the Order Paper it is appearing that, it is hon. Sibo to second with his permission I have been allowed and you have allowed rising to second the Motion tabled because of the seriousness that it demands.  

Last Thursday, this august House met and overwhelmingly supported the report of the Public Accounts Committee and recommendations, including its open letter to the right hon. Prime Minister Sir.  We have noted often that these august House under your Chairmanship, that it is taken sometimes for a right we bring matters here, Bills becomes statute here, Resolutions are passed here, but to me over the first five years I now almost see that it is just the tradition and a formality that they come and then as he was saying it seems that there is conspiracy of silence but it is something which is only brought so that Members as it was which is not the case now, rubber stamp.  

A lot of grounds have been covered in the public accounts report they have revealed matters that should be taken very seriously by the organ that is to follow it up.  What I have seen in the Committees, Commissions and what have you, Sir, there are no court grounds in themselves otherwise they expose set in place hoping that legal measures can follow them up, unfortunately this has never been the case because we would not like to lose trend of this particular report that we have just received, we would like now to trigger to set in motion some kind of action by the appropriate bodies.  We have found that it is recorded, and it is in my contribution to this august House sometime last year but one, when I lamented the lack of implementations of the Leadership Code I said may be, it is protecting some of us because I am also a victim of the Code maybe, it is protecting some of us that is why we cannot put this one into action.  

From outside this cry of corruption is rampant and we are not sitting, I remember some time last year in the Uganda Television Forum, I was invited to talk about this very word ‘corruption’ together with Professor Apolo Nsibambi, no rather than the Inspector General of Government, Mr. Augustine Ruzindana.  We had two weeks programme on this very issue corruption, and sometimes we have not taken papers very seriously although papers are not Bible versions in themselves, but they have some amount of truth in whatever they come across whose truth can only be re-enforced or thrown out by arm of government, which in this case should be the investigating arm.  

We have always talked about corruption, sung about corruption, exonerated ourselves from being corrupt people and because there is nobody who is ready probe and declare that such a person is to be believed, we have encouraged if anything corruption in our society.  The only thing that this House can take now, is to follow as guided by the Mover of this Motion all the truth, facts and reports which have actually come and not been challenged; let us take it that all these things are worth of execution.  

Unless we are able to put in place machinery that will break the rules, laws, regulations, and resolutions, which we make in this House, we are not going to help this nation.  The nation has entrusted us with the responsibility of speaking on their behalf, and we are the watchdogs here, and if we are the watchdogs, we have to be the type of dogs that the master would actually have confidence in.  Because corruption is known in the Third World and even in their first world but much more rampant in our Third World of Uganda, and for this, Mr. Chairman, I beg to re-enforce and put my strong appeal that Members of this august House should hear and now resolve that some machineries be put in place to probe this.  I beg to support.

MISS NAMUYANGU (Kibuku County, Pallisa):  I stand to support the Motion with the few observations.  I have been listening to what Members have been saying, and their concern on the government, and we have seen the reports produced by PAC - Public Accounts Committee and other bodies who have been trying to find those who embezzle, and those who are corrupt the methods they use and how they have been carrying on the business of crippling the country by embezzling and by corrupt methods.  

Now, the Committees set up and the machinery to apprehend the corrupt and the embezzlers have done their work, and the work that they have produced makes one feel that we cannot have non-corrupt people.  It gives an impression that all servants of the people are corrupt; they are embezzlers, and they are thieves.  It is very worrying, but I do not believe it is like that, I think we have more honest people who can serve faithfully and diligently, only that government has lacked machinery to identify them.  

I, therefore, would like to appeal to government to review its methods of appointing people.  We know there is public service and all institutions normally they advertise jobs, people make applications from a village or an area or from an institution and I face a small group of people who are to interview me, they look at my papers, and I have fulfilled all the requirements but, all this I bring to the table according to their adverts, do not reveal my background whether I have been honest or not, whether I am a principled person to serve or to handle public money.  

So here, I think government must put in place machinery strengthen machinery to find out the credibility of people who normally take up important jobs that have been crippled by corrupt people.  I identify one method; if people have already faced interviews, and one or two have been identified as fit from the papers and the first experience and what have you, instead of rushing to write an appointment letter, they should stand a test or time, say two weeks or three weeks or a month advertising their names so and so has been offered a job, then the public gives their opinion -(Laughter)- why not?  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MISS NAMUYANGU:  They should get the public opinion because normally when we are applying for jobs the referees demanded are only one or two, and some of the referees usually are relatives or people who have been in the system together.  So, I think the public must take part as recommends on the Motion say that government must take action now.  Action has been taken, people have been apprehended, and they were complaining that nothing has been done; the laws are there, even if we enforce them they may not work.  So, I propose that when one is appointed to the Public Service, one must also - the public and Members of Parliament must also be given a chance to give their opinion on the first principles, first behaviour of the individuals to take up these jobs.

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. speaker on the Floor that, I do not think it is scarcity of information about alleged cases on embezzlement, I think the press has done quite a lot to reveal some cases of allege embezzlement and corruption, and they have gone sometimes un heeded.  

Secondly, I think that before even we go to the Public Service we as Members of Parliament should submit ourselves to the proposed system whereby the public should be free to say whatever they want to say about us, but in so doing, you must realise that some Members of the public are also corrupt and they will make allegations which will not even be able to defend once they have been levelled against you, I think our emphasis should be put on trying to find out what is the cause of corruption, because no matter whether you sweep the whole board clean and you employee people starting tomorrow these people will also be corrupt.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed Madam.

MISS NAMUYANGU:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I thank hon. Magezi for his information, but I strongly feel that what has been happening has not been adequate enough, the public has to be involved more to intervene before someone is appointed to any job.  I was coming to the end of my contribution, before hon. Magezi intervened.   I thank you.

MR. TIVU (Northern Youth Representative):  Mr. Chairman, in the first place, I thank the august House for having given opportunity to the Members to express their views in nation issues.  Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, you will bear the issues like corruption which we are discussing right now, the burden will be born by the youth, when we talk of external debt which is being mismanaged today, it will be the youth tomorrow to suffer.  

I support the Motion being moved by the Member on the following grounds.  In Uganda when we talk of poverty, I do not believe because we have a lot of natural resources and we have the manpower; it is just corruption and mismanagement of public funds, and somebody has just said what has been the cause of this corruption.  To me, it is lack of institution guards against corruption. But in Uganda in particular, when we talk of corruption, you will find the Minister will not resign. I think this is a very serious note that the youth are concerned about.  

I, therefore, suggest on behalf of the youth that if there is any institution held or Ministry that is accused of corruption, the ministers will resign because we shall not tolerate mismanagement being practised and being treated against and yet the person promoting the corruption - legislator.  By setting up these circles of people we shall - we have these boards like the Inspector General of Government, and the CID, but my experience that we have set up a circle of corrupt officials so we must find a strong legislative guard against the corrupt officials and, therefore, I recommend the public accounts should be given to the designated; irregularly it means every three years we must examine the accounts of our institutions, every year, we must be able to examine the accounts because if we just leave them there and say we leave it to the CID and so we shall find that the same board will end up being corrupted.  

When you look at the present nature of corruption in Uganda, it is not really the economic aspect of it, it is not moral degeneration, you know, economists say that the marginal prospective to have increase, it is a very unique phenomena.  So, when people talk of giving incentives these people became more corrupt because the more money you have, the more you want to have.  So, let us have institutional guard which is legislative.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr. Amanya Mushega):  Mr. Chairman, I also like to make a contribution on this Motion.  My notes are brief because I had come to present my Paper, only to find that we are discussing something else. But is not true to say that Government is doing nothing about corruption.  And I will recite a few cases.  I will start with a report that has been presented by the Public Accounts Committee here, concerning the Ministry of Education.  What is the genesis of that report?  

In 1991, having found out that we had a problem in the Ministry of Education, the existing machinery would not help, I wrote to my Colleague after talking to him, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs that if he could find me two trusted CID officers versed in accounts and post them to the Ministry of Education quietly so that they could carry out investigations is what is going on, because the real corruption which eats the borne marrow is the one you do not see.  Invoices are in order, all papers signed but you may find that the commodity that was worth ten million has been invoiced for 50 million and everything looks very well and the gentlemen are walking around the town.  

So, these two officers were posted in the Ministry and they started investigating the Teaching Service Commission.  They are the ones who found that money was being disbursed for District Teaching Service Committees when they were not yet formed.  They made a report to the CID and gave me a copy and a copy to the Auditor General.  We encouraged them go on and we gave them money to go to the districts and investigate more.  After doing that, they gave a report to the Auditor General and the Auditor General continued with this investigation and gave a copy to the Public Accounts Committee.  The Public Accounts Committee, I commend them but they should recognise this fact.  That is a fact.  Then the Public Accounts Committee also continued with investigations but one mistake was made.  The whole matter was made public and therefore the officer who are being followed now were aware that problem was at hand because we were publicity anxious at that time.  

So, to say that we are doing nothing as ministers or as Government, is definitely not the whole truth.  There is no conspiracy of silence or of action. (Laughter)  So, had we not requested for this quiet investigation, there would have been no report that the Public Accounts Committee would have acted upon.  Because it does not have an independent machinery of its own to go in the ministries and do this system of inquiry.  

There is also a report about 8 million or 28 million stolen in Masaka.  How was it done?  I think hon. Ntimba may recall.  When we started paying teachers on the spot.  And Father Pius the PS then, went with a team of Ministry Officials to Masaka and when they paid the people on the spot, that is when they discovered that some teachers who were receiving these monies were not there and the DEO was interdicted and the matter handed to the Police.  That is another fact of our action in our attempt to preserve public accounts. (Interruption)- Mr. Chairman, I will take the information.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you going to give order or point of information?

MR. WANENDEYA:  Well, since he has accepted the information, I will give it to him.  May I inform the hon. Minister of Education who is on the Floor of the House now, that I personally wrote a letter and gave a copy to his Deputy in connection with corruption in schools when salaries are being paid out.  So, when he comes of his speech in saying that he is doing everything, may I inform that, it is not the gospel truth.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr. Chairman, I thank hon. Wanendeya for his usual interventions, and if he had been patient enough to listen to my statement, probably he would have heard that I would have given a word of praise to him.  That is, I will just touch on an ant shell of what some of us in Ministries have been doing to combat the corruption.  What about government as a whole?  Perhaps it would help us to look at what were the avenues of corruption when the National Resistance Movement came into power.  Whether any steps have been taken or nothing had been done.  One, the system of allocation of commodities and foreign exchange.  This was a major avenue of corruption.  This has now been closed.  I am told if you go to the Bank of Uganda now, you no longer find queues, looking for money to import things that people are not going to buy.  And people in the Bank of Uganda now can tell you; they sit on their deals and attend to their professional duties.  Originally, they were the most hated people because they could not allocate the money to those who wanted it.  Commodities, now you can go to any part of Uganda - in the villages and buy the commodity available.  You no longer have to look for a Minister’s chit, a DEO, a District Governor or pretend you are going to have a wedding, simply to be allocated ten crates of beer and then go and sell a piece of paper and say, in the evening that in Uganda, people are working very hard.

The system of licensing has been shortened and streamlined.  Because people were paying heavily to get licences, and those who had no business to do, may get a license faster than those who had a business to transact.  This has been made - liberalisation of trade and export.  Hon. Kaheru, when I was a small boy, he was the Chairman of Coffee Marketing Board, according to my sister here, he was also in National Trading Corporation, but I saw him in Coffee Marketing Board, when hon. Kanyomozi was the Minister.  He must know what was going on in the export of coffee at that time.  And he made his best; bit the export of coffee was a centre of corruption.  

With liberalisation of export of coffee and other commodities now, government has been able to save money and people can go about their business fairly well.  The appointment of Members of NRC on parastatal bodies was another attempt to involve everybody including the legislators to fight corruption that was available in the government - on the companies.  If that has not been done, you cannot blame Ministers.  Because I would like to know where people and Chairman, if there has been an improvement, that is a good attempt.  If there has been no improvement, that is a good attempt.  If there has been no improvement, obviously, we all have to share the blame. I am just mentioning incidences of blocking the loopholes that previously were avenues for corruption.

The office of the IGG.  The law was passed in this House.  The RC Statute.  When RCs were involved to become judges.  You may recall how the professional lawyers opposed this.  But now there is fair justice in the countryside.  If somebody steals you chicken or extended the boundary mark in your ‘Kibanja’ you go to the local people who know, and they will give judgement faster than their magistrate would have done.  And you can definitely not have peace and democracy without justice.  

I am just mentioning a few incidences.  The list may be long, so we may mention areas in which government has not acted, but it is not true to say that government has been doing absolutely nothing.  It may not have done enough and the duty of this House is to point out those areas and empower the government and give it the necessary machinery to fight remaining battles.  I would also mentioned that they increase the pay of the teachers in the Ministry of Education although it is not yet enough, is yet another attempt to return the teacher to work, and some of us who come from the country side, if you go to our primary schools now, the teachers are more present at the schools than they were three years back during the administration of this Government.

The return of the Custodian Properties.  The actual owners.  Because if you may recall whenever Governments are changed in Uganda, the first line of battle was over the location of custodian Board Property.  I happen to have been in the Security Ministry when we came in 1986 and some of the people maybe wanting a flat of somebody or a shop of somebody, and the first report was that so and so I understand is carrying a gun.  If you are not careful, you take that gentleman already to prison only for the following day for the accuser to be occupying the shop of the flat.  By now labeling that ground, another area where corruption was rampant has now been eliminated and people can pay the rent charged. But nobody can pocket the difference.  

So, I am mentioning and I would take this opportunity to announce hon. Members that on the 17th of May, the Ministry of Education is going to carry out a head county throughout the whole country.  We computerised the pay roll of teachers in order to be able to know who is a teacher and who is not.  But that is not enough.  We are going to carry out a head count of all primary teachers, count the existing schools, count the students in schools, so that if tomorrow the headmaster claims that he has 17 teachers when we know they are two, he will not receive the salary of the balance of 15.  These are the efforts being made to smoothen the situation.  

The government of the National Movement has encouraged the free press.  Actually, the free press when they talk about corruption, previously they would not have in the 70s and early 80s corruption was there definitely, but nobody would talk about it, because if you did, you may not be alive that evening.  So, encouraging a free press is in itself widening the horizon of those who want to combat corruption in this country.  Because they will point out, some of them may be true, some of them may be exaggerated, some of them may be invasion, but they will be followed and action taken, at least, they will be made aware.  And of course, a free press also means, free debate in this hon. House.  And all these measures have been done with your knowledge and support by your popular National Resistance Movement.  

So, there are a lot of good people in Uganda, if all Ugandans were as bad as we say, very few of us would be living today.  The majority of Ugandans are decent, they want to go upon their business and we should not blanket them.  I have worked in a few Ministries and I have seen young men and women in spite of the low pay, who turn up and do their work diligently.  But when we turn around and say everybody is rotten, even we discourage these young people who are anxious to serve their country.  Hon. Matayo Kyaligonza may recall that when he was in the bush even there were allegations in Nairobi and other capitals that people in the bush were being paid.  Obviously if somebody pays you 2 million, you are better of in Nairobi Hotel than sleeping in those forests near Namugongo, where he once found you.  But people could not believe that they could go there and fight without pay.  

There are many Ugandans who are also willing to contribute a battle for the development of this country even on the limited resources we have.  So that they can build a capacity for more and record themselves better.  My own view is that is why I support the Bill read by hon. Loy Nkwasibwe that we must categorise the good people and have a machinery to separate the bad ones, and praise those who are working hard in spite of hard conditions and penalties those who are damaging our economy.

So, in my view, we should give credit where it is due.  Even the Government brought a Bill here, to take more people to work and reduce public holidays.  It was this august House which increased time for holidays, in the middle of a battle against corruption and backwardness.  So, my only view is that, we should stop lamenting, stop pointing fingers - accusing figures and come out consistently with complete suggestions and ideas as to what all of us can do to combat corruption in this country.  There are a lot of people already doing so and this House should not discourage them by just blanketing everybody as corrupt.

Finally, I do not believe that whenever something is written in the place, the person concerned must resign.  If that was the case, very few Members of this House would be here.  Because every year they mention this, somebody has no county, Student, in his pick-up, another one has done this.  Of course, looking down people is not a pleasant activity, because in other developed countries also, even smaller people, church leaders, Members of Parliament, Head teachers and ministers resign when there is proof that they have been involved in malpractice.  But if we say that once every headline is written, the one who is written about must resign, then that would be opening a door for confusion and chaos in this country.  I support the views raised by those who want to help us to clean up this country.  

And finally, there are some people who say things here, you invite them in your office to brief you, they do not turn up.  And there are those who say nothing in this House and follow you in the office and give you evidence of what is being happening and have action taken.  I hope that those who make statements here, one; themselves, leave to the standard they have taken.  Two, give evidence to those involved, give information, and you see whether action cannot be taken.  Let us not lament, but look for ways of improving the wealth of our people and ensuring that everybody earns what he works for.  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for availing me this opportunity.

MR. SEBAANA KIZITO (Makindye Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Allow me to welcome you back to your Chair.  We were all very worried when news reached us, but when you are here safe and well, we are all rejoicing. (Applause)  

Allow me to mention the situation about Ugandans in Rwanda.  We do not hear anything, no statement at all about these people although we know that there are some countries that went there, and air lifted their nationals. I do not know whether in Uganda, we do not care about our nationals.  Also, we do not have any information about our embassy in Rwanda.  You know that His Excellency the Ambassador of Uganda, His Excellency Katetejuro was a Member of this House for five years and we are very worried about what is happening to him and his staff.  We would like to have a statement from Government about Ugandans in Rwanda.  

Going to the Motion which I support, I want to make a distinction between corruption and theft, confusing the two.  If a man has been entrusted with public funds and he cannot account for that money, that is not corruption, but that is theft of public funds.  Do not clarify this action by calling him a corrupt official; he is a thief.  And we should call a spade a spade.  The idea of having audit reports is for us to be able to detect where people have stolen money, is mainly stealing which is so rampant in these Public Accounts Committee Report.  It is not corruption as such, because I want to define corruption as the giving and receiving of bribe, which is different from stealing money.  The reports which we get from the Auditor General, give us the information how many is stolen and how much is stolen, although it is true that these are postmortem, but they guide us so that was can prevent future thefts.  

Unfortunately, we do not appear to be learning from these reports because what happened last year, is what happens today, is what will happen next year.  We want to see that if the Auditor General points out a loophole, that loophole is plucked and therefore it does not re-occur.  

Therefore, this Motion, which we are debating now, is important in the sense that it will awaken the administrator of justice in this country, particularly the Attorney General and his staff.  That there are sufficient laws in this country, which can arrest and imprison thieves, especially thieves on public funds.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the floor of the House that the Attorney General of Uganda unlike the Attorney General from some countries, who has no investigative machinery.  He does not investigate crimes.  The Ministry of Internal Affairs investigate crimes and produces evidence to the Attorney General or move precisely to the Director of Public Prosecution who is under the Attorney General and if there is sufficient evidence supporting the Commission of the crime, the Attorney General prosecutes.  But the nature of this country is that people are either not willing or able to give evidence.  And without evidence or may be witnesses in the investigating machinery, when cases are brought up, they are investigated.  And when cases are brought up in the future, following continue to be prosecuted.  Thank you very much.

MR. SEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you for the information, hon. Attorney General.  The Uganda public is not interested in knowing the finalities of running the government.  The public of Uganda is interested in arresting a criminal and punishing him appropriately according to the laws of this country.  Therefore, the government should find ways and means of reaching this gap whereby there is difference and so forth.  Therefore, collective responsibility must apply here.  

Also the public - I know it is the public in one way or the other; the public may know that someone has stolen money, but they may enjoy that money together - especially if that person is a generous man.  He goes and buys beer for them and they will even begin signing praises of that same person.  Therefore, stolen money if you give me something and I suspect that you have stolen money to buy that same thing, I should not take it away, I should not take it from you.  Therefore, the public would know because if they arrest somebody who has stolen Shs. 50 million, and they take him to prison for one week, that man comes out of prison and he throws a party. 

In conclusion, I want to say that unless we are careful in Uganda, we are quickly gaining reputation that we are very difficult to deal with.  People in all walks, it is not only in public but also in private there is stealing everywhere, there are some people who even say that they will not want to work while they have no chance of stealing, and if this continues, we are going to discourage investments both internal -(Interruption)

MRS. V. SSEKITOLEKO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, through you, I would like to ask the speaker on the Floor, if he remembers, because when he said people are saying that we are difficult to deal with, that is what reminded me, if he remembers what happened when he was a Minister of Co-operatives and, I was a Minister of Agriculture, and there was this corrupt company which wanted medal in our assets and when I threw it out of agriculture, it went to Co-operatives and it was housed.  At the end of the day, they said, I was difficult to work with.  I want to finish this story, two months later, there was a retrenchment of Ministers, a new Minister came into Co-operatives, he stopped the bill and Uganda was liberated.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman; I just wanted to remind him. (Laughter)

MR. SEBAANA KIZITO:  I am happy about the reminding - the reminder of the Ministry of Agriculture, when she threw that from her own Ministry, it went to Co-operatives after I had left that Ministry.  I was saying that unless we are careful about our behaviour, we may lose investments both local and overseas because people who invest money would want to see that what they have invested have been used for the purpose to which it was intended.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi):  First of all, I would like to welcome you back.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  I am repeating it, but out of joy, I was pleased when I saw you coming back to Chair the meeting, and I will always cooperate with you Sir. (Laughter)  I would like to begin by supporting the Motion moved by hon. Zack Kaheru.  We in this country, we feel that government is not very serious on this aspect of corruption because for example, one time we had a closed session, and the Prime Minister - the closed session in fact was chaired by no other than His Excellency the President.  The Prime Minister came out with a statement saying he had a hundred corrupt officers on his desk as we talk today, and we have never heard anything. (Laughter)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor to leak secrets that were discussed in a closed Session?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Not in order, please proceed.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Mr. Chairman, as far as I am concerned, there is no secrecy here because why - as a leader, I have always emphasised the importance of being accountable to the people who elected us and we -(Interruption)

MR. D. PULKOL:  Point of order.  Through you, Mr. Chairman, and for the purpose of discipline in this House, is it in order for hon. Member to disregard a ruling from the Chair?  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order please.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  I wish to withdraw, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Thank you. Then proceed.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Mr. Chairman, me, I feel I always fight for the disadvantaged group of people in this country.  It is really thorough black mail for some of our leaders to think that we are well off and we fail to realise that people around us are really in a trap; the rural people are in utter poverty.    They actually feel that there is not much that is being done to rehabilitate the rural people, they feel that government should do much more in order to save the - to clear the problems as we politicians because they demand that most of their roads are not done.  This is because when money is given always passed by Parliament every financial year, that money is not - when it is sent to the districts, it is not used properly.  Sometimes there is colliding between the Ministry Headquarters for Local Governments and the - those respective districts saw the money which was meant say for feeder roads, is not used for feeder roads, and it is the politician who is again called upon because of lack of information by our people, that now this road was not done and yet money has been sent to this district.  

So, really there are great things which are being done in ministries and should be clear to MPs and to the NRC Members so that we know if money is sent to the district; we know we are given a copy of at least that letter but the Ministers do not care to respect this House.  

MR. LUKUMU:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the point he is raising regarding Members about funds going up country is very important.  I have a case in mind, the hon. Minister of Education gave us details of funds that were sent to respective Secondary Schools and because of that information, I was able to tress Shs. 700,000/= which was meant for the purchase of cement for Bugungu Secondary School, but after three months, in fact, it took four months, nothing has been made known to the people concerned until I intervened well equipped with the information from the hon. Minister of Education, that is when I saved the Shs. 700,000/= had disappeared.  Thank you.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  I thank the hon. Member for that information.  Mr. Chairman, that adds to what I am trying to say that there is a gap between the executive and the legislature, if we are to combat corruption, if we are to combat embezzlement, this rampant embezzlement of public funds, this communication gap should be reduced.  In fact, we are very lucky we have three Prime Minister in this country -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  Who? Who?
 
MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Okay, they are four -(Interjection)- now four Prime Ministers in a country and they are - the Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business, but some of these issues really we need a report as a Parliament, we need a report from the Leader of Government Business to inform us what is taking place in every sector; at least, Parliament is entitled to that; maybe after every three months, the Prime Minister should come and give this House a brief of whatever is happening in every area so that it keeps us near, and so that we know exactly what is happening in government.  

So, I would even appeal to the National Resistance Movement, Secretariat should also try to keep NRC Members as close as possible so that we know what goes on there rather than keeping us a look.  We are all bound in one Movement, this is what everyone thinks, but we want to see that bound - this calling Movement think to be interpreted into reality we do not want mares. 

I would like to dwell on another point which I raised last time, that Leaders must be accountable, without accountability of leaders, there is nothing you can do in any democracy.  I do appreciate the contribution made by hon. Minister of Education about the achievements of the National Resistance Movement when you compare it with the previous governments.  I want to inform the hon. Minister through you, that people had suffered a lot for so many years since independence.  When the National Resistance Army was in the bush, there were other people who were also contributing not being active combatant, but they were contributing morally or they were in a financially - but making sure that this war is won.  Because you know people had suffered a lot, they had lost relatives, there had been mismanagement of public funds.  

So, when the National Resistance Movement came into power, everyone was - had to have a sign of relief because we knew that this is going to be really a change, which means therefore, all the areas which the hon. Minister of Education has addressed, it was obvious that is what the NRM was supposed to do. (Laughter)  

So after doing that we are still saying, they still need more, we want it to be more strict, we are happy with the progress being made, but we are saying, there is still some loopholes which we need to be planned so that the system can live forever. (Laughter)  

So, I would like to say for example, the government’s failure to implement the Leadership Code has also caused a problem to this country especially, to we leaders because if we leaders had to have our balance sheet every year, to know exactly how much money we have obtained and then we could also have some auditors or people to verify, have you got this money properly then this - these masses which we hear people are buying voters, people are doing this and that, people are throwing lavish parties, would not be there because in developed countries, leaders are accountable and they know exactly how much a President gets; they know how much a minister gets, but here, you find someone is spending beyond his means, how can you account for that as a means which was spent?  

Recently, we requested as a Member of the Public Accounts Committee on Parastatals, we requested for a list of debtors from - those bad debtors not good debtors, but bad debtors from UCB so that we know exactly real how are the people been living, this is living beyond our means, and this is very chaotic, it can throw a country in chaos where people live beyond their means.  

So, the Leadership Code should be implemented and it if is implemented, we shall have all, it will keep us under discipline, we shall always try to check on our bad behaviour trying to amass wealth here and there, you will say, ah, but I will be queried how did I get this house during this year, where did I get the money from?  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do strongly support the resolution brought by the hon. Member Zack Kaheru.

MR. KAHERU (Historical Member):  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Members for having contributed.  Now, really most of the contributors have been generally positive and clear, but I would like to make some comments on some of the contributions on the points raised.  

There is the point raised by hon. Amanya Mushega, I think truly hon. Amanya Mushega may not have come to the House because what he was talking about is not what has been said, nobody made blanket accusations; I repeat, nobody made blanket accusations.  Really it is amazing for anyone to think that because there have been some problems - there have been some developments, therefore, and no one should say anything else of what is going on, really you see, I appreciate that, of course NRM came into power with very heights we set these high standards and we should be proud of them.  We should not start comparing ourselves too much with previous regimes. Otherwise, you will gravitate to them, to their standards.  We should the entire time endeavour to improve on our own performance so that the gap goes on widening.  Secondly, no one actually made any - no one said that Government has done nothing about embezzlement and corruption as such.

MR. NASASIRA:  Point of information. I want to inform the Mover of the Motion that, although he is not accepting or he is praising the work done so far, it does not reflect in a warding of resolution.  The resolution says, ‘notes reports of wide spread and serious mismanagement and lack of control of public funds and assets.’  I want the Members to mark the word wide spread, serious, serious mismanagement and lack of control.  It further goes ahead and says not the gross in adequate measures taken; I want the word gross in adequate measures taken.  While I support the spirit of the Motion, I want to inform him that those words in the resolution are rather too strong and they do not reflect the appreciation of what has been done so far.

MR. KAHERU:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Member for that information, but at the same time I wish really to correct him that he is completely wrong.  To begin with, the part which refers to wide spread and serious mismanagement of public funds and assets, there is no one really who can rightfully say there is no wide spread and serious mismanagement of public funds, you only need to look through the reports of the Public Accounts Committee and yet that is in the report of the Public Accounts Committee is only the tip of the iceberg.  But you see that the tip of the iceberg is so large indicate the whole iceberg really is very huge. (Laughter)  

Secondly, the statement is ‘note the grossly in adequate measures’ taken by the government to prevent eradicate so on and so forth. Now, if you look through these reports of the Public Accounts Committee, you find so many recommendations which would really bring about very effective control for example, in the Committee which chaired, made the recommendations about strengthening the internal audit in Ministries, in order to deal with the control of mismanagement at sorts, can you believe it that since that time when we investigate up to now, the treasury has not created these internal audits.  So, really - that is just one example.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, through you, I would like to inform hon. Kaheru on two points.  One for purposes of records.  I never said that nobody should say anything for sure.  Secondly, that the system you established in the Ministry of Health is still working very well.

MR. KAHERU:  Now, Mr. Chairman, really unless we want to say we want to cover up, I get amazed.  First of all, well, it will take long for this council, but if I started explaining what the measures which were being taken in the Ministry of Health to control mismanagement, you will be amazed if one of the reasons why so many officials were so unhappy and there were spreading malicious rumours because they wanted to keep on eating.  So really let us face - the NRM standards are high, let us keep them high, let us not start saying these current standards are NRM standards, I do not accept that.  The current standards of management of public funds are not NRM standards.  

Now, there is another point that there was -(Interruption)

MRS. OKER:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Member through you and my own observation that, it seems as if while we are discussing this very serious issue about mismanagement of public funds, I get the impression that the Ministers think the august House or the back benchers are against them.  I feel that this is the concern of all of us here, and I think that the ministers should take it very seriously because I can now see us pointing accusing fingers on one another and trying to counteract what has happened.  I think this is not our concern; our concern is to try to see whether we can clean the House and clean the nation, and also really be concerned with those people who are serving us - the civil servants in the rural area without any benefit and yet we have here the Leader of Government Business, the ministers and ourselves are here laughing.  I think it is not a laughing matter; we should take it seriously and should stop accusing one another and feel that there is a difference. (Applause)

MR. KAHERU:  Thank you very much.  I would like to thank the hon. Member for the information.  I would like to state that I have got a high opinion of the measures which the hon. Amanya Mushega has taken in he Ministry of Education, and I think we would like to congratulate him -(Applause)- but let us go beyond and say that the measures he is taking, he is probably too much overwhelmed because there is still a lot to do in the Ministry of Education and he should admit it while thanking him for the measures he is taking, no one is saying that even in the Ministry of Education that nothing has been done.  The House appreciates the measures taken, but it is not enough - let us do more.  If the hon. Minister wants more legal powers or if he wants the Committee to assist him, he should come.

There is another point which was raised and that is -(Interruption)- the other point is, he mentioned that there is lamentation.  No, this Motion is not lamenting.  This Motion is proposing concrete action to be taken because we have heard reports, we should have concrete action and I would like to suggest that in future when a Motion like this is made, the government should really bring in its own programme.  You say look, we are going to do this and that.  We have done this much but there is still a lot undone and if they want us to help them, they should - you know, we are willing to help them.  

Now, the other point is that - it is the last point I want to raise - that if you look at this resolution, it is generally giving government opportunity to come up with measures.  We do not want reports to be made and they are kept aside.  No, that has been happening, but it is not good enough.  In conclusion, Mr. Chairman - (Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, arising from the points that the Mover has just made, would he like to tell this House what will happen if government fails to implement part or all these resolutions here?  He does not mention that one.

MR. KAHERU:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to say that, I would not like to judge the government by low standards of not responding to the supreme organ.  This body is actually the supreme organ of government and it cannot direct government and government takes no action, because that would mean there is no law and order.  After all, even politically members of the public have always been questioning Members of this House why the House does not take action.  


In conclusion, I would like to invite Members to support this Motion and by this appeal, I am including Members of the Front Bench.  It is not directed at them, it is directed at implementing the Ten Point Programme and clean up the system.  I beg to move. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.  With those in favour of the Motion moved by hon. Kaheru say, aye to the contrary no.

(Question put and agreed to).

MOTION

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Sam Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, I rise to seek the permission of this House under Rule 85 to suspend Rule 55 in order to debate the amendment contained in the Constituent Assembly Amendment Bill, 1994.  This is a very urgent matter.  I stood at this same point a few weeks ago and informed this august House that CA or the Constituent Assembly whose elections have just been concluded or almost concluded was due to start its deliberations on the 5th of May - a few days from today.  

However, it has been the opinion of quite a number of people and that of government that there should be some loose ends tied up and some procedural points clarified before debate starts in the Constituent Assembly.  It is for that urgency that I come to this House to seek your permission to have this Bill debated here before the expiration of 14 days.  It was disturbed last week and I hope Members have had opportunity to look at it.  It is a very short Bill but very important because government believes that if we wait, we may not have time to complete its enactment before the commencement of the Constituent Assembly and that would be disaster.  So, I beg that this House accommodates government and allows the House to debate this Bill.  I beg to move.

MR. WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I rise very reluctantly to support this Bill.  The Motion is very clear.  Do we not have in government people with foresight to see that this and that is required so that the loose ends of anything we are trying to do is put right.  This arbitrary way of coming up here and now is not in the best interest of our government and our people.  

So, whilst I support this Motion, I would request the government as a whole to put our own house in order so that we would have the foresight to know what we are doing rather than doing things piece-meal all the time.  Otherwise, we will always be taken as a rubberstamp so that whenever government wants to do something, we just rubberstamp the Motions.  With those few words, Mr. Chairman, I humbly and reluctantly support the Bill.  I thank you
 
DR. TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi):  Mr. Chairman, I rise to oppose this Motion; the Motion to table this in less than 14 days.  The reason why I rise to oppose this Motion is that this Amendment is not really an Amendment.  It is a new law in spirit and in substance.  This Bill or this Amendment touches the very backbone of our Constitution making process.  For those who may not have had the chance to study it, all it seeks to do is in effect to remove the possibility of referendum in case the CA fails to realise two thirds in passing a Motion.  

I think this is a very important matter.  I think we should be given 14 days studying this matter so that we can, if necessary, even consult.  We debated this CA Statute for two months.  We consulted, went there and came back and there is this very important Clause which states that if there is no agreement supported by two thirds, we should go for a referendum.  This Amendment in effect seeks to kill the possibility of consulting the people and I think we should be given time to study this one in detail.  

We carried out the CA elections and we carried them out using certain rules.  We now wan to change the rules in the middle of the game - halfway.  You have scored two goals then you want to change the rules for the next half of the game.  

I would like to plead with the Minister possibly to withdraw this and give us a chance to study this Bill because it is so crucial.  The reason why I want us to study this matter carefully is that, the matter which is likely to involve a referendum is, how we would like this country to be ruled in the next five years.  Whether we would like to continue with the movement or whether we would like to go multi-party and this is not a matter we would like to just discuss now. I would like to plead with the Minister and plead with the Members and think about this matter so that we are given more time.  I am not opposing the Amendment itself; I am opposing the hurried nature in which the Amendment is being introduced.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have been trying to study carefully the contents of this Bill.  I have found difficulty in understanding proposed provisions.  This is complicated for a layman who is still interested in the politics of the country.  

I want to make a few observations.  We have just been talking in the last debate about corruption.  I deliberately kept quiet because I wanted to make my statement in connection with this Bill.  I have two points to make.  The first one - I was saying that there are two points to this that I wanted to make.  One is that, if you are going to fight corruption, you must do it in an environment that is not hostile to your effort.  Unfortunately, our country is a hostile territory when it comes to fighting corruption.  The people of Uganda - very many of them, I even dare say the majority encourage corruption.  

Recently, when we were having this election, it is clearly stated in Rule No.32 of the election procedure that any person either before, during an election with intend either direct or indirectly to influence to another person to vote or to refrain from voting for any candidate directly or indirectly gives or provides or causes to be given or provided any money to as a bribe to that other consideration in this rule collectively referred to imprisonment for a term not exceeding, vast members of our community contravened this law. (Applause) I would like to be advised by the Ministry of Internal affairs of how many people have been apprehended under this law.

MR. NASASIRA:  Point of clarification.  I wanted a clarification from hon. Kagonyera that him as a private citizen of this country, having had knowledge of that section being violated, whether he made any effort to make the citizens arrested.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Chairman, if I could be allowed to make my contribution and every Member of this House has a right to make his or hers.  Interruptions interfere with my thoughts.  Mr. Chairman, yes -(Interruption)

MR. KAWANGA:  Point of clarification.  I would like to argue that the honourable is advancing, but I am not sure whether he is debating the Motion or he is debating the Bill.  I want to be sure.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Not the Bill, the Motion please.  Proceed please.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you very much.  We teachers like to develop our subject. (Applause)  I am doing that and in response to hon. Nasasira, I think I have got a letter written to the Chairman of the Commission to which I am still waiting a reply.  You see and to answer hon. Kawanga’s question, it is almost futile to make Amendments to laws when the already existing laws are fragrantly broken with impunity and nothing happens. (Applause)  

This country has a serious problem.  If you break a law like this on corruption - what type of a leader are you going to be and I am not exonerating Kagonyera.  I am saying Kagonyera among others is one of the people, and I am saying that our people themselves have encouraged their leaders to be corrupt because they are the ones who have said you Kagonyera, you X you are ‘mukono gamu’ what do we eat from you? (Laughter

Everybody knows in this House and outside that ill-gotten money has helped some people get some permanent seats in churches. (Laughter)  They have bought their permanent seats in churches with ill-gotten money and our people, Christians have said thank you very much.  Who will not do it?  So, I am saying, much as we blame the leadership, unfortunately the terrain is not good for fighting corruption, because the most effective way of fighting corruption is the people themselves rising and fighting against corruption among their leaders but they are not doing it.  So, these leaders have a serious problem.  They must be good but they must buy tonto.  Millions of shillings must be spent.  Where do they get money?  The people are saying go back to the treasury and get that money and bring it.  So what do we do?

The second one I think is leadership; we must also do something about it.  You know, it is a kind of tandem thing.  If we allow these people to get away with it, both leadership and the people, then we have a serious problem.  Now a point I have is that during the last elections - if the people managing the elections had stood up and said - anybody providing a bribe would be dealt with.  You know people do not like going to jail - you need only one or two of us, either disqualified or put in jail and everybody will say, wait a minute government is serious.  But you know these things happen.  

In fact, we had a very serious problem.  Giving money at a fund raising was more dignified way of bribing people than the way we were caused to bribe the people.  It reminds me of when they had a prohibition in the United States to prevent people from dying of alcoholism.  

Pathology books have it that immediately following the enactment of that law, people died more of chronic liver, failure as a result of alcohol consumption than had died before.  So, in fact, if we had been allowed to fund raise in open daylight, we would not have been knocking on people’s doors at night - on Sunday night and Saturday night giving three hundred shillings, a glass of salt and what have you.  So, in other words, there is a duty on part of leadership as well as on the part of our people and I must say this, definitely unless we put our foot down and say no at the beginning, we are sowing the seeds now.  There is no way a person who buys his way into some position can be -(Interruption)- Thank you very much.  So, I will stop at that.  I want to refer to the Amendment regarding the referendum.  My views are slightly different from hon. -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Motion?  We are on suspending of the laws.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Chairman, definitely I do support the Motion by hon. Tiberondwa that we suspend the Rules and debate. (Interruption) I must be guided by the Chair.  Which Motion is on the table? (Laughter)  The Motion on the table -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  To suspend the rules.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  The Order Paper I am carrying, Mr. Chairman, 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, order please.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  The Order Paper I am carrying, Mr. Chairman -(Interjection)- this is the Order Paper I am carrying which is dated 26th April, so, I must be guided.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Give him the right one please.  Take the other one.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Chairman, hon. Nkalubo here said I knew what the situation was but I must say that, I never came to this House to make a fool of this House, I do not.  I come with seriousness.  Now, this is apparently an Order paper, the one I had, does not include what hon. Tiberondwa was saying and I assumed that in fact he ought to have been ruled out of order and I continued with debating the Motion being moved by the Minister.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, concentrate on that Order Paper please

PROF. KAGONYERA:  I am not lost, Mr. Chairman, I am misguided.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, order please.  Have you finished?

PRO. KAGONYERA:  No, my debate is on the Minister’s Motion.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO (Busongora County, Kasese): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion raised by the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, realising that society is not static. It is very dynamic certain things come at certain times.  But what is important, are you able to correct something if you know that, that thing has gone wrong?  And I think this is what he is trying to do and therefore, I support the Motion and when we come to debate the real issues, then we shall be able to correct whatever went wrong.  I support the Motion, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala):  Mr. Chairman, I rise to support the Motion but on a small contribution.  I see nothing wrong with the Minister starting a debate on the proposed Amendment Bill today.  However, it seems apparent that many Members are not clear of what the intent is of this amendment.  It is only through starting debate that they will be able either to understand it or to fail completely.  Therefore, I do agree that it might be wise to start debate now.  The condition is that we do not end it today.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1994

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Sam Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, I move that the Constituent Assembly Amendment Bill, 1994 be now read the Second Time.  The aim of the Bill is to effect Amendments to the Constituent Assembly Statute No. 6 of 1993.  The Amendments are necessary to prevent potentially serious problems arising with the operation of the Constituent Assembly when it begins to meet.  There are substantial potential problems in some areas of the CA Statute, which were not anticipated at the time the Draft Statute was debated in the NRC last year.  The Bill deals with mainly matters of some importance as well as evident from the following outline of the aims of the Bill.

One, the term of the Assembly, Members of the Council will be aware that at present, the Statute provides for the CA of the Constituent Assembly to have a term of 4 months which can be extended by the Minister to a maximum of seven months.  But Members will also recall that the Statute provide for a referendum to be held on controversial matters which the CA cannot resolve by a two-third vote.  

Government is concerned that there maybe a problem if a referendum is needed towards the end of the CA’s work, because it would take sometime to make all arrangement needed for a referendum.  It will not be possible to hold it within the maximum term of the CA, which is 7 months.  Yet the CA may need to meet after a referendum either to make changes to the Draft Constitution, to take account on the referendum result or carry out the formal promulgation required by section 19 of the Statute.  

Therefore, Sections 5 and 11 of the Bill make the necessary changes to Section 8 and 19 of the Statute.  They do not involve an extension of a maximum term, they just enable the CA to meet for their limited purposes of completing the work only if a referendum results in a maximum time expiring.  Contentious matters that go into the referendum.  

At present the Statute - the CA Statute provides for a referendum to be held on any contentious matter.  A matter is contentious if a proposed Amendment to the Draft Constitution is supported by more than half the CA Members but less than two thirds provided only them that it involves issues of national character rather than local interests.  This requirement could result in many matters for referendum but there should be many difficulties involved if this were to happen, including finding the finances and completing the Constitution making process on Schedule early next year.  Amendments to Section 17 of the Statute containing Section 9(b) and (c) of the Bill would introduce a much more difficult set of procedures to be held before anything becomes a contentious matter.  

There would be for three separate votes of more than half and less than two thirds of CA Member voting, in other words, here would allow Members to reconsider their position, probably do some consultation probably do some lobbing in order to move one way or the other.  In order to achieve the required majority, to save time and save on the funds of the taxpayer, the votes would have to be separated by a week.  

The third proceeded by an adjournment for the delegates to consult the electorate.  The aim here would be to forecast both national and CA debate on such issues so as to seek compromises in the CA.  A referendum would then only be held as a last resort when compromise will not found in any other way.  Determining local or national character of contentious matters.  This CA Statute does not say how to decide which contentious matters are of local and which are of a national character and therefore, need a referendum.  It could be a matter of grave contrives in a CA.  

Therefore, Section 10 of the Bill provides for a new Section 17(a) under which the CA could decide the issue by a majority vote.  Voting in the CA:  At present, the Statute makes no distinction between the procedural for voting in a CA.  On a Draft Constitution on the one hand, and on the other matters such as internal procedures for CA, on the other hand.  The requirement of either a consensus or two-thirds majority vote applied to all CA decisions.  

In theory then, a decision to adjourn the CA to the next day, unless taken by the Chairman, could require either a consensus or a two third majority vote.  The potential for the CA to become unworkable is obvious.  The strict requirements for special majorities for CA should obviously apply only to decisions on the Draft Constitutions, and not procedural or related matters.  This is the effect of the new section 17 sub-section 6 providing for in Section 9(c) of the Bill.  The position of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman.  There is no provision in the CA Statute expressly stating that the Chairman and Deputy Chairman should not be the CA delegate.  In fact, many parts of the Statute imply that they should, in fact, be delegate.  For example, Section 10(2) says no delegate should be elected Chairman, unless delegate obtains the vote of two thirds of all other delegates.  

In addition, a provision remains in Section 17(3) (b) which would allow whichever of the Chairman or Deputy as is not presiding to cast vote in a CA.  The Bill aims at tying up all the parts of the Statute that implies that the delegate must be a delegate.  In interest of flexibility they leave the issues open.  The Bill also clarify that either the Chairman or the Deputy has a right to vote in CA.  The relevant provision of Bill are section amending Section 3 of the CA Statute 1993 Section 6 amending Section 10(2) and (3), Section 7 amending Section 13; Section 8, amending Section 15, Section 9(a) amending Section 17(3) in respect of voting rights of Chairman and Deputy.  Section 13 amending Section 26, Section 15 amending Section 29, and Section 17 amending Section 31.  

Verification of the CA proceedings; the CA Statute says that a vacancy in membership does not invalidate the proceedings.  But it is silent on the status of the CA proceedings if a person not entitled to sit in the CA does in fact sit.  This could happen, for example if an election petition results in the ruling that the person thought to be elected a delegate was in fact not qualified.  It is normal for laws on legislative bodies to specify that despite such a problem, the proceedings are nevertheless valid.  This is the effect of the Section 17, sub-Section 7 in Section 9(c) of the Bill.  

Grounds and procedures in the election petitions:  At present the CA Statute permits almost unrestricted access to the courts for anyone who has a complaint about an election of a delegate.  There are not even grounds for complaints spelt out in the Statute.  Section 12 and 19 of the Bill, this is the new Bill, deals with the problem by applying the provisions of the National Assembly (Elections) Act to the election complaint about the CA.  This is the same approach as the Resistance Councils and Committee Statute.  Limiting of time for by-elections:  The Constituent Assembly Statute requires a by-election whenever the sit a delegate is vacant.  This is obviously not necessary if the CA has almost completed this work.  

So, Section 14 in the Bill would amend Section 28 of the Statute so that, by-elections are held only if both the Chairman of the CA and the Commissioner believe that there would be time for an election before the CA completes its work.  Regulation making powers:  The CA Statute limits regulations made by the Minister of matters specified in the statute.  This restricted wording lessens Government flexibility to deal with problems in the operations of the CA when they do arise.  Section 16 of the Bill would amend section 30 of the Statute, to wording more normally used in Statutes.  Rules of Court:  There is no provision for rules of court to handle matters in the RC Courts in respect of complaints about the register of voters as they may be by elections; it will be useful to remedy this situation.  

Section 18(c) of the Bill, therefore, makes the necessary provisions while paragraphs (a) and (b) of Section 18 remedy small errors in the original.  In conclusion, I seek the support of all Members of this august Council for the approval of Constituent Assembly Amendment Bill, 1994.  I remind all Members that the CA will very soon hold its first meetings as I said at the beginning.  It is therefore, necessary to deal with these problems as identified on this Bill before the Assembly meets.  I beg to move. 

MR. NTIMBA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill and I would like to congratulate the Minister for having thought it fit to bring in these Amendments to ensure that the whole process of Constitutional making is carried out without hitch, but I am disappointed that when we are discussing important matters of this nature, when you look into the official guidance, you do not find a single person from the office of the Constitutional Commissioner.  

If, Mr. Akabway or any of his lieutenants had been present, maybe they would have benefited from the discussion that we are having on this.  Because I take it that Amendment of this nature are meant among other things to close some of the loopholes which most of us experienced during the last CA election, and one of the things I would like to point out is the question of the display of the registers, the law was very, very clear on this, but when people were being registered you could see non-authorized persons being ferried from all over the place to go and he registered in a particular area.  When objections were raised, the returning officers would say, sorry, nobody can prevent anybody from registering.  What you can do, you wait for the registers to be displayed and the RC 2 court will deliberate on all matters concerning the registers except the question of citizenship, and verdict of the RC 2 court is final.  

Now, when it came to people coming to vote what happened?  You could clearly see people who were not registered coming to vote and there you could not raise any objection because nobody has a right to prevent anybody from registering and up to now, nobody has really explained to us why the Commissioner deemed it fit on the eve of the election to announce something to the effect that anybody who had a registration certificate could go and vote in that particular area even if his name could not appear in the voters register, and this was one of the biggest blunders because apart from the fact that the ink was not all that indelible, but you could see many, many people coming in to take advantage of voting more that once and also -(Interruption)

MR. KAYONDE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, as you know, I participated very strongly in this exercise and what happened that the registers were badly done and they omitted some names of the people who had rightly registered and they had the forms and therefore, there was no opportunity or there was no time to recall those registers when the following day was voting.  

So, in other words, what the Commission -(Interjection)- please, I am stating what happened in my area and what I suspect could have prompted the Commissioner to suggest that those who had the registration certificate should appear even if they did not have the names in the registers, there was a problem in the registers, some were not there.  

MR. NTIMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I will take more information from my neighbour here.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, it is true that there were omissions of various names on the register of voters.  To me, it was deliberately done by the Commissioner.  These omissions were done in such a way that they could be used as an excuse to decampaign particular characters or fail other characters from the previous elections.  It was a deliberate manoeuvre by the Commissioner of the elections, Mr. Akabway.  So, it was not that it was an oversight because if the registration were not ready -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member now holding the Floor in order to impute a very serious allegation against a Commissioner who is not here to defend himself without substantiating it?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is not in order please.  Proceed please.  

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I am in order.  The fact that he is not here, it means that he is guilty because this is an issue that is very serious, and which really needed the presence of the Commissioner because it tackles every aspect of the political life of this country.  

For example, I went to vote.  When I reached in the area called Nambale where I was supposed to vote, a place called Nashihaso, I was told by the Polling Agent and the Presiding Officer that my name does not appear on the voters’ register therefore, I am not going to vote and yet I was a candidate.  So, I stayed in the place for about two hours without voting, and then I was informed that may be I could go and vote in another place called Bumboobi.  I drove to Bumboobi, I got to Bumboobi at around 2.00 O’clock in the afternoon.  I was told by another Officer there that I was not going to vote because my name does not appear on the voters’ register and yet I was a candidate.  I told them I was a candidate.  The fellow had the audacity to tell me that he does not care even if I was a candidate; the fact that my name does not appear on the voters’ register, I was not going to vote.  So, it was a big hurdle between me and the officers, the hurdle took about two to three hours. Then lastly, at around 5.00 O’clock, the fellow told me okay, we have taken a decision in spite of radio having made announcements, this and that, but I was going to vote provided my voters’ register certificate was arrested by him.  In fact, up to now, my voters’ register is arrested by the Presiding Officer and the Returning Officer.  It is very serious; I took to task these fellows -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Give information and stop there, allow hon. Ntimba to proceed please.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA:  No, this is very serious, Mr. Chairman. (Laughter)

MR. NTIMBA:  Mr. Chairman, my two Colleagues here have pointed out a number of the loopholes I was referring to.  The third excuse given by the Returning Officers was that the registers contained so many names that there was not enough time for people to copy from the registration books to the registers and to list them according to the cells.  Now, if that was the case, was there any earthly reason why we could not have been called here to amend the statute, giving more time for display of the registers?  

This raises the point; a very valid point we are talking about in this Minister’s amendment; the question of a referendum.  If the registers were not properly displayed and, as I speak now, I am not satisfied that we have up to date registers; the question that arises is, in the event of our requiring going to a referendum who is going to participate in the referendum.  Suppose - without trying to be an alarmist, suppose there was a contentious matter of a local nature to be voted on a referendum here in Buganda, and for the some reason I have an interest, I come from Ankole and I decide to bring lorry loads of people to come and vote or disturb the type of voting, what is going to happen?

AN HON. MEMBER:  The Ndaiga affair. (Laughter)

MR. NTIMBA:  Mr. Chairman, somebody has cited a case of Ndaiga about thirty years ago.  Now, this is a very serious matter.  So, the Minister, before he really comes in to make amendments, I wish he had made a thorough study of all the loopholes that we had in the last CA Elections -(Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Including the registers.

MR. NTIMBA:  Yes, including the registers and come - if he had come here with a comprehensive list of amendments to be made, I think we would feel more comfortable that way.  As it is now, I think I might as well avail myself of this opportunity to strongly demand that the registers be displayed immediately right now so that in the even of our being required to go to a referendum, we shall be sure that the registers are up to date.  

There are other loopholes which many people have talked about and which should have been taken care of such as the question where the ink was snot all that indelible, where people were able to vote more than once or to use things like break fluid or petrol to wash off that ink.  There was violation of the regulations concerning distances between the tables and the general public.  As it is now, it was easy for somebody even if the voter was as far away as the last - where hon. Opio is sitting, it was easy for one to tell whether he had ticked the top of the sheet or the bottom of the sheet.  

Now, we need to bring in place amendments such as putting - being able to put a small screen around somebody’s hand so that whereas you can see his feet and the legs but you cannot tell what part of the paper he has ticked.  I am aware that if we have to vote in a referendum, it will probably be a small paper where we have got to tick either ‘yes’ or ‘no’ and that may not be easy for persons to tell how somebody has voted but I would like to appeal to the Minister that there are quite a number of rules which must be amended, there are quite a lot of provisions in the statutes that ought to be amended comprehensively rather than these amendments being brought in piecemeal and boring everybody.  

With these few words, whereas I support the Motion, but I would like to appeal to the Minister to make a very comprehensive study of the statute with a view of closing the loopholes that we have seen for ourselves before we attempt to call anything like another election or a referendum.  I support the Motion, Mr. Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I want to apologise to you for once in a lifetime jumping the gun, but I think this debate is so important that honestly we should may be have been given more time to think about these issues.  Hon. John Kawanga I can see now he is gesturing in victory over me but I hope, in your great wisdom, you allow the Members to debate this Bill thoroughly and bring out all the issues that they would like the Minister and also the government in general to consider at least for future elections.  Under the NRM, we have the best opportunity to establish correct political culture.  If we do not begin now, we shall have a difficult time beginning at a later date.  That is why I think it is important, Mr. Chairman, and I notice you are looking at your watch; I will hurry through my statement.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Because I want to give you more time.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I want to give you more time tomorrow to proceed with it.  I, therefore, adjourn the Council to tomorrow.


(The Council rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 27th April, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

